--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:42:38
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 248th in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 248 ---
Video ID: lsODSDmY4CY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lsODSDmY4CY
Title: AMA #1: Leveraging Ultradian Cycles, How to Protect Your Brain, Seed Oils Examined and More
Published: 2022-11-02 15:15:02 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the first Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of the Huberman Lab Premium subscription.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

Subscribe to Huberman Lab Premium at https://hubermanlab.com/premium

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:09 How do you use ultradian cycles in your daily work?
00:22:38 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full 2 hour+ AMA episode, we discuss:
- Zone 2 training
- What do you do when you live in a northern climate and the sun doesn't rise until hours after you are up?
- Morning routine for people who work from 8 am to 5 pm
- Best productivity method: to-do list or time-blocking everything on a calendar?
- Seed oils and metabolic disease
- Do recommendations and protocols you give change with age (beyond 60)?
- What advice would you give to your younger self?

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything or AMA episode, which is part of our premium subscriber content. Our premium channel was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which still comes out once a week every Monday, and of course, is zero cost to consumer. The premium channel is also designed to support exciting research being done at major universities like Stanford and elsewhere. Research that's done on humans that should lead to protocols for mental health, physical health and performance in the near future. If you'd like to check out the premium channel subscription model, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium and there you can subscribe for $10 a month or $100 a year. We also have a lifetime subscriber option. For those of you that are already Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers and you're watching and/or hearing this, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium podcast feed. And for those of you that are not already Huberman Lab Premium podcast subscribers, you will be able to hear the first 15 minutes or so of this episode and hopefully that will allow you to discern whether or not you would like to become a premium subscriber. Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. And as always, I will strive to be as clear as possible, as succinct as possible, and as thorough as possible while still answering as many questions per AMA episode as I can without these sessions becoming unreasonably long. I should also point out that if you asked a question and it was not answered this AMA, it may very well be answered in the next AMA. So the first question, which had a lot of upvotes-- meaning many people wanted the answer to this question-- came from Jackson Lipfert. And the question was about so-called ultradian rhythms. For those of you that are not familiar with ultradian rhythms-- ultradian rhythms are any rhythms that are shorter than 24 hours. And typically when people ask about or talk about ultradian rhythms, they are referring to 90-minute rhythms. I've talked about these on the podcast before. And Jackson's question was-- how do you use ultradian rhythms in your daily work? There's more to the question, but first off, I do use ultradian rhythms-- that is, I leverage the fact that these do exist in all of us as a way to engage in focused bouts of mental work once or twice, or sometimes three times per day. However, I use them in a way that's grounded in the research on ultradian rhythms for learning and memory in a way that might not be obvious just from their name that they are 90-minute rhythms. So I'll get into the details of how to use ultradian rhythms to best capture neuroplasticity-- that is the brain's ability to change in response to experience-- and in a way that should allow you to get one or two, or maybe even three focused bouts of learning per day, which can greatly accelerate learning of cognitive material, languages, mathematics, history-- for sake of school or work, or maybe just a hobby, or a personal interest of some sort-- and for skill learning in the physical domain as well. Jackson then went on to ask-- you've mentioned before that you try to include at least one 90-minute focus block per day as part of your work and overall mission. And indeed, that is true. I tried to get at least one of these focused ultradian rhythm blocks per day. That is a period of about 90 minutes where I'm focused on learning something or doing something that's cognitively hard, although typically I aim for two of these sessions per day. He then goes on to ask-- what is the maximum number of blocks you can perform sustainably? The answer to that is probably four. And I say probably because some people have schedules, lifestyles, in which four 90-minute blocks of focused learning is possible per day, but that's highly unusual. For most people, it's going to be one or two, maybe three-- four, I would place in the really extraordinary end of things, maybe if you're cramming for exams or you've managed to go on a writing retreat or a learning and retreat of some sort where you can devote essentially, all of your non-sleeping, non-eating time to learning. But most people simply can't organize their life that way. So the short answer is-- for me, it's one or two per day is the target and three would be the maximum. You then went on to ask-- do you take vacations or extended breaks from these ultradian rhythm sessions? And the short answer is no. Typically, I try and do this every day-- and yes, even on the weekends. But on the weekend, the ultradian rhythm focused learning bout might just be reading a book for about 90 minutes or so, which might not be as cognitively difficult as it is for other sorts of work that I perform during the week. I occasionally miss a day entirely for whatever reason-- travel, obligations related to family, et cetera. But in general, I try and do this every day. I do think that the circuits for focus are, I guess the non-biological way to put it would be kept warm. But essentially, that accessing the circuits for focus is made easier by accessing them regularly and that's because the circuits for focus are indeed themselves amenable to neuroplasticity. In other words, the more you force yourself to focus, the easier focusing gets. I'll now answer the last part of the question and then I will go through and emphasize some tools that anyone can use in order to leverage ultradian rhythms toward learning bouts-- either cognitive learning or physical skill learning, or a combination of the two. The last part of the question Jackson asked was-- if you knew you needed to drastically increase the amount of focus you do daily, how would you schedule that focus and recover from it? That's an excellent aspect to this question. And I will now give you the details of how I would use and schedule ultradian rhythms. I'll offer you a tool-- I've never talked about this tool in the Huberman Lab podcast. And I will dispel a common myth about ultradian rhythms that points to a, believe it or not, an easier way to leverage them for maximum benefit. OK. So as I mentioned before, ultradian rhythms are these 90-minute cycles that we go through from the time that we are born until the time we die. Indeed, even during sleep, we are experiencing and more or less governed by these ultradian rhythms. This question and this answer is not so much about sleep. But just know that when you go to sleep at night until you wake up in the morning, every 90 minutes or so, your patterns of sleep-- that is the percentage or ratio rather of slow wave sleep to light sleep to rapid eye movement sleep changes in a way such that each 90-minute cycle gates the next cycle. It flips on switch for the next 90-minute cycle then that 90-minute cycle ends, flips on switch for the next one, and so on and so forth. I mentioned all that because during the daytime, the same thing is true. But most people don't know when the 90-minute all trading cycles begin. Because if you think about it, you could wake up on the basis of an alarm clock or noise in the room, or simply because you naturally wake up in the middle of an ultradian 90-minute cycle. So does that mean, for instance, that if you wake up 60 minutes into an ultradian cycle that the next 30 minutes of your waking-- right, because that 60 minutes needs to continue to 90 to complete an ultradian cycle-- that the next 30 minutes after waking are related to the ultradian cycle that you were still in during sleep, or does it start a new ultradian cycle. And the answer is the former. That ultradian cycle continues even if you wake up in the middle of it. And so a lot of people who want to leverage ultradian cycles for learning will say, "Well, how do I know when to start? When does it start, when I hit my stopwatch? Can I just set a clock and work for 90 minutes?" And the short answer is no. And that might seem unfortunate, but the good news is that you can figure out when your first proper ultradian cycle of the day begins simply by asking yourself when are you most alert after waking. That is if you were, say to wake up at 7:00 AM and let's say that's the end of an ultradian cycle or perhaps you're in the middle of an ultradian cycle-- doesn't matter. What you need to watch for or pay attention to for a day or so is when you start to experience your greatest state of mental alertness in the morning. And here, we can discard with all the issues and variables around caffeine or no caffeine, hydrating or no hydrating. Exercise is one variable that we'll consider in a moment. But here's the deal-- these all trading in cycles are actually triggered by fluctuations in the so-called glucocorticoid system-- the system that regulates cortisol release. And as some of you have probably heard me say before-- cortisol, even though it's often discussed as a terrible thing, it's chronic stress, cortisol, cortisol, et cetera-- cortisol is essential for health and every day we get a rise in cortisol in the morning that is associated with enhanced immune function, enhanced alertness, enhanced ability to focus, so on and so forth. In fact, the protocol that I'm always beating the drum about that people should get sunlight in their eyes as close to waking as possible-- that actually enhances or increases the peak level of cortisol that's experienced early in the day. And that sets in motion a number of these ultradian cycles. So for instance, if you wake up at 7:00 AM and you find that for the first hour after waking, you tend to be a little bit groggy, or you happen to be groggy on a given day, but then you notice that your attention and alertness starts to peak somewhere around 9:30 AM or 10:00 AM, you can be pretty sure that, that first ultradian cycle for learning is going to be optimal to start at about 9:30 or 10:00 AM. How can I say about if it's indeed a 90-minute cycle? Well, this is really where the underlying neurobiology in these ultradian cycles converge to give you a specific protocol. The changes in cortisol that occur throughout the day involve-- yes, a big peak early in the day if you're getting your sunlight and caffeine and maybe even some exercise early in the day. But typically, that peak comes early. And then across the day the baseline jitters a little bit, it comes down, but it bounces around a little bit. It's not a flat line, if we were to measure your glucocorticoid levels. Each one of those little bumps corresponds to a shift in these ultradian cycles. So if you find that you are most alert at 9:30 or starting to become alert at 9:30, and then typically you have a peak of focus and concentration around 10:00 AM, that is really valuable to know. Because the way that the molecules that control neuroplasticity-- that is the changes in neurons and other cell types in the brain that allow your nervous system to learn and literally for new connections to form between neurons, which is basically the basis of learning-- those fluctuate according to these ultradian cycles. What does this mean? This means if your peak in alertness and focus and energy-- could even be experienced as physical energy occurs at about 9:30 AM, I would start your first ultradian cycle for learning somewhere around there. Certainly 9:30 AM would be ideal, but 10:00 AM would be fine as well. And then you have about one hour to get the maximum amount of learning in even within that alternating cycle. This is where there's a lot of confusion out there, people think, oh, ultradian cycles are 90 minutes, therefore, we should be in our peak level of focus throughout that 90 minutes. In reality, most people take about 10 or 15 minutes to break into a really deep trench of focus and then periodically throughout the next hour, they'll pop out of that focus, now have to deliberately refocus. This is why, if possible, you want to turn off Wi-Fi connections and put your phone in the other room or turn it off. If. You do need your phone or Wi-Fi, just be aware of how distracting those things can be to getting into a deep trench of focus. But the point is this-- these 90-minute cycles occur periodically throughout the day, but there is going to be one period early in the day-- and here, I'm referring to the spirit of starting at about 9:30 or 10:00 AM-- and then likely another one in the mid to late afternoon that are going to be ideal for focused learning. And that focus learning bout should ideally have you set your clock-- a stopwatch or something-- to measure 90 minutes, but do assume that there's going to be some jitter at the front end where you're not going to be able to focus as deeply as you would like. Then you'll get about an hour of deep focus and then you really start to transition out of these ultradian cycles. How do when the afternoon ultradian cycle occurs? Well, just as in the morning, it occurs because there's a brief, but significant increase in the glucocorticoid system in the mid to late afternoon. I wish I could tell you it's going to be 2 PM or it's going to be 3:00 PM-- that's really going to depend on the individual. When you ingest caffeine, some of the other demands of your day. But you can learn to recognize when these two periods for optimized learning will occur and here are the key principles. Watch for a day or two-- meaning pay attention to when you have your peak levels of physical and mental energy in the morning-- that is between waking and noon, and then again between noon and about 6:00 or 7:00 PM. Although I'm sure that there are some late shifted folks that will experience their peak in focus somewhere around 6:00 or 7:00 PM, especially if they're waking up around 10:00 or 11:00 AM, as I know some people out there are. Once you know where those peaks in focus occur on your schedule, set a stopwatch for one ultradian cycle in the early part of the day. In this example, I was saying 9:30, but if you can't hop on it until 10, that's fine. Set it for 90 minutes, consider that block wholly-- meaning rule out all other distractions. But assume that within that 90-minute block, you are only going to be able to focus intensely for about one hour. And just know that the molecules that control neuroplasticity-- and these things have names. And yes, Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor or BDNF is the most famous of those, but there are others as well. In fact, the very receptors that control synaptic strength, the connections between neurons, some of the neurotransmitters and modulators involved in synaptic plasticity, they undergo regulation by these ultradian changes in glucocorticoid. And then try and capture a second ultradian learning block in the afternoon. Again, just knowing that the first 10 or 15 minutes, consider it mental warm up, and then you get about an hour-- it's not exactly 60 minutes, but about an hour to maximize learning. So if you're trying to learn something, really capture it during that phase as well. Now, is there a third opportunity or a fourth opportunity? This relates to Jackson's question directly. And the short answer is not really, unless you're somebody who requires very little sleep. Within the 12 or 16 hours that one tends to be awake during the day or 18 hours that one tends to be awake, there are really only two of these major peaks in the glucocorticoid system that trigger the onset of the circadian cycles. Again, there's a ramping up and a ramping down of glucocorticoids throughout the day. But the real key here is to learn when you tend to be most focused based on your regular sleep, wake cycle, caffeine intake, exercise, et cetera. And again, that's going to vary from person to person. And you really only have two opportunities or two ultradian cycles to capture in order to get the maximum focus challenging work done a.k.a. learning. So for somebody that wants to learn an immense amount of material or who has the opportunity to capture another ultradian cycle, the other time where that tends to occur is also early days. So some people by waking up early and using stimulants like caffeine and hydration or some brief high-intensity exercise, can trigger that cortisol pulse to shift a little bit earlier so that they can capture a morning work block that occurs somewhere, let's say between 6:00 and 7:30 AM. So let's think about our typical person-- at least in my example that's waking up around 7:00 AM. And then I said, has their first ultradian work cycle really flip on because that bump in cortisol around 9:30 or 10:00 AM. If that person were say to set their alarm clock for 5:30 AM, then get up, get some artificial light-- if the sun isn't out, turn on bright or artificial lights, or if the sun happens to be up that time of year, get some sunlight in your eyes. But irrespective of sunlight, were to get a little bit of brief high intensity exercise maybe 10 or 15 minutes of skipping rope or even just Jumping Jacks or go out for a brief jog, what happens then is the cortisol pulse starts to shift earlier. And so the next day and the following day and so on and so forth-- provided they're still doing that exercise first thing and ideally getting some light in their eyes as well-- well then they have an opportunity to capture an increase in cortisol that is now shifted from about 7:00 AM to about 8:30 AM. So they can capture an hour of work there and then they will also still be within that rising phase of cortisol in the 9:30 to 10:00 AM block that lasts until about 11:30 or so. They might have lunch. Perhaps after lunch, they do a Non-Sleep Deep Rest-- maybe they, don't maybe you're a napper or maybe you're not-- doesn't really matter. And then in the afternoon-- and I would suspect it would now be in the earlier afternoon sometime around 2:00 or 2:30 would be typical. Although again, that exact time will vary person to person. Then they would want to schedule another 90-minute work block. So that's how you can capture three. Now you can start to see also why capturing four ultradian work blocks would be exceedingly rare. It's just not typical that people are awake for that much of the day, you have to sleep at some point. And I should mention that if you're going to force yourself to wake up earlier on a consistent basis, you probably should be trying to get to sleep a little bit earlier as well. Because it's not just the quality, but the duration of quality sleep that really matters for learning. And I should also remind everybody that the actual rewiring of neurons does not occur during any focused work block, it actually occurs during deep sleep the following night and the following night, and during Non-Sleep Deep Rest. This is why Non-Sleep Deep Rest can accelerate learning because it's in states of rest that the actual connections between neurons strengthen or weaken or new neurons are added in a way that allows for what we call learning. OK. So one or two all trading work blocks per day is typical, three would be really exceptional, and four would be extraordinary. Look for them-- meaning look to see when you are feeling most focused and alert typically in the period before waking and noon and typically in the period between noon and bedtime, given your standard intake of caffeine and exercise and other life events. Please also remember that even though it's an ultradian 90-minute work block, the neuroplasticity is going to be best triggered within a 60-minute portion of that. And there's no way to know exactly when that 60 minutes begins and ends until you actually begin the work block. So this is really designed to be empirical, you need to actually go do this. What you'll notice again is that it's hard to focus at first then you'll drop into a state of focus. You may get distracted, that's perfectly normal. You refocus, get back into triggering learning-- that's really what you're doing, you're triggering learning-- and then there'll be some taper and then you'll be out of the ultradian work block. Now, it's also a key to understand that myself and other people should not expect that they're only working during these 90-minute work blocks. It's just that a lot of the sorts of demands of our day, including cooking and shopping for groceries, and email, and text messaging, and social media-- a lot of those things don't require intense focus of the sort that I believe Jackson is asking about maximizing, and that I'm referring to when I talk about these ultradian work blocks. And then as a final point, I've been talking about these ultradian work blocks and focus, et cetera, in a context that brings to mind ideas about cognitive work. So learning a language, learning math, writing, or creating, doing something related to music, et cetera. But these 90-minute ultradian work blocks also directly relate to physical skill learning as well and to physical exercise as well. So if you are somebody who's really interested in improving your fitness and your fitness requires a lot of focused attention-- so for instance, when I go out for a long run on Sundays, which is part of my fitness routine, I deliberately not thinking about much, I'm just trying to cruise along. I might focus a little bit on my pace in stride, maybe an audiobook I'm listening to or a podcast. But typically, I'm just cruising along, it's low cognitive demand work. These ultradian work blocks can really be maximized for pure cognitive work-- book type work, et cetera, music, et cetera, or they can also be leveraged toward skill learning. So if you're trying to learn how to dance or how to perform a particular athletic move or you're trying to get better at some skill that requires a lot of focus and alignment of muscular movement and cognitive demands, et cetera, well then these are also going to be ideal for triggering neuroplasticity to get better in the motor skill based domain as it's called, et cetera. If you'd like to learn more about ultradian shifts in neuroplasticity and ultradian work bouts, I will certainly do more on this in the standard Huberman Lab podcast. But the key words to look up if you want to explore this further online-- it's not something that a lot of people about, it's called iterative metaplasticity. It's a vast literature and one that I'd be happy to teach you in a standard podcast episode. But in the interest of getting to more questions from you all, hopefully the answer I've given you now has been complete enough, yet clear enough, and yet succinct enough that you can start to leverage these really powerful aspects of iterative metaplasticity and ultradian rhythms for learning. And I'd just like to point out that these opportunities for focused learning that occur in these 90-minute ultradian cycles are really terrific opportunities. They are offered to you at least twice every day and you can really learn to detect when they occur and when they're likely to occur. You can certainly learn at other times in the 24-hour cycle. But for anyone who's tried to stay up late at night cramming for an exam or for somebody who's tried to learn during the sleepiest time of their afternoon, we can be very familiar with the fact that there are times of day in which we are best at learning. And as I've just described, there are ways to capture those moments and they are valuable moments. So even though it's just about three hours per day or really only two hours per day because of the 60 to 90-minute thing that I talked about a few minutes ago, learn to know when these occur and really treat them as valuable, maybe even wholly in the sense that they are really the times that are offered up to you each day by your own biology in ways that will allow you to get better pretty much at anything. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel-- it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast. And to fund research-- in particular, research done on human beings. So not animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is the species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through all channels. Not just the premium channel, but through all channels-- Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now an especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar for dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and science related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs you can ask questions and get answers to your questions and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes and not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 249 ---
Video ID: wTBSGgbIvsY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTBSGgbIvsY
Title: How Meditation Works & Science-Based Effective Meditations | Huberman Lab Podcast #96
Published: 2022-10-31 12:00:48 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the biological mechanisms of the state changes that occur during different types of meditation and describe how to develop the meditation practice optimal for you. I explain key meditation principles, such as using specific breathwork patterns and adjusting your perception to specific locations along the continuum between interoception, exteroception and dissociation. I discuss how meditation practices lead to long-term trait changes and neuroplasticity, including changing your default mood, reducing baseline anxiety/depression, increasing your ability to focus, enhancing relaxation, improving sleep, and increasing your overall happiness level. I also explain the concept behind the “third-eye center,” what mindfulness is from a biological standpoint, the power of ultra-brief meditations and how to select the best meditation and time and duration to meditate to meet your need. I also explain a novel open-eyed perception-based meditation that may enhance focus, relaxation and task-switching ability. Whether you are a novice or an experienced meditator or simply interested in how our brain controls different aspects of conscious awareness and self-regulation, this episode should interest you.

#HubermanLab #Meditation #Science

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind: https://bit.ly/3sMP64B
Brief, daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotional regulation in non-experienced meditators: https://bit.ly/3zu83gf
Yoga nidra practice shows improvement in sleep in patients with chronic insomnia: A randomized controlled trial: https://bit.ly/3zvZwtb

Books
Wherever You Go, There You Are: https://amzn.to/3TSnOFF
The Harvard Psychedelic Club: https://amzn.to/3NkQ2qg
Altered Traits: https://amzn.to/3wXsKj8

Other Resources
Waking Up app: https://www.wakingup.com
NSDR (Virtusan / Huberman): https://youtu.be/AKGrmY8OSHM
NSDR (Madefor): https://youtu.be/pL02HRFk2vo

Timestamps
00:00:00 Meditation 
00:04:13 InsideTracker, Thesis, ROKA, Momentous Supplements
00:08:25 Brief History of Meditation: Consciousness, Psychedelics, fMRI 
00:16:19 How the Brain Interprets the Body & Surrounding Environment; Mindfulness 
00:26:07 Neuroscience of Meditation; Perceptual Spotlights
00:32:27 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:33:41 Interoception vs. Exteroception
00:42:20 Default Mode Network, Continuum of Interoception & Exteroception
00:53:30 Tools: Interoceptive or Exteroceptive Bias, Meditation Challenge
01:01:48 State & Trait Changes, Interoceptive & Exteroceptive Meditations, Refocusing 
01:07:35 Tool: Brief Meditations, Waking Up App
01:10:30 “Third Eye Center” & Wandering Thoughts
01:20:46 Meditation: Practice Types, Focal Points & Consistency 
01:24:10 Breathwork: Cyclic Hyperventilation, Box Breathing & Interoception 
01:30:41 Tool: Meditation Breathwork, Cyclic vs. Complex Breathwork
01:39:22 Interoception vs. Dissociation, Trauma
01:47:43 Model of Interoception & Dissociation Continuum
01:53:39 Meditation & Dissociation: Mood, Bias & Corresponding Challenge 
02:00:18 Meditation & Sleep: Yoga Nidra, Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR) 
02:11:33 Choosing a Meditative Practice; Hypnosis
02:14:53 Tool: Space-Time Bridging (STB) 
02:25:00 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Social Media

Huberman Lab is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing meditation. We are going to discuss the science of meditation, that is, what happens in the brain and body while we are meditating, and we will talk about the science of meditation as it relates to how the brain and body change as a consequence of meditation, that is, what you export or take from a meditation practice that can impact everything from your sleep to your mood. For instance, meditation has been shown to alleviate symptoms of depression. And we will also talk about how meditation can be used to enhance focus and other states of mind that are useful for work and other aspects of life. Now, of course, most of you have probably heard of meditation, and when we think of meditation, most often, we think of somebody either sitting or lying down. If they're sitting, we might imagine them in the so-called lotus position, you know, sitting with legs crossed, very upright, with hands on the knees or, you know, crossed in our lap or something of that sort. Typically, we think of somebody who is in a very calm state, eyes closed, focused on their so-called third eye center. The third eye center is the area just behind one's forehead. There's no third eye there, at least there shouldn't be, but I'll tell you why it's called the third eye center and what the origins of that are and why it's relevant, actually, for a meditative practice. With all that said, it turns out that meditation encompasses a huge variety of different practices. Some of those practices indeed are done sitting or lying down with one's eyes closed, focusing on the third eye center. Other of those practices are focused on a body scan, you know, really focusing on one area of the body and its contact with whatever surface you happen to be sitting or lying on or can be done walking. In fact, there are walking meditations done with eyes open. So there are many different forms of meditation, but today, we are going to focus mainly on how specific types of meditation and specific areas of the brain that are activated during those meditations change our way of being in fundamental ways, not just during the meditation practice, but afterwards as well. So if you're somebody who's interested in changing your default state of mood or of thinking or enhancing your ability to focus or improving your sleep or improving performance in some cognitive or physical endeavor, meditation is powerful, but you want to make sure that you pick the right meditation practice. So we will talk about picking a meditation practice that isn't just feasible because you'll do it but is actually directed at the goals specific to you and what you need most. So to give you some sense of the contour of today's episode, first, I'm going to talk about some of the underlying biology, the mechanisms and the brain areas and also the areas of the body that are activated during certain forms of meditation, and, equally important, which areas of the brain and body are shut down or reduced in their activity during specific types of meditation. Then I'll transition into how to best do a meditation practice, how to get the most out of that meditation practice, and then I will talk about how to change or alter your meditation practices according to your specific goals and as you get better at meditation. And this can get a little bit counterintuitive, but in a positive way. What I mean by that is, for instance, a lot of people think that as you meditate and get better at meditating, you need to meditate more and more and more, sort of like if you get better at running endurance races that you need to keep running longer and longer, you know, first a 5K, then a 10K, then a marathon, then ultras. With meditation, it's actually quite the opposite. The better that you get at dropping into a particular brain state and the more your so-called traits of brain state shift, not just states as they're sometimes referred to, but traits, this is a theme that I've picked up from a terrific book that I'll refer to later, but the more that you can get into specific neural circuits quickly, actually, the less you need to meditate in order to derive the benefits of meditation. So that's a wonderful aspect of meditative practices that's unlike a lot of other forms of mental exercise and cognitive enhancing exercises. So we'll talk about all of that today, and I promise that by the end of today's episode, you will have a rich array of meditative practices to select from, you'll know why each of them work and why they can be directed toward particular goals and how to do that, and you'll also know how to modify those meditation practices under conditions where you might get busier or where you're suffering from lack of sleep, and I think a lot of people will be excited to know that today we're going to discuss a specific form of meditation that can indeed reduce your need for sleep and still allow you to enhance your cognitive and physical abilities. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. Now, I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about hormones, blood lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes understanding all of that very easy and, even better, points to specific directives, that is, things you can do in terms of your lifestyle, your nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, in order to bring those numbers related to metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera, into the ranges that are optimal for you, your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics, and to be honest, I am not a fan of the word nootropics. I've said this many times before on this podcast and other podcasts, and the reason I don't like the word nootropics is that it means smart drugs. And as a neuroscientist, I'm aware that there are neural circuits, that is, connections in the brain and body that underlie things like focus or our ability to switch tasks or creativity, et cetera. There is no neural circuit for being smart. And so Thesis understands this, and as a consequence, they've developed custom nootropics that are designed to bring your brain and body into specific states to become, for instance, more focused or to engage in creative work or to have more energy for workouts and things of that sort. At Thesis, you can go there, you take a brief quiz, and they will design a kit of four different custom nootropics that you can try and then modify along with their help so that you can develop a kit of custom nootropics that are perfect for your needs. Perhaps one for creativity, another one for motivation, another one for focus, and another one for energy. They'll build those for you. To get your own personalized nootropics starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. Now, I spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly. ROKA understands this and has designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be worn in any number of different conditions and for you to still be able to see with crystal clarity They were designed for things like cycling and running so they won't slip off your face if they get sweaty, they're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I can't even remember that they're on my face, they're so lightweight. However, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, to dinner, et cetera. They have a terrific aesthetic, unlike a lot of other performance eyeglasses out there that you can only find in designs that really make people look like a cyborg. ROKA makes the cyborg versions, some people like those, but they also make versions of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with frames that you can wear out to dinner, to work, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, go to roka.com, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about meditation. As I mentioned earlier, we are going to talk about what areas of the brain and body are active during meditation and after meditation and why that can be so beneficial. We will also talk about when and how best to meditate. Now, this is a topic I've long been interested in. I was first given a book on meditation when I was in high school because, to make a long story short, I was a bit of a wild one early in my high school years, and as a consequence of a program that I was in, somebody handed me a book on meditation. That book is still available now. That book is called "Wherever You Go, There you Are" by Jon Kabat-Zinn. He was one of the first, not the only, but one of the first people to really start popularizing meditation and mindfulness practices in the United States. So this was in the late 1980s, and it was really only until recently that there were very few studies of meditation, although those really picked up in the '90s. Now you can find many, many thousands of studies on meditation and their mechanistic basis, so brain imaging studies, changes in hormones in the body. But in the late 1980s and in the early 1990s, because functional imaging of the brain, so-called MRI or fMRI, was really just starting to emerge as a popular tool in laboratories and hospitals, there really wasn't that much mechanistic understanding about how meditation worked, but, of course, there was a deep understanding from cultures outside the United States that meditation was extremely useful. I should just mention, as long as we're talking about the history of meditation, any discussion about meditation is going to be a discussion about states of mind, and any discussion about states of mind invokes the word consciousness, a kind of a dangerous topic to get into in any format because a lot of people talk about consciousness, but people use consciousness, the word, to mean different things. It doesn't have one standard operational definition as scientists call it. However, discussions about consciousness are often part and parcel with conversations about things like psychedelics and kind of alternative therapies. And so in the 1960s and especially in the 1970s, meditation and psychedelics were actually close cousins in the conversation about consciousness and states of mind. That conversation started to split into two different divisions, and I'll explain why in a moment. It gets to a little bit of interesting academic sociology. But what happened was there were a couple of guys at Harvard, including Timothy Leary and others, who got really interested in psychedelics, in particular LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide. And at that time, that was part of the whole counterculture movement, it was considered very anti-establishment, and they were really encouraging students at Harvard to take LSD. They were also very interested in meditation. But what ended up happening is they essentially got kicked out or fired from Harvard, and there's a book that I'll refer you to in the show note captions if you're interested in learning more about all this. But they got kicked out and fired for their emphasis on psychedelics. Now, nowadays, there's a lot of interest in psychedelics. We've had episodes with Dr. Matthew Johnson from Johns Hopkins University who's running clinical trials on psychedelics like psilocybin and LSD for the treatment of depression and PTSD. We've also had Dr. Nolan Williams on the podcast, my colleague at Stanford who's doing incredible studies on some of those compounds as well. So nowadays, the conversation about psychedelics is coming back, and it's somewhat divorced from the conversation about meditation, but in the 1960s and 1970s, the conversation about psychedelics and meditation was sort of one and the same. That changed in the late 1980s and early 1990s when people like Jon Kabat-Zinn started writing books that were purely about meditation and suggesting that people explore meditative practices for the utility to bring calmness, adjust stress, improve sleep, et cetera, divorced from the conversation about psychedelics. Now, that's not to say that the scientific community immediately embraced the conversation about meditation. In fact, it took quite a long while for schools like Harvard and Stanford and other universities around the world to start embracing and funding studies of meditation, asking what sorts of brain areas are involved, how it changes the body, and, perhaps most importantly, how a meditation practice can shift the brain and body when somebody is finished meditating and is off in their life doing their everyday things. In the late 1980s and especially within the 1990s, the advent of brain imaging technology like magnetic residence imaging, MRI, or functional magnetic residence imaging was a way to look at the brain while it was active, not just to get an image of its structure, but also how it's functioning in the areas that so-called light up. When all of that technology became accessible and popular, well, that allowed a large number of laboratories to start asking how specific patterns of thinking and breathing, maybe people sitting in the lotus position, but more often than that, it would be people inside of an MRI magnet because it is a magnet, they sort of put you into a little tube and push you into the tube, not against your will of course, but put people into the tube, have them meditate, and then look at how the brain changed and to do that over time. When those studies were done, what was discovered was really quite miraculous, really. And now we don't think of it as surprising, but what was discovered was a huge laundry list of brain changes. And then when people were evaluated in their outside life, so when they would fill out reports of their subjective feelings of happiness or they would report their sleep, or even if objective measures were taken like changes in hormones or markers of inflammation, et cetera, a large list of information fell out of that which revealed that indeed there are many, a dozen or more clear benefits of a regular meditation practice, and some of those meditation practices could be quite short. So nowadays, we think of meditation as pretty commonly accepted, and in fact, that has a lot to do with the fact that many of the major tech companies in the Bay Area during the 2000s such as Google and Apple and any number of different social media companies and other companies and business ventures, et cetera, and investment firms all over the world started hiring people to train meditation or had online courses for meditation. So nowadays, we think of meditation as this thing that almost everybody understands can benefit us, but we now sit at an interesting frontier where most people think of meditation as one thing, sort of like the word exercise, which, of course, could mean weight training, it could mean running, it could mean high-intensity interval training, all of which, as you know, will get you different results depending on what you do, how often you do it, and the specifics of what you actually do. So, too, meditation can give you very specific results. It can give you more focus, it can give you better sleep, it can give you a combination of results just like exercise can depending on the exercise. So what we are going to talk about next is the specific changes that happen in the brain with specific aspects of meditation. That is, what happens when you close your eyes, what happens when you focus your attention inward versus focusing your attention outward because, as I mentioned before, there's third eye meditation where you close your eyes and focus on that spot just behind your forehead and you focus on your breathing. There's also meditation practices where you're focusing on what you're eating with a lot of so-called mindfulness, being very present to whatever's happening, not letting your mind wander or think about yesterday or tomorrow or what's happening next, but really focusing on the present. There are also meditation practices, of course, where you are in a format of interpersonal communication where you're really listening very intensely. That, too, is a form of mindfulness. So we're going to parse each of these things, and we are going to ask what's happening in the brain and body during each of these meditation practices so that you can develop specific meditation practices that you can invoke in your real life on a daily basis or, thankfully, I would say, for some who are pretty busy, that you could even do once a week or even once a month that will still clearly benefit you in specific ways. I'd like to spend the next 10 minutes or so talking about the neuroscience of meditation, and I promise you I'm not going to just list off a bunch of different brain areas that are active during meditation. That wouldn't be useful to you. In fact, I don't believe in throwing out a lot of nomenclature without also giving some mechanistic explanation as to what different brain areas do. And you could say, "Well, what good is it knowing what different brain areas do and their names if I can't actually manipulate those brain areas?" But the good news is you actually can manipulate those brain areas. As I'll tell you today, you can turn up the activity in certain brain areas and turn down the activity in specific brain areas with specific elements of a meditation practice, so that's quite exciting and quite different really from other aspects of neuroscience that we might discuss on this podcast. So there are a few different brain areas whose names I'd like to arm you with. And again, the names themselves aren't essential, but if you can grasp even the top contour of what I'm about to say, you'll be in a much better position to parse and use the information that follows. There's an area of your brain that sits right behind your forehead that's called the prefrontal cortex. Basically, it's the front bumper of your head just behind the bone, okay? That area just behind your forehead that we call the prefrontal cortex actually encompasses a lot of different things. And actually, you have two of them. You have one on the right side of your brain and you have one on the left side of your brain, and they're connected to one another but they actually do different things. The area that I'd like to focus on today for a bit is the so-called left prefrontal cortex, or if we were going to get really specific, we'd say the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Dorsal means up, lateral means to the side, so if you want to touch the left side of your head and move your hand just toward the midline, toward the sort of top of your head a little bit, so that's dorsal, and then lateral, as long as your hand is still on the side of your head, you're in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, okay? So you've got your hand probably right over your left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. That area of the brain, we know from lesion studies where it's been damaged in animals or humans and we know from stimulation studies where it's been selectively stimulated in animals, or yes, indeed, also it's been done in humans, has an incredible ability to control your bodily senses and to make sense, that is, to interpret what's going on in terms of your emotions and your bodily sensations. So from now on, unless I say otherwise, if I say prefrontal cortex, I'm specifically referring to the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, but I'm going to shorten that up just for sake of simplicity and ease of communication. If I'm going to talk about another area of prefrontal cortex, I'll talk about another area, but if I say prefrontal cortex today, what I mean is left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Stimulation of left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex or, I should say more appropriately, when your left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is active, you are in a great position to interpret what's going on with you emotionally, to interpret your bodily signals of comfort or discomfort, and then to make really good decisions on the basis of that interpretation. And that's because the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is in direct communication with and is directly connected to another brain area called the anterior cingulate cortex, or ACC. Now, I'm just going to refer to it as the ACC, okay? The ACC is an area of your brain that is interpreting a lot of different things about bodily signals, for instance, how fast you're breathing, whether or not your heart is beating quickly or slowly, and, more importantly, whether or not your heart is beating quickly or slowly for the circumstance that you are in. So for instance, if you're running up a hill and you're even in great shape and your heart is beating very fast, it's unlikely that you are going to be concerned about your heart beating fast because that is appropriate for the circumstance. However, if you're just walking along and all of a sudden, your heart starts beating very quickly for no apparent reason, well, then you are going to interpret that as either pathologic or uncomfortable, inappropriate for the context that you happen to be in. The left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is the area of the brain that actually has some control over and especially can interpret what's going on in this ACC region. Now, most of you probably haven't heard of the ACC. Most of you probably have heard of a brain area called the amygdala. It's an almond-shaped structure on the two sides of the brain, people talk about it as the fear center, et cetera. But your ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex, gets input from areas like the amygdala, your threat detection centers, but it also gets input from an enormous number of other areas of your brain and body, including your heart, your gut, so it gets information about how full, that is, distended, or how empty your gut is. It gets information about how quickly you're breathing from input from your lungs and related structures. It's an absolutely critical station for making sense of what's going on in your body, and it works very closely along with one other structure. And I promise this is going to be the third structure in this triad, and then I'll stop listing off names. So we have dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Think of that as sort of the interpreter of what's going on inside of you. You have the ACC, or anterior cingulate cortex, which is the area of your brain that's bringing in all this information about what's going on inside your body and even on the surface of your body. You know, if you have any pain or an itch or a mosquito bite on the surface of your body, your ACC would definitely register that. And then there's this other absolutely incredible brain structure which is called the insula, I-N-S-U-L-A, insula, and the insula has a bunch of different parts to it. But the insula is another area that is interpreting signals of what's going on in your brain and body, so the ACC and the insula are working together to try and figure out, you know, what's going on inside me? And in addition to that, the insula is interpreting information about what's going on outside of you. So your insula is saying, for instance, hey, this is a steep hill that I'm running up, and as a consequence, whatever heart rate increase that I'm experiencing or heavy breathing or burning in my lungs, this all makes sense. I don't have to be worried, I don't have to be scared. I might want to slow down, but this makes sense. Whereas, for instance, in the example I previously gave, where if you're sitting in a room and everything is pretty calm, and all of a sudden, you start feeling really uncomfortable, like your stomach doesn't feel right or you start breathing quickly or you start having a so-called anxiety or panic attack, in large part, that's because the shift in your bodily sensations doesn't match or doesn't correspond to something in the outside world. So there's this incredible triad which includes the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the cingulate or anterior cingulate cortex, and the insula, and those three are working together in a kind of conversation, it's a neural conversation, but a conversation nonetheless, trying to figure out, okay, what's going on inside me? How do I feel? What am I thinking about? And this could be thoughts about the past or the future or the present. They are also in a conversation as to whether or not the sensations that you're experiencing, meaning how quick your breathing is or how slow your breathing is, how your heart feels, how your skin feels, any sensations of pain, or pleasure for that matter, whether or not that makes sense for the situation you're in and trying to determine whether or not you are doing the right things as a consequence of those sensations. Okay, so again, if you can't remember the names of these different neural structures in the brain, don't worry about it. It's really not that critical. What is critical is that you understand that there's a conversation that's constantly occurring as long as you are awake trying to figure out what's going on inside of you and whether or not it makes sense relative to what's going on outside and around you. Now, humans are smart. That is, we are, to some extent, conscious of the fact that we have memories of the past, awareness of the present, and anticipation of the future. So we do realize, for instance, that we can be seated at the dinner table, excuse me, and have a thought about something tomorrow, maybe an exam that's stressing us out or something like that, and that will change our bodily state in a way that is not optimal for what we're doing in the moment but that can still make sense to us because that exam is important, maybe we're feeling some pressure about a hard conversation we have to have, or maybe we are very excited about the next day and we can't eat because we're so excited, and that can make perfect sense to us because we do have access to this knowledge about self that we can think about the past, the present, or the future. So that makes the conversation these three structures are in even more interesting and dynamic because what it means is that we can be doing something, eating, talking, running, any number of different activities, and our bodily state may or may not match what we are doing in a way that's adaptive for that, and yet that can be completely okay or at least understandable for us. Now, a major emphasis of a meditation practice is to make us so-called more mindful. What is mindfulness? Well, again, there isn't one perfect universally accepted operational definition of mindfulness. That's basically nerd speak for saying people can't agree exactly what mindfulness should be, is, and means for everyone. But most people assume, and I think agree, that mindfulness includes something about being present. And when I say present, that doesn't necessarily mean present to one's surroundings because of course a lot of meditation practices that are designed to make us more mindful and present are designed to make us more mindful and present to what's happening internally while ignoring everything that's happening externally, but they are designed to make us more present to our bodily sensations and, in particular, our breathing and our thoughts in the moment. So let's now explore what a generic meditation practice looks like, and let's evaluate how that tends to change the activity of these neural circuits in the brain and body. And then from there, we can split the conversation into a couple of different bins, that is, meditation practices that are ideal for enhancing focus, meditation practices that are ideal for improving mood, meditation practices that are ideal for improving sleep, and meditation practices that, believe it or not, benefit all of those things in one fell swoop. Okay, so what happens during a meditation practice at the neural level? In order to answer that question, we are going to be scientists. That means you and I are going to be scientists now. We are going to break down a practice into its different component parts and address what we know for sure about the brain activation states that occur with those different component parts. In order to do that, let's use a somewhat generic form of meditation, but it's generic and pretty far-reaching because I would say that for most people, about 75%, let's say, a meditation practice is going to involve stopping, meaning getting out of motion, sitting or lying down, and, in most cases, closing one's eyes, although it is absolutely not required to close one's eyes during meditation. There are many forms of meditation that are done eyes open. But for most people, it's going to involve stopping our movement, that is, not ambulating, not walking or running, so seated or lying down with eyes closed. When we do that, meaning when we sit or lie down and close our eyes, as trivial as that shift might sound to you, it actually is a profound shift in the way that your brain and other neural circuits in your body function for the following reason. When we close our eyes, we shut down a major avenue of what's called exteroception. What do I mean by exteroception? Well, very briefly, we are sensing things on our body and in our body all the time. We are also sensing things from outside of us all the time, so these could be sights or sounds, touch on our body, sensations withinside our body, et cetera. Now, sensation is distinct from what we call perception. Perception is, put simply, the sensations that we happen to be paying attention to. So at any given moment, you are sensing many, many things. There are sound waves hitting your ears, there are pressure receptors on the bottoms of your feet sensing your shoes or your sandals or the floor, et cetera, but you're not perceiving them until you place your attention on them. Now, the way perception works is that you have so-called spotlights of attention. You can't perceive everything all at once, every sound, every sight, every touch. That would be overwhelming. In fact, that would be terrible. Rather you have spotlights of perception that can either be very narrow, so for instance, you could focus all of your perception right now on your big toe of your right foot and really pour all of your awareness, your attention into what you're perceiving there, what it feels like, if there's tingling or pressure, heat or cold, et cetera, or you can broaden that spotlight to include both feet or all your toes on both feet and then your legs and your whole body or the entire room. Perception is like a spotlight, and I should mention there are very good data that we can split our attention into two but probably not more than two spotlights, and we can make those spotlights of perception either very broad and diffuse or very narrow. You can practice this now if you like. You can pick a spot on the wall away from you anywhere, or if you're driving, you can look at some location, and you can focus intensely on one small location, for instance, a tree in the horizon or a person on the street or any number of different things outside of you, or you can broaden that spotlight to include the entire scene at once. You can also focus a spotlight of perception on your body, say on the left upper portion of your chest. And of course you can focus on the left upper portion of your chest and something outside of you, you can split your attention between those two perceptual spotlights. It's very hard, although not impossible, to have three perceptual spotlights, but most people can split to two points of attention or perception pretty easily. The other thing that most people can do pretty easily is merge those two spotlights or, rather, to have just one spotlight of attention. So you don't always have to have two spotlights of attention on, and here, I'm using the word attention and perception interchangeably. But you could, for instance, have two points of attention, so you're talking to somebody and you're paying attention to whether or not somebody's walking in the door or not, so that's two, or you could be completely focused on the person you're talking to, or you could be completely focused on the stomach ache or the great sensation of hunger that you have in your belly while talking to somebody, in fact, you're not even listening to what they're saying at all. Okay? So you have two spotlights of perception. You can split them or merge them into one. And, this is very important, those spotlights of perception can intensify or dim, and there, I'm using analogy. What I mean by that is your perception of what's happening within those spotlights can be very, very high acuity. That is, you can register very fine changes in detail like tingling on one side of your big toe of your right foot versus the other, or it can be somewhat more diffuse. You're just thinking about your whole toe, which, in that case, seems like a small area, but the point is that you can consciously adjust the acuity, that is, the fineness of your perception. All of this is under your power because of the incredible ability of a brain structure whose name you now understand and know, which is the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, although there are other areas of your brain involved as well. Your ability to direct your attention to specific things in your environment or within your body or to split those points of attention or merge them or dial up the intensity of how closely you're paying attention to every little shift or ripple and change in sensation there or to kind of dissociate, if you will, for lack of a better word, to disengage from that perception, all of that is under control because of your ability to engage this area that we call the prefrontal cortex, and, in particular, the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health, and those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met, and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera, and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3+K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3+K2. Okay, so now if we look at the example of what happens when you sit or lie down and close your eyes and decide to meditate, you should immediately realize that that's a tremendous shift in your perceptual ability, why? Because that spotlight of attention, while it can be oriented toward, for instance, what you hear in the room or maybe the feeling of wind moving trees in the environment that you happen to be in, when we close our eyes, we shut down one of the major avenues for sensory input, which is vision. And when we do that, there's a tendency for those perceptual spotlights to be focused more so on what happens at the level of the surface of our skin and inside of our bodies. And that informs us about something very important, which is that there are actually two axes or two ends of a continuum of perception. Up until now, I've been talking about perception and intention as kind of the same thing, and indeed they are, at least for sake of this conversation, but within that word perception or within that word attention, there's a continuum, and that continuum has on one end something called interoception. Interoception, spelled with an I, is everything that we sense at the level of our skin and inward, so the sensation inside our stomach, the sensation of our heart beating. Some people can sense their heart beating pretty easily. Other people have more challenge doing that. What we are feeling on the surface of our skin, how hot or cold we feel, that's interoception. In contrast, at the other end of the continuum is so-called exteroception, spelled with an E. Exteroception is perception of everything that's outside or beyond the confines of our skin. So by shutting our eyes, and in particular, in a meditative practice where we direct our attention toward our so-called third eye center, this area right behind our forehead, which, not so incidentally, is the prefrontal cortex, or in some cases where people will focus on their breathing, so the movement of their stomach or the movement of their diaphragm or the lifting of their chest or the extension of their belly while they breathe. By doing that, we are taking what ordinarily is a perceptual state that's split between the outside world, exteroception, and usually also toward our inner state. You know, most people are generally in touch with how they are feeling from the skin inward while they are also paying attention to what's outside of them. You can think about somebody, for instance, at a restaurant or a sandwich shop about to order a sandwich and you're reading the menu, so that's exteroception, right? The menu is outside the confines of your skin. And little ideas or maybe big ideas come to mind about what the roast beef sandwich or the vegetarian sandwich will taste like, what it will do for you, what's in it, what you like, what you don't like, et cetera. That's splitting interoception and exteroception. But when we close our eyes, we stop, we slow down, we focus on our breathing or that third eye center, the majority of our perception then shifts to interoception. And when we shift down to that end of the continuum of interoception, something very important happens. What happens is that those two regions, the ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the insula, really ramp up their levels of neural activity, and that should make perfect sense to you because those are areas of your brain that are registering and paying attention to the various sensations of how full or empty your stomach feels, whether or not the surface of your skin feels hot or cold, and on and on. So by just sitting down or lying down and closing your eyes, your brain undergoes a massive shift from exteroception to interoception. Now, that's not to say you can't be distracted by external events, and, in fact, many people are, but the early stages of transitioning into a meditative state involve this shift down the continuum, or, I should say, to one end of the continuum because there's no down-up, there's just the continuum, shift along the continuum to heightened levels of interoception. Now, I mentioned this briefly before, but many people are very interoceptively aware just naturally, even if they don't do a meditation practice. Other people are not. And there's a pretty good measure of whether or not you have high levels of interoceptive awareness or capability, and that is your ability to count your heartbeats without placing your fingers anywhere with any pressure to take your pulse. You can do this if you like, you can actually try and estimate your number of heartbeats simply by trying to feel your heart beat. Some people are very good, meaning they're very accurate at doing this, other people are not. It does seem to be an ability that can be trained up quite a bit, and, in fact, meditative practices will improve your interoceptive awareness, but, and this is a very important point, heightened levels of interoceptive awareness, while that might sound attractive, oh, to be really in touch with your body, that is not always beneficial, why? Because many people who, for instance, have excessive levels of anxiety have excessive levels of anxiety because they are very keenly aware of any subtle shift in their heart rate or breathing or change in the sensations within their stomach. Whereas other people who are less aware of their bodily state, that can be beneficial, right? It can be adaptive or not, depending on the circumstances. It's probably not adaptive to be very, very aware of your internal state if, for instance, you're doing public speaking, you don't want to be thinking about what's going on in your stomach or how quickly you're breathing. I'm certainly trying to ignore all those signals, those sensations now. But for somebody who has no awareness of what's going on, very little interoceptive awareness, that can be problematic, too, because these are the very people who can ignore the fact that they're having a heart attack or can ignore the fact that they have high blood pressure and are carrying about life focused on everything external with no awareness of their own body. They're, quote, unquote, out of touch with their body. So we want to be very careful about placing valence, which is a sort of value of good or bad on interoceptive awareness versus exteroceptive awareness. More importantly, we want to emphasize that when you undergo a meditation practice, if it's of the sort where you stop your movement and close your eyes, you are training for interoceptive awareness. This becomes important later when we get into discussions about meditation for reducing anxiety. Some people may opt, in fact, I would say some people ought to opt for a meditative practice which involves more exteroceptive awareness, actually a meditation like a walking meditation or even a seated meditation where they are bringing their focus to a place outside their body as opposed to inside their body. And in fact, there are examples of people who have meditated quite a lot who develop such a heightened state or awareness of their interoceptive components, that is, just fancy, again, nerd speak for so aware of their breathing and of their heart and of the state of their gut that it actually is intrusive for daily activities. So I will ask you to ask this question of yourself now. Are you somebody who tends to be very in touch with your bodily sensations, so, for instance, from the skin inwards? Or are you somebody who tends to be less in touch with or aware of your interoceptive state? There is no right or wrong answer. You don't get an A or an F or a D or a C depending on your answer. It's just a good question for each and every one of us to answer, and I think most people will answer that it depends. It depends on whether or not you are in a social setting or whether or not you're alone. But we are going to return to that answer so keep it in mind because it will become very beneficial in building an optimal meditation practice for you. But for now, just note, there's this continuum of perception, interoception and exteroception. Closing your eyes increases interoception. Opening your eyes dramatically increases exteroception just automatically, just automatically because so much of your brain, in fact, 40% or more, is dedicated to vision. And this, I should say, for those of you that are low vision or no vision and those of you that are blind or have poor vision, this entire process is translated to the auditory, to the sound domain, so it's true for people that can see and it's true for people that can't see. Of course, people that can't see, closing the eyes doesn't have this huge shift towards interoception, but there have been a few studies, not as many as I would've liked to find, but a few studies of, for instance, people who are blind or have low vision, don't see very well, and when they close their ears and they can't hear the external world or they put headphones on or noise-canceling headphones, then the world inside of them becomes very prominent relative to the world outside of them for obvious reasons. So I asked you to ask yourself whether or not you are somebody who tends to be more interoceptively aware or not, more exteroceptively aware or not. And some of you might not be able to answer that question, and if you can't, chances are that you are effectively sliding along that continuum depending on the activities that you're doing. So you're probably the kind of person where if somebody comes over to you and starts talking to you, you will engage in that conversation, and you don't feel so inside your body that you're thinking about your heart beating and whether or not you're flushing red, et cetera, you're going to pay attention to what they say. Many people, however, when somebody talks to them, if they have social anxiety or even a slight bit of social anxiety, will be thinking about whether or not their cheeks are flushing or whether or not they look right or sound right or whether or not they have something in their teeth. These are normal responses, but they really speak to this issue of whether or not you tend to shift more towards interoceptive awareness or exteroceptive awareness. And, of course, it's context dependent. It will depend on whether or not you're, you know, out on a date with somebody that, you know, you would loathe to find out later that you had food in your teeth or whether or not you're with somebody you're more familiar with where that would not really matter much or the other person would tell you this kind of thing. What does it mean to be at one location or another location along this continuum of interoception or exteroception? Well, we know what it means neurally, right? We know that if you are more interoceptively aware, your insula and ACC are active, but that's not very useful. That's not helpful as a tool. That's just a fact. Now, there have actually been studies of what a meditation practice can do in terms of moving you along this continuum from where you naturally sit in order to help you function not just during the meditation but at all times. And in order to illustrate this, I want to start with a description of what is now a classic study. It's a very cool study, it has a very cool name. It talks about something very important that will come up again and again in today's conversation, and that's something called the default mode network. The default mode network is a collection of different brain areas that essentially are active when we're not doing much of anything and certainly is active when we are not focused on one particular task or conversation or activity. The default mode network can be thought of more or less as the network that generates mind wandering or our thoughts drifting from the past to the present to the future. Remember, earlier, I talked about how your perceptual spotlight can either be two spotlights or they can merge. Well, similarly, human beings can think about the past, surely, the present, definitely, and the future. And it turns out we can also split our thoughts just like we can split our perception into two of those three things, so I can think about the past, a past event, and I can think about the present. I can split my thinking and my memory in that way. I can also think about the present and the future. I can also think about the future and the past, although it's very difficult, although not impossible, to split one's thinking and memory into the past, the present, and future simultaneously, not easily done, but pretty easy to split one's attention and thinking into two of those three things, either the past, the present, and the future or any two of those three things, okay? Just like with attentional spotlighting, you can place your mind, your thinking, and your memory, your cognition onto one of those things and be very, very present or the past and the present and so on and so forth. The default mode network, while it involves a lot of different brain areas, can be thought of simply as the network of brain areas that are active when your mind is wandering between these different time domains. And the paper I'd like to share with you, as I mentioned before, is now a classic paper, it has a wonderful title, which is A Wandering Mind is an Unhappy Mind. Now, that sounds almost like a news article or a news article about a scientific paper, but that's actually the title of the scientific paper which was published in the journal, "Science," which is one of the three apex journals. You know, scientific publishing is competitive, but it's especially competitive to get manuscripts accepted into "Science," into "Nature," and into the journal "Cell," so it represents kind of the Super Bowl, NBA Championships, and Stanley Cup, if you will, for you sports aficionados of scientific publishing. This is a paper from Matthew Killingsworth and Dan Gilbert. It was published in 2010, but it's still considered a classic. And this paper, A Wandering Mind is an Unhappy Mind, has a number of very important points. I'm going to paraphrase certain elements of it for you because they say essentially what I would like you to know far better than I could say. So first of all, they started out with a statement, which I confess I disagree with, which is, "Unlike other animals, human beings spend a lot of time thinking about what is not going on around them: contemplating events that happened in the past, might happen in the future, or will never happen at all." I agree with their assertion that human beings do that. That's certainly my experience, although I must say, I don't think there's any evidence whatsoever that other animals don't do it also. So my apologies, Killingsworth and Gilbert, but I'd be happy to go toe-to-toe with you on that. I am not aware of any data that prove one way or the other what other animals are thinking. So let's set aside other animals, and let's focus on the human animal. Now, their point is still a very good one, which is that humans have this wandering of the mind that they call stimulus-independent thought. That is, there's nothing happening to create these thoughts or anything happening in the immediate environment. These thoughts are just happening on their own internally. That's the default mode network. This study was important. In fact, it was a landmark study because they did it right about the time that smartphones became widely available and in use, so again, 2010. So they basically pinged people, they contacted people on their iPhones many times per day, and they did this for well over 2,200 adults. They had a mix of male and female people in this study. The mean age was 34 years, but there was a range, mean, of course, being average, but there were a range of different ages and so forth. And at any moment, they asked people, "What are you feeling right now?" And they also asked them, "What are you doing right now?" So they were looking for the match or mismatch between what people were doing and what they were feeling. They were essentially trying to probe what people were thinking about, and they also addressed that. And they came up with a kind of a bubble chart, if you will, where the bigger the bubble, the more answers came back about one particular thing, and they assessed whether or not people were happy or not in that moment, or sad or not, whether or not they were focused on what they were doing or not. There are a lot of bubbles in this chart, so I'm not going to read them all. But the important points that came from the data, and, again, this is a very large data set, was that, and here again, I'm paraphrasing, first, people's minds wandered frequently regardless of what they were doing. In nearly half of the samples taken, people were generally thinking about something else, except, it turns out, there's this one little bubble sitting way far out on the horizon here, people claimed, and I'm inclined to believe them, that they tend to be very focused on making love if they were making love in the moment where they were pinged on their iPhone. Now, why their iPhone was there with them at that moment, I don't know. That wasn't included in this description of the study. But all the other activities, grooming and self-care, listening to the news, watching television, relaxing, working, et cetera, et cetera, during all those activities, people claimed that their mind wandered a lot. And then they also assessed, of course, their mood and how those people felt at any given moment depending on what they were doing and how well their mind and their emotions matched what they were doing. And what they say here is second, they revealed that people were less happy when their minds were wandering than when they were not, and this was true during all activities. And then third, what people were thinking at a given moment was far better a predictor of their happiness than what they were doing. So this is interesting and I think matches a lot of people's experience. In fact, I think as you hear about this study, many of you will probably just say, "Well, duh." I mean, if you're working and you don't like your work and you're thinking about something bad that happened, well, then of course you're not going to be happy. But the key point of this study is that it did not necessarily have to be the case that people were thinking about something unpleasant. In fact, if people were working and they were thinking about something else that was pleasant, that also made them feel unhappy. In other words, the mismatch between being in an activity and having our mind elsewhere led people to report themselves as feeling more unhappy in that moment. And when you total this up, what you find is that people are often not present to what they are doing, and that is a great source of unhappiness, even if their thoughts are those of happy, joyful thoughts. So this is interesting and I think runs counter to what most of us have heard or have been taught, which is, you know, think good thoughts, you know, try and suppress bad thoughts, have a good internal landscape, you know, create a good narrative. That is all true, but equally if not more important is to have the ability to be fully engaged in what you are doing at a given moment. That is the strongest predictor of being happy. And there were several other studies that followed up on this, but their conclusion that they put in the final short paragraph of this paper I think really captures it beautifully. They say, and here, I'm quoting directly, "In conclusion, a human mind is a wandering mind, and a wandering mind is an unhappy mind. The ability to think about what is not happening in a moment," I added the in a moment part, "is a cognitive achievement that comes at an emotional cost." So I know I'm not alone in believing that this paper, A Wandering Mind is an Unhappy Mind, and we will provide a link to this paper in the show note captions, is absolutely key in understanding why a meditation practice is so important because a meditation practice is really about adjusting your place along that interoceptive-exteroceptive continuum to what you happen to be experiencing in that moment. And while most people think of a meditative practice as focusing on what's going on internally with your eyes closed, third eye center, focusing on your breathing, et cetera, for any number of minutes or maybe even an hour or longer, there are other forms of meditation in which your exteroception dominates and which you are actively focusing on things outside or beyond the confines of your skin and internal landscape, and that, too, is meditation. And if we are to take the work of Killingsworth and Gilbert, this A Wandering Mind is an Unhappy Mind, seriously, and I know a number of other laboratories have and have supported this research with their findings again and again and again, what this means is that meditating is not necessarily a practice that we do divorced from the rest of life. Meditation and mindfulness in particular, being present to what we are doing in a given moment is one of the essential keys to happiness and improved mood even if what we are doing is unpleasant. So that brings us to a tool, and it's a tool that any and all of us can use whether or not you tend to be interoceptively dominant, right, that you tend to pay more attention to your bodily sensations, or exteroceptively dominant. And, again, if you don't know the answer to that question, there's a simple test that you can do. You can just sit down or lie down, close your eyes, and you can ask yourself or assess whether or not your attention tends to fleet to things outside of you, right, cars honking or going by, people in the room, or whether or not you tend to be able to focus on your internal landscape to the exclusion of exteroception and attention to things outside the confines of your skin easily. Now, of course, this will depend on context and situation, even how well rested you are, et cetera, but that's exactly the point. This is the sort of thing you want to do every time you decide to do a meditation practice. In fact, I would suggest that you use this to determine what meditation you do at any given moment. So let's say you are somebody who is a regular meditator or let's say you're somebody who's never meditated and you'd like to develop a meditation practice. I suggest that you do a test of whether or not you are more interoceptively dominant or exteroceptively dominant in that moment. Again, this is not a personality trait. This is a question about where you happen to be in a moment. So let's say you're on a plane or you're in the car. If you're in the car, please don't close your eyes while driving, that's sort of obvious, but do this in a safe way, please. But stop, close your eyes, and assess whether or not you can access and focus your attention primarily on your internal state or whether or not your attention and perception gets pulled to something external, to exteroception. And, again, that will vary depending on circumstance and who you are. Then I suggest opening your eyes and trying to focus your attention to something external to you and seeing or evaluating the extent to which you can divorce your perception from sensations that occur at the level of your skin or internally. Now, I should say that there's no technology, at least not that I'm aware of, absence of fMRI machine, in which case, you are inside an fMRI machine while you do this. But unless you are in that experiment, and most of us aren't, there's no technology that can tell you, for instance, whether or not you are interoceptively dominant or exteroceptively dominant and whether or not the ratio is, you know, 75 to 25 or what have you at any given moment. You have to assess this subjectively. However, if you sit down, for instance, and you notice that you can equally split your attention between internal sensations and external sensations or whether or not you find yourself pulled into external sensations when you're trying to focus inward or you find yourself pulled inward when you're trying to focus outward, well, that will dictate the sort of meditation that you perhaps ought to perform in that moment. Let me give an example of how you would do this. You would stop in some way, so sit or lie down, close your eyes, and evaluate whether or not you can essentially rule out or eliminate attention to all outside events. Most people won't be able to do that entirely, but try and focus your attention, for instance, on your breathing or the typical third eye center, you know, focusing at a spot right behind your forehead. If you feel you can do that reasonably well to the exclusion of what's happening around you, well, then an important question arises. Should you meditate in a way to enhance that interoceptive awareness? Or rather, should you meditate in a way, for instance, with your eyes open and your attention on a particular portion of the landscape you're in like a tree or maybe even, you know, an object or a plant or something else in your immediate environment to try and cultivate or enhance your exteroceptive awareness? That's up to you, but my bias would be one in which you work against your default state. Again, the default mode network is where you land on this interoceptive-exteroceptive continuum. It's going to lead to more mind wandering, whereas when you encourage or we could even say force yourself a little bit to anchor your attention to either inside your body or outside your body, and you make that decision according to what you are doing less easily, well, then you are actively training up the neural circuits. You are engaging so-called neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. You are deliberately engaging a shift along that continuum. To make this crystal clear, what I mean is this. Let me give an example. If I were to sit down and I wanted to do some meditation, let's just say three minutes of meditation. There's good evidence that even three minutes of meditation can be beneficial for a variety of things, including enhanced focus and enhanced anxiety management. Let's say I sit down and I notice that I can really focus inward on what's happening at the level of my skin and my internal organs, and I can rule out everything. Maybe that's 'cause the room is quiet or maybe it's just because my brain is in a state that I'm particularly good at that at that moment or maybe it's just a natural ability. Well then I would opt for a three-minute meditation practice in which I deliberately exterocept, that I build up the circuitry to focus on something external to me because I want, and I think most people would like, to have an adaptive mechanism within them so that they can slide along that continuum and they don't default to whatever happens to be easiest for them in that moment. Now, if I were to sit down and try and focus on what's going on internally and I kept getting distracted by things happening outside of me, opening my eyes or feeling like I need to reach for my phone or paying attention to the sounds in the room, well, then I would actively engage a meditation practice, in this case, a three-minute example but it could be longer, where I'm deliberately trying to focus my perception on events at the level of the confines of my skin and internally. Why do I say this? Well, you know, I love to use the phrase anytime with kids, you know, when they say "This is really hard or something's challenging," or adults will say, "That's really tough." Well, as my graduate advisor used to say, that means you're learning. If something were easy, if you can perform any activity or thought, et cetera, well, then there is absolutely zero reason for your neural circuits to change. It's the friction, it's the feeling that something is hard that turns on the enormous variety of mechanisms at the level of cells, et cetera, that allow you to potentially change your neural circuitry. So challenge and discomfort is the signal to your brain and body that something needs to change, so I'm encouraging you to embark on meditative practices that are not your default, okay? To essentially go against the grain of where your interoceptive bias or your exteroceptive bias happens to be at a given moment. And, again, this will change. For some of you, this will change across the day where early in the day, you are very, very good at doing an interoceptive-biased meditation, and later in the day, you aren't. I actually believe, based on the data that I've covered, and we'll get into a few more papers about this, and my lab is actively working on this as well, that a meditative practice can be made far more effective, that is, it can invoke more neuroplasticity, more shift in brain states and brain circuitry if we do not take the easy path, that is, we go against the grain of what our brain would naturally do in a given moment. So if you're in a crowded airport and you're finding that everything's very distracting, well, then that would be a great time to do some interoceptive focused meditation. Whereas if you are really in your head, you know, you're looping thoughts about the past and present, maybe you're even in obsessive thought, well, that would be a terrific time, an ideal time really, to do a short meditation focused on something external to you. In both cases, whether or not you're focused on interoceptive bias or exteroceptive bias, you are going against, or I should say you're pushing back against your default mode network. I would argue it's going to be far more effective, that is, you're going to reduce or shift the activity of that default mode network far more and in a far more beneficial way if you actively try and suppress your bias toward being more interoceptive or exteroceptive. Now, I think that's immensely beneficial, both for the immediate changes that you experience, what others have called a state change, because that's what it is, and it also can lead to, as we referred to earlier, more neuroplasticity, more changes in the brain circuits that underlie your default mode network and lead to what are called trait changes. And I want to be very clear that I am not the first to make this state versus trait distinction. That's a distinction that was raised in a really wonderful book. In fact, I can't recommend this book highly enough. The book is "Altered Traits: Science Reveals How Meditation Changes Your Mind, Brain, and Body." This is a book by Daniel Goleman and Richard Davidson who've done terrific work and many writings and many TED Talks, et cetera, about meditation. I would say that circa 2016, 2017, this book really captured what I believe to be the most essential elements of the science of meditation and a lot of the history of it as well. Today, we are focusing on much of what's covered in this book but also a lot of things that have happened, excuse me, since 2017. In fact, most of the papers that I'm going to talk about are papers that were published after 2017. But, again, this is a wonderful book where they very clearly distinguish between state changes and trait changes, trait changes being the more long-lasting ones. My read of this book and the literature that follows is, again, that when you sit down to meditate, it is going to be most effective to do that interoceptive, exteroceptive bias assessment. Ask yourself whether or not you are more in your head or outside your head, if you will, and then to do a meditation practice that runs counter to where you happen to be at, that is, that pushes you more externally if you're in your head, and if you're more focused on what's going on around you, that pushes you more internally. Now, I think most people are familiar with how to do an interoceptive-biased meditation. Again, that would be setting a timer. Maybe you don't have even set a timer, you just sit or lie down, close your eyes, focus on that third eye center behind your forehead or focus on your breathing or your bodily sensations. That's typical and often discussed. Exteroceptive based meditations, you pick a focal point outside or beyond the confines of your skin, so that could be, for instance, a point on the wall if you are indoors, it could be a plant, it could be a point on the horizon far away. What you will find is that your visual system will fatigue a little bit when you concentrate your visual focus at that location. I want to remind you that it is perfectly okay and, in fact, necessary to blink, so you should blink, you can relax your face, you can change your expression. There is no rule that says that you can't do those things. This is not, you know, just beaming a particular location in space and holding your eyelids open. I've been accused many times of not blinking very often. That's for other reasons. It's part of the way I access memory about what I want to say. I don't use a prompter here, so I'm accessing from a sort of internal image in my head. That's how my memory works. But in any case, if you're going to do an exteroceptive-biased meditation, there is absolutely no reason why you wouldn't look away from that location every once in a while in the same way that if you were focused on internal thoughts with your eyes closed and focused on your breathing, every once in a while, your thoughts will skip away from that breathing or from your third eye center. In fact, and this is discussed in the book "Altered Traits" but by many other people as well, one of the key elements of any meditative practice, whether or not it's interoceptively focused or exteroceptively focused, is that it's really a refocusing practice. The more number of times that you have to yank yourself back into attending or perceiving one specific thing. In other words, the more times your mind wanders and you bring it back, actually the more effective that practice is. Again, if you can just focus on one location with laser precision and your mind never darts away from that and you don't have to bring it back, well, then there's no neuroplasticity, nothing needs to change because your nervous system will effectively know it's performing perfectly. So if you're somebody who tries to do meditation and you find that your mind just wanders, just remember every time you scruff yourself and pull yourself back to focusing on some location externally or focus back on your breath or your third eye center, each one of those aren't just opportunities to do better, they are essential to the improvement process. Think about them as ascending a staircase of refocusing. Every time you refocus, you're going up one more level, another stair, another stair, another stair, and I think that will move you away from the kind of judgmental process of thinking, "Ugh, like, I can't focus on anything." Pretty soon, what you'll notice is that the refocusing process will happen so quickly that you don't even perceive it. And, again, this is something that's borne out in the neuroimaging data. A lot of people think that they can focus with laser precision, but actually, what they are better at doing is refocusing more quickly and consistently over time. There's a classic study about this in very experienced meditators that was done in Japan where they had people with varying levels of meditation ability, so some who had never meditated, others who were really expert meditators with many hundreds if not thousands of hours of meditation under their belt, and they had those people listen to 20 tones repeated over and over, the same tone, and they found that the expert meditators could really focus, and they did this by brain imaging, they could really focus on all 20 tones, whereas most people kind of attenuate or what's called habituate to the tone so that by the 10th or 11th tone, their mind is really going to something else. Now, that's wonderful, but that really just tells us the expert meditators have better focus. But it turns out that the more modern neuroimaging studies have shown that they don't have better focus such that they're staying in a very narrow trench of focus. What they're doing is they're exiting focus and going back in more quickly, more quickly, more quickly over and over again. So rather than think about your ability to focus, think about your ability to refocus, and the more number of times you have to refocus, the better training you're getting. So earlier, I mentioned doing this interoceptive-biased or exteroceptive-biased meditation for three minutes. Why did I say three minutes? Well, three minutes seems like a reasonable number for most people to do consistently, you know, once a day. And in fact, there are some studies of one-minute meditations and three-minute meditations and 10 and 60. My laboratory has been studying a 5-minute-a-day meditation, and that clearly has benefits, but I think it's also clear that by three minutes, many of the benefits are starting to arrive. And so while I'm not pointing at any one particular data point here, it's very clear that forcing oneself to direct one's perception, that is, your attention, to your internal state or to something external to you is immensely beneficial if you do it consistently and is, again, especially beneficial if you're focusing your attention on the portion of your experience, either internal or external to you, that is not the one that you would default to in that moment. And some people have taken this to the extreme to say that, you know, you can even just move about your day, and then every once in a while, just do a one breath meditation. To be honest, when I look at the whole of the data, it seems as if it doesn't really matter in order to derive most of the benefits of a meditation practice. Now, I'm a big fan of some of the newer meditation apps that are out there. One in particular that I've been using and that actually I started using because my dad is a big fan of it and he does now fairly long meditations. He's doing about 10 or 20 minutes at least every other day and often every day, and he convinced me to check out the Waking Up app that Sam Harris has put out. I looked at it, I think some of it sits behind a paywall, but you can access much of it or at least do a trial and try it out without having to get behind that paywall. They're not a sponsor of this podcast, I should mention, but I decided to use the Waking Up app. I think it's terrific, and I think one of the reasons it's terrific is that Sam includes short descriptions of what meditation is doing and what a specific meditation can do for you just prior to doing that meditation. So those meditations can be quite brief. Some of them are a minute long, two minutes long, some are longer or even quite a bit longer. That app, I think, includes a variety of meditations that really encompasses the huge range of possibilities that are possible with meditation, and that, at least by my experience of the Waking Up app, has led to my most consistent meditation practice. And, of course, I would love to get Sam on the podcast as a guest so we could talk about the sort of underpinnings of the Waking Up app and his views on everything from meditation to, I know he's big in the discussion about free will and consciousness, some of the very deep and somewhat abstract discussions. I really hope to get Sam on the podcast at a time not too far from now. Meanwhile, we've never met in person, but I absolutely love the Waking Up app, Sam, and I know my father does as well, and I know many of you already use it. If you haven't tried it already, I really do encourage you to check it out. I want to talk just briefly about this third eye center business because it turns out to be pretty interesting. The third eye is actually a name that's been given to another neural structure, or I should say structure because it's not strictly neural, and that's the pineal gland, and this has an interesting history. I promise I'm not taking off on a tangent here that isn't relevant to meditation. So you have a brain of course, and on both sides of your brain, you tend to have mirror symmetric representations of the same things. What do I mean by that? Well, you have a prefrontal cortex on the right, you have a prefrontal cortex on the left, and they actually do slightly different things. Language is sometimes lateralized to one side, but in general, for every structure that you have on one side of the brain, you have the same structure on the opposite side of the brain. There's one clear exception to that, and that's the pineal gland. The pineal gland is the gland that makes melatonin, which, at night when it gets dark, secretes melatonin, and that melatonin makes you sleepy, it helps you fall asleep but not stay asleep. Descartes, right, the philosopher Descartes asserted that the pineal was the seat of the soul because it was the one structure in the brain that he saw was not on both sides of the brain, it was only one of them and in the middle. Now, I don't know if it's the seat of the soul or not, I'm not in a position to make assessments like that. But what do we know about the pineal? The pineal, as I mentioned, is involved in releasing melatonin, it does a few other things as well, but it is also considered the third eye for a couple of reasons. One is that it responds to light, although, in humans, not directly. So in birds and lizards and snakes, they actually either have a thin skull, or, believe it or not, two holes in the top of their skull that allow light to go directly in. If you look at the head of a snake, light can go directly into their brain through these holes and activate the pineal to suppress melatonin and control their wakefulness, sleep rhythms. In birds, they don't have holes in their skull, but they have very thin skulls. And, believe it or not, light can penetrate the thinness of the skull in many birds and communicates information about time of day and even time of year, and that's translating to hormonal signals such as melatonin release from the pineal. And so the pineal has been called the third eye because it's a light-sensitive organ inside the brain. In humans, the pineal sits deep, deep, deep to the surface, and light cannot get in there. In fact, if light can get into your brain, unless you are part of a specific experiment where that's the intention or you're having neurosurgery or something of that sort, then you've got serious issues happening. That pineal sits deep, deep, deep near what's called the fourth ventricle, and it absolutely should not see light directly. So the idea that the pineal is the third eye in humans is not true. It just isn't true. So anytime someone says, "Oh, the pineal is your third eye." That's not the third eye center that people are referring to when they talk about meditation. Now, you'll see a number of different forms of art where it will be a picture of a face and the eyes will be closed or sometimes open, and there'll be literally a third eye, like a cyclops eye in the middle of the forehead. That has been proposed for many thousands of years to be, quote, unquote, the seat of our consciousness. Now, that's interesting because that real estate behind the forehead actually turns out to be the prefrontal cortex, which we know from lesion studies and stimulation studies, if you remove that brain area, people become very reflexive. They are not thinking intentionally, they don't become deliberate. In fact, and this is kind of an eerie result, but if you inactivate, you turn off the prefrontal cortex and you give somebody the opportunity to play a shooting game, for instance, their accuracy goes through the roof. They become essentially like a machine. They see a stimulus, they shoot at it, they see a stimulus, they shoot at it. Their accuracy is exceptional, but their ability to distinguish between enemy and friend completely disappears. So they become a highly effective motor, or I should say sensory motor machine, but their assessment and their judgment about right or wrong completely disappears. This is also true for people that have prefrontal damage. They often will have inappropriate behavior or a hard time suppressing behaviors, et cetera. So the third eye center as the seat of consciousness and our intention is something that makes sense generally with what we know about the neuroscience and neurology, but there's something more to it that I think is especially important for all of you that goes beyond anything about ancient traditions or pineals or birds or snakes and pits in the top of the head, and here's what it is. The brain itself, meaning the brain tissue, does not have any sensory neurons. What do I mean by that? Well, if I touch the top of my hand, I can feel that. If I want to sense my heartbeat, if I work at it, I can feel that. If I want to sense how I feel internally at the level of my stomach, is it full, is it empty, am I hungry, is it acidic, does it ache or does it feel pleasant, et cetera, I can sense that. And that's because we have sensory neurons on our skin and in our body, et cetera. We also have sensory neurons in our eyes that let us perceive things externally. We have no sensory neurons on our brain. This is one of the reasons why you can remove the skull and do brain surgery on somebody who's wide awake and be poking around in there, and they don't need any anesthetic on the brain itself. They need anesthetic for the incision site, but they don't need anesthetic on the brain because it has no feeling. You have emotions, but there's no feeling. So normally, we are perceiving and paying attention to what we are sensing, either externally, sight and sounds, again, exteroception, or internally, interoception, touch, et cetera. But by focusing our perception and our attention not on our bodily surface like a body scan, but to a point a couple centimeters or inches behind our forehead, we essentially are bringing that attentional, that perceptual spotlight to a location in which there is no sensation. There's nothing to feel there. And when we do that, by closing our eyes and focusing on that, quote, unquote, third eye center, which is the prefrontal cortex, to be quite honest, when we do that, something else happens. And what happens is when we are not thinking about and perceiving our sensations, because there are none there, our thoughts and our emotions and our memories sort of mushroom up. A better way to put it would be that they geyser up and take on more prominence in our perception. What I mean by this is that normally, you know, I'm not thinking about the contact point between me and this chair, but as I'm speaking, I'm in contact with the chair and those neurons are firing. But if I focus my energy and attention on them, they're going to fire the same but more of my perception goes there. Similarly, I'm thinking things all the time. You are too. And I'm perceiving things all the time, and I'm remembering things all the time, and I'm anticipating things all the time about the future. But by focusing my attention on the one organ for which I have no sensation, that is, my brain, well, then thoughts, feelings, and memories, feelings meaning emotional feelings, start to grow in their prominence in my awareness and in my perception. And so this is why when you sit down to a meditative practice, if it's a meditative practice where you close your eyes or you're focused on that third eye center, where you're focused on your brain as opposed to your bodily surface or something external to you, the thoughts seem to come by in waves, and they can almost be overwhelming. It's very hard to, as it's often described, just sit back and watch your thoughts go by because there are so many of them. Actually, the best way to stop thinking is to really focus on something external or to focus on sensation. That's less thinking than it is perceiving senses, okay? So I don't want this to get too abstract. When people talk about the third eye center, they're not talking about the pineal, they're talking about prefrontal cortex, and when you direct your own attention to the very area of your brain that directs attention, there's nothing to sense there. The only things that will become present to you are feelings, emotions, that is, thoughts and memories, and they will often arrive in what seems to be a very disorganized fashion. And the reason they arrive in somewhat disorganized fashion is because, normally, we just don't perceive things that way. Normally, we are splitting our attention, our perception, that is, to multiple things, our sensation and our thoughts. When we put all of our perception into our thoughts, we see how disorganized, how wandering they are and how, in fact, how random and intrusive those can be. Again, random and intrusive. And much of what we talked about in that paper earlier, the one where they asked people, what are you doing and what are you feeling and how happy or how unhappy you are, what they discovered was that most people are sort of in their head a lot. They're not really present to what they're doing, which leads me to the statement that I believe, at least based on the data, that paper included, that most people have an interoceptive bias. They're focused more on what's going on internally than they are focused on what's happening externally. There are certainly people who for the opposite is true, but I think that this is an issue because we hear so often about the need to do a meditation practice that allows us to focus inward and that we're getting yanked around by all the stressors of life, et cetera, et cetera. And we are, we're getting yanked around by all the stressors and demands of life. But as we do that, we tend to be very focused on what's happening with us. The data clearly point to the fact that being mindful and being aware can enhance one's level of presence and happiness. But we can go so far as to say that being mindful and aware of what's happening, not just with us but external to us in our immediate environment, that includes what other people are saying and doing, that also can really enhance our sense of well-being and happiness. At least that's what the data point to. Let's briefly recap where we've been so far. We've talked a little bit about the brain networks that are activated during meditation, which include prefrontal cortex, ACC, the insula. We also talked about the difference between interoception and exteroception and the importance of assessing where you are along that continuum. And I should mention, of course, that you can be right in the middle of that continuum. You might sit down to do meditation and find that you are smack dab in the middle of being able to attend to things outside of you but also attending to things inside of you. In which case, I suggest doing a meditation that is either exteroceptive-biased or interoceptive-biased. But as I mentioned earlier, if you find that you are more, quote, unquote, in your head or in your body, well, then focus on an exteroceptive-biased meditation to build up that set of circuits. Whereas if you are more exteroceptively focused at any given moment, well, then I encourage you to do an interoceptively focused meditation practice. And as I mentioned earlier, there is this issue of how long to do a practice. There are a lot of different data on these, but some of the practices we've covered on this podcast before when we had guests, for instance, highlighted the 13-minute meditation that Dr. Wendy Suzuki from New York University's laboratory has popularized, and they popularized it because they have a wonderful paper that we will provide a link to which shows that a daily 13-minute meditation, which is of the traditional third eye, interoceptively biased, focus on breathing, and focus on that location directly behind one's forehead or both, that meditation done daily for about eight weeks, maybe shorter, but in that study, eight weeks, greatly improved mood, improved ability to sleep, improved cognitive ability and focus, memory, a huge number of metrics were looked at very specifically. So that's a terrific one. And you may be asking yourself, do you need to do the full 13 minutes? Could you get away with five minutes or three minutes? Well, my laboratory has shown benefits in stress reduction, improvement in sleep, et cetera, with a five-minute-a-day meditation. However, in trying to establish how long you should meditate, I would ask yourself a couple of questions. First of all, what is a practice that you can do consistently? And by consistently, that doesn't necessarily mean every day. If you answer the question about consistency honestly, and you find that you can only do one meditation session per week, well, then I would encourage you to go a little bit longer, maybe 10 or 15 minutes, maybe even 30 minutes. Again, understanding that you're going to have to refocus repeatedly throughout that meditation regardless of whether or not you're focusing on internal perceptions or external perceptions. If, however, you can set aside 5 or 10 or 15 minutes per day and you can meditate every day, well, then I think you have a bit more flexibility in terms of how long you meditate. Maybe it's three minutes one day, one minute the next day, 10 minutes the next, and so on and so forth. Just like with exercise, the key component is consistency, and this is borne out in all the data that's covered in "Altered Traits." It's also borne out in all the recent studies that have come out since that book was published. Consistency is key, so ask yourself what you can do consistently, and also don't necessarily burden yourself with always having to do the same amount or duration of meditation. So earlier, we decided we were going to parse or fine slice the meditation practice, and indeed we've been doing that. We've talked about interoceptive versus exteroceptive bias, and we've been talking about where you place your perception or your focus. Another key component of meditation is the pattern of breathing that you embrace. In fact, the pattern of breathing that you embrace during your meditation practice can itself be its own form of meditation. What do I mean by that? Well, these days, we hear a lot about breathwork. Breathwork has really grown in popularity in the last 5, 10 years, and there are a number of reasons for that. First of all, I think we need to credit Wim Hof, or can we call him, I think appropriately, the Great Wim Hof? You know, certainly there were people before Wim who were doing deliberate breathwork and talking about deliberate breathwork, but it was really about 2015 or so that Wim Hof started to grow in recognition and popularity for a particular style of breathing, which, in the laboratory, we call cyclic hyperventilation. I know there are other names for it that come from ancient traditions. He named it, or people named it after him, Wim Hof. Wim Hof, for those of you that don't know, is a Dutchman who is known to hold many world records for deliberate cold exposure, including swimming under icebergs, longest period of time buried in ice up to his neck, et cetera, but who's also expert in the use of breathing in particular ways in order to manage and maneuver through those challenges. And he started speaking about different patterns of breathwork, in particular, the use of cyclic hyperventilation, deep, deliberate breathing, so big inhales [inhales], exhales [exhales], big inhales [inhales and exhales] exhales. In the laboratory, again, we call that cyclic hyperventilation. It's very clear from studies both done on Wim specifically but on the general population as well by my lab and other labs that that pattern of cyclic hyperventilation, of deliberately breathing deeply and repetitively, typically in through the nose, out through the mouth, generates a lot of adrenaline or causes adrenaline release from the brain and body. It, quote, unquote, heats up the body. Indeed, it raises body temperature, but the liberation of adrenaline does a number of things to shift the state of the brain and body. That, more or less, is what Wim Hof breathing is, although Wim Hof breathing, or some people will call it tummo breathing or cyclic hyperventilation, is not a pattern of breathing typical of most meditations that have been discussed, at least not in the research literature. Now, that's not to say that cyclic hyperventilation can't be incorporated into a meditation practice, but Wim Hof breathing aka cyclic hyperventilation/tummo is typically considered its own practice, okay? Its own breathwork practice divorced from meditation. It might have a meditative component, but it's not often discussed as meditation or as part of meditation. More typically, a meditation practice involves slowing one's breathing, and this could be in the form of cyclic breathing of inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, which is cyclic, or, in some cases, doubling up on inhales and then exhaling, so inhale, inhale, exhale, inhale, inhale, exhale, or controlling the duration of inhale, breath hold, exhale, breath hold, repeat, so-called box breathing where the inhale, the hold, the exhale, and the hold are of equivalent durations. Any number of different breathing patterns, slow cyclic breathing, box breathing, a cadence of three to six seconds in, holding for two seconds, and seven seconds out, regardless of what cadence of breathing one uses, there is a tendency during most meditative practices to slow one's breathing and/or control one's breathing in deliberate fashion. This is essential because when we default our breathing, that is, when we don't pay attention to how long we are inhaling relative to our exhales, when we don't deliberately exhale, that is, normally we just passively exhale but we actively inhale, I repeat that, normally, when we're not thinking about breathing, we deliberately inhale, there's a a motor command that's sent to inflate the lungs, and then we passively exhale. But in many breathwork practices or meditation practices, we actually actively exhale as well. Well, when we do that, a number of things happen. First of all, it forces us into interoception. Why? Because the diaphragm, the muscle that helps move the lungs essentially and create a specific cadence of breathing or depth of breathing as one would with box breathing or deliberately slow breathing, well, that muscle resides inside of us, and so when we focus on our breathing, more often than not, we aren't focused on the actual air leaving our nasal passages or mouth, maybe a little bit, but more typically, we are forced to focus or we just default to focusing on the movement of our diaphragm or of our belly or the rising and falling of our chest. All of that is to say that by deliberately focusing on our breathing, we shift to interoception. So breathing and specific patterns of breathing are sort of along for the ride in meditation, but the reverse can also be said, that when we focus on our breathing, we shift to interoception and away from external events. It doesn't mean we can't still pay attention to external events, we can still exterocept, but at least some portion of our perception, of our attention shifts to interoception. So we of course need to breathe to stay alive. We have to breathe at least every so often in order to stay alive, so, of course, breathing is part of any meditative practice, just like it's part of any living activity, even sleep. But if the first component of meditation is to direct our perception in a deliberate way, using that prefrontal cortex, to a specific location, either on the surface of or within our body or external to our body, or both, but typically one or the other, then we can say that the second element of a meditative practice is the pattern of breathing, and we can ask ourselves, can it and should it be deliberate or not? In other words, do we just default to however we happen to be breathing, or should it be deliberate? That is, should we be controlling the depth and the cadence? And I do believe that, based on what we know about the capacity for specific patterns of breathing to shift our brain state, that controlling one's pattern of breathing during meditation can be enormously useful, and that is true regardless of whether or not one is focusing on interoceptive perceptions within our body or exteroceptive perceptions. So that raises the question, how should we breathe during meditation? Well, there is, again, no simple one-size-fits-all rule there, but there are some general rules of respiration physiology that can help us access and develop a meditation practice that is going to best serve our goals. And since this is not an episode all about respiration, and we will do one, I simply want to give you the basics of what respiration can do to shift your brain and body state. Before I do that, however, I want to give a very specific instruction, which is when you sit down to meditate, or if you're going to do your meditation walking, that's fine too. I should just say when you are about to begin your meditative practice, you need to ask yourself a question. Do you want to be more relaxed than you are at present, or do you want to be more alert than you are at present when you exit the meditation practice? Do you want to calm down, or do you want to become more alert? Simple question. You can decide from session to session. You could even switch within a session. But just as you need to assess whether or not you are leaning more interoceptively or exteroceptively, you also need to ask yourself, do you need to calm down or want to calm down, or do you want to be more alert at the end of your meditation session? Or maybe you want to go into a state of deep relaxation and then exit with more alertness. The way to do that is very simple using breathwork and specific patterns of breathing. And here is the general rule that is supported by all the respiration physiology that I'm aware of. I'm oversimplifying here, but I'm oversimplifying intentionally so you can simply apply the tool. And then, as I mentioned before, we will do an episode all about respiration physiology in the future. Essentially, if your inhales are longer and/or more vigorous than your exhales, then you will tend to be more alert or you'll shift your brain and body towards a state of more alertness. This is simply based on the way that the neural circuits like the pre-Botzinger nucleus and the parafacial nucleus that govern respiration physiology and alertness, it's simply the way they work. They communicate with brain areas that release noradrenaline and norepinephrine, et cetera. In contrast, if you emphasize longer duration and/or more vigorous exhales relative to your inhales, you will tend to relax more, you will tend to calm your nervous system. Now, you might be saying, "Okay, I understand what it is to make an inhale longer than my exhale, but how do I make it more vigorous?" Well, it simply means drawing more air into your lungs more quickly than you allow yourself to exhale that air. So an example of inhale-biased breathwork would be [inhales and exhales] [inhales and exhales], so there's an active emphasis on the inhale, and it's a little bit longer than the exhale which is passive. Conversely, if you want to relax, then you want to extend your exhales relative to your inhales, and you can even make them active exhales. So it can be inhale [inhales and exhales], exhale [inhales and exhales]. That's going to shift your nervous system in a direction of more calm. And, of course, if you would like to stay at the level of alertness aka calmness because those are two sides of the same seesaw or the same continuum, if you'd like to be right where you're at at the end of your meditation as where you started, at least in terms of levels of alertness and calmness, well, then you would just keep your inhales and your exhales relatively balanced in terms of duration. Now, the introduction of things like breath holds with box breathing or Wim Hof breathing, typically, it's 25 or 30 deep inhale, exhales, deep inhale, exhales, and then exhale all your air, hold your breath for 15 to 60 seconds, and then repeat and so on, sometimes some inhales and holds. Well, that's a whole business into itself. But for sake of meditation, the key thing to understand is that if you are going to do a complicated breathing practice, it will, by design, by necessity, shift much of your attention to the breathing practice, especially if it's not cyclic, if it's not inhales follow exhales. Cyclic breathing is where inhales always follow exhales, follow inhales, follow exhales. It actually relies on a specific brain center called the pre-Botzinger complex discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA. He was a guest on this podcast previously. However, if you are doubling up on your inhale, so two inhales [inhaling], and then an exhale [exhales], a pattern of breathing my laboratory has studied extensively, well, then that relies on a different brain center, the parafacial nucleus. The point is that if you are engaging in noncyclic breathing or you are deliberately emphasizing inhales or exhales or the vigor of inhales and exhales, et cetera, well, then some portion of your attention will be devoted to making sure that you follow that breathing practice. We are very good at going into cyclic breathing practices by default, and our attention can drift to other things. Interoceptive or exteroceptive, it doesn't matter, we can just drift into, you know, how our body feels or something we see or hear in the room, et cetera. When we are focused on our breathing and the breathing pattern is noncyclic or complex in some way in that it involves deliberate voluntary commands, again, from those so-called top-down mechanisms of the prefrontal cortex, well, that, by design, requires some portion, often a significant portion of our attention to be devoted to the breathing practice itself. So what does this mean? This means that breathwork itself can be a form of meditation, and meditation can involve breathwork, but one should know that the more deliberate and unnatural that pattern of breathing is, the less you will be able to focus on other things. Now, this isn't necessarily a bad thing. You can actually leverage this. So for instance, if you are somebody who's very much caught in your own head, right, we talked about this earlier, or you're in a moment where you're really stuck in your head and you want to get out of your head, well, then that meditation practice that you do really should be focused on exteroceptive bias, you should really focus on something external to you, and I would encourage you to use a natural cyclic pattern of breathing where inhales follow exhales follow inhales follow exhales. If, however, you are finding that you're sort of caught in the landscape of things happening around you and you want to ground yourself, as it's sometimes called... That's a loose language, not a scientific language. I know there's this practice of grounding, and that's a whole thing. People are always writing to me, "Is grounding a real thing, walking barefoot on the Earth and magnetic fields, you know, and gravitational fields?" Well, gravity's real, but, you know, grounding, there isn't a lot of science for it, to be frank. It does feel nice to walk on the ground, however. But if you are somebody who's kind of feeling pulled out of yourself a lot or in a moment and you want to bring your awareness into your body and sort of calm down, well, then I would encourage you to, yes, use a deliberate, somewhat unnatural or non-default pattern of breathing, which, by definition, will force you to attend to what's going on interoceptively. Again, I'm not aware of any place that this has been discussed in detail such as this before. If there is a research literature on this, please let me know. My laboratory has been working on this extensively. I'm always looking for new colleagues and collaborators. We, meaning Dr. David Spiegel who's an expert in hypnosis, again, who's been a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast and my colleague at Stanford Psychiatry. In fact, he's our associate chair of psychiatry, world expert in hypnosis, he's been on this podcast before, we have an active research program focused on these issues. We are very much of the belief that a breathwork practice itself can be meditative, a meditation practice can include breathing, but the more that that meditative practice focuses on the breathing itself, the more interoceptive-biased it will be. Now, it's very important to understand that an interoceptive-biased breathwork practice will have a specific effect, which is to make you more interoceptively aware. And if you think back to earlier in the episode, for many people, that will be a wonderful thing and something that they are actively seeking or ought to seek because it can help people gain awareness, for instance, you know, if they're stressed and they're not realizing it till the end of the day, they're just exhausted, more interoceptive awareness throughout the day can be very beneficial. If, however, you are somebody who is overly focused on your bodily sensations, well, then more exteroception awareness is important. And this brings us to a yet larger theme but a theme that I think really emphasizes what particular types of meditative practices are going to be best for certain people, especially people who are using meditation to combat certain challenges, in particular, mood-based challenges or sleep-based challenges or focus-based challenges. I haven't listed off all the positive benefits of meditation yet in this episode, but they are many, many, many. In fact, there are now tens of thousands of scientific studies showing, for instance, there are known benefits of doing meditation for enhancing sleep, there are known benefits of a regular meditation practice for enhancing focus, there are known benefits of a regular meditation practice for reducing inflammatory cytokines, even improving outcomes in cancer, reducing pain, improving mood, reducing the symptoms of ADHD and clinically diagnosed HD and on and on and on. And, again, rather than focus on all those beautiful studies today which all basically point to the fact that some meditation practice done regularly, even if it's very brief, has tremendous, even outsized benefits on our health even relative to some drug treatments, that's been shown. Rather than focus on all that, I've been more focused on what sorts of brain and body changes occur when we do a meditation practice and, perhaps more importantly, what really constitutes a meditation practice. We have this thing about a continuum of perception. We also now are talking about breathing. Well, there's another component that I'd like to raise now, which we could say is the third major component if the first one that I raised was interoceptive versus exteroceptive bias or continuum, the second being breathing, is it going to be default or deliberate breathing? Is it going to be natural cadence or unnatural cadence? Again, no right or wrong, it just depends on what your goal is. There's a third component. This is a component, again, that hasn't really been formalized in the literature but that Dr. Spiegel and I are working hard to formalize through some research and through an upcoming review that we will provide links to once it's out, and that's a separate continuum which is the continuum between interoception and dissociation. So now all of you know what interoception is, but most people probably don't know or don't realize what dissociation is. Often we hear about dissociation, sometimes called disassociation. Some people pronounce it dissociation. Guess what? Despite being corrected many times for each of those pronunciations, I checked with my colleagues who are experts in dissociation or disassociation, and guess what? They're the same thing. Tomato, tomato, potato, potato. So I'm going to say dissociation. Some people will say disassociation, like I disassociate. Other people will say I dissociate, okay? Both of those refer to essentially the same thing. Dissociation is often talked about in the context of a negative event. And indeed, dissociation is unfortunately, or, I should say, is adaptively associated with traumatic events. In particular, violent or sexual trauma, people will report feeling out of body or out of the experience during the experience or during a recollection of the experience. Dissociation has also been described in terms of people who are in a traumatic accident or they see someone killed right in front of them. First responders will talk about dissociating when they arrive on a scene. I don't want to provide, you know, gruesome imagery here 'cause I know people can be pretty sensitive to this, but, you know, showing up on the scene of a car crash and just seeing carnage or incredible damage to bodies or, you know, this sort of thing. Dissociation lies at the opposite end of a continuum with interoception. Now, earlier, I said that interoception is on the opposite end of a continuum with exteroception, but it also is on the opposite end of a continuum with dissociation. We can provide some better definitions perhaps to make this crystal clear, and here, I'm actually reading from an upcoming review. I feel comfortable reading from it because I'm an author on the review. But nonetheless, interoception refers to a process by which your nervous system, meaning your brain and connections with your body, senses, interprets, integrates, and regulates signals originating from within the body, and thereby provides a moment-to-moment mapping of your internal landscape at both a conscious and unconscious level. Okay, that's a lot of words to describe basically the process of perceiving what's happening at the level of the surface of your skin or inward. Dissociation can be thought of as the opposite of interoception. It's a lack of bodily awareness or a removal of one's conscious experience from one's bodily experience and awareness. Again, this is most often talked about in the context of something traumatic, but really, if we think about health and mental health and physical health, the optimal place to reside on the continuum between interoception and dissociation is somewhere in the middle. We don't want to be dissociated from life's experiences, but we also don't want everything that happens in the world to profoundly impact our heart rate and our breathing. We'd be yanked around by every experience. There are instances in which being yanked around or pulled into an experience is something that we desire and want, like seeing a movie that we want to see or, for instance, clinical hypnosis or falling in love, wonderful experiences and sometimes also sad experiences, right? Being able to feel one's feelings depending on life's events is important. But being too dissociated or being too feeling, that is, feeling so much in response to everything that happens is also problematic. There are certain people, for instance, that have challenges with what's called narrative distancing. That is, they see someone in a movie getting hit and they almost flinch as if they are getting hit. They see someone who's scared or happy in a movie and they feel scared or happy in a way that seems like they're along for the ride a little bit too much. This is important because what it speaks to is the ability for that... Remember way back at the beginning of the episode, that ACC, that anterior cingulate cortex and the insula. We've got a prefrontal cortex that can say, hey, let's be rational. That movie, that person who's happy or sad, that person in your environment who's breaking down crying, yes, they're sad, it's important to be sympathetic, maybe even empathic towards them, but let's not get pulled into the experience so much that we lose ourselves. And then of course there are areas of your brain that are also leaning on, and here I'm using metaphor, but they're leaning on the insula and ACC and saying, hey, there's somebody that I care about that's upset, I'm also going to be upset, or somebody I care about is happy, I'm also going to be happy, or they're scared so I'm also going to be scared. So it's a push-pull between our recognition that we are each distinct entities and also, of course, the very healthy desire to be attached to others' experiences and the experiences around us. So why am I raising yet another continuum, right? We already have the one continuum of interoceptive-exteroceptive awareness. Well, if we want to think about how meditation can serve our mental health and our ability to focus, there's a very particular mental model that we can arrive at that incorporates this interoceptive-dissociative continuum. Again, if you are extremely interoceptive, you're feeling everything in your body, and those feelings in your body nearly completely account for all of your experience if you're at that far end of the continuum. On the dissociative end of things, you can see what's going on, you can react to what's going on, but your bodily response to that is essentially shut down. You could either be paralyzed shut down, so kind of no movement, or you could still be engaging in behaviors but you're dissociated. Again, sadly, this is often what victims of trauma report, that they are able to just go through the motions but just shut off their emotions or their emotions just shut off. They aren't feeling the elevated heart rate or breathing. Sometimes they can even be quite scared, but they're not even perspiring or showing any signs of autonomic arousal, that is, fright or stress or panic. So let's talk about this model of interoception and dissociation and then a meditative practice that can be used to try and anchor us at the right location or the healthy location along that continuum. Let's first imagine the ideal mental health state. And here, I want to acknowledge, nobody achieves or at least maintains this mental health state. I want you to imagine that where you are along this interoceptive-to-dissociative continuum is like a ball bearing, or you represent a sphere that can roll back and forth along the continuum. At one end, you have pure interoception, you're just feeling everything. At the other end, you're completely dissociated. Well, in this one version of mental health, we take that continuum and we fold up the sides so that it looks like a V, okay? On one end, you have interoception. On the other end, you have dissociation. I realize a number of people are listening to this and not watching this on YouTube so they can't see that my hands are now, the heel of my hands are together, the fingers of my hands are apart so it looks like a V, and you are like a ball bearing. Your state is like a ball bearing at the base of that. You are in a trench of perfectly balanced interoception and dissociation, so you can feel things, you can register what's going on in the outside world, but your feelings are not overwhelmed or overtaken by what's happening in the outside world. You are in a perfect place of being able to make rational decisions and yet still feel your feelings. Wouldn't that be lovely? Wouldn't that be lovely if we could be like that whenever we wanted to? And frankly, nobody is like that all the time. More typically, the model of mental health and mood and well-being and perception of self versus others and internal versus external states is one of more of a U, a U shape, where at one end, we have interoception, and at the other end, we have dissociation, and it's kind of U shaped, and your state is more or less like a ball bearing at the base of that U that, you know, it gets pushed from side to side. Maybe, you know, your heart races a little bit because of something bad or good, and that ball bearing shifts towards interoception a little bit more and you notice that your heart is racing. Or perhaps, at any given moment, you know, your mind drifts a little bit while watching a movie or while talking to your partner or while your child is complaining about something and you're thinking about something else, and that ball bearing shifts towards the dissociative state a little bit. That is a mild form of dissociation. And I think most people would agree that being mentally healthy would involve this kind of U-shaped model as well, where it kind of can shift back and forth, but it's not extreme. You're not going from interoceptive-biased all the way to dissociated in any kind of extreme way. The ball bearing stays down near the base of that U. Then, of course, there are states that we all, frankly, go into from time to time where the continuum of interoception and dissociation is essentially flat, where you are a ball bearing at one location or another, depending on whether or not you're watching a movie that you're very engrossed in or you're in a conversation with or in an activity with your partner or a friend, et cetera, that has you very engrossed, maybe matching their state, right? There are a number of states you can imagine where matching one's state is actually healthy and good, and then there are a number of conditions in life and situations in life where being matched to someone else's condition like you're getting yelled at and they're angry so then you're getting angry, and then pretty soon, you know, you're not in the best place along that continuum. And I think that for many people, they find themselves somewhere along that continuum. And a number of practices, including meditation, including exercise, including getting a good night's sleep, including therapy, including journaling, including just doing activities like social engagement that you enjoy, are designed to sort of bring up the edges of that flat continuum into more of a U or concave shape so that that ball bearing, meaning your state of awareness and your state of feeling your own feelings versus paying attention to what's going on around you, is somewhere, again, biased toward the middle. By curling up the edges of that continuum on either end, it biases that state toward the middle. And then, of course, there's the extreme that I think almost everybody would agree is more or less pathologic, which is one in which that continuum is no longer shaped like a deep trench like a V, it's not shaped like a U, it's not flat with the edges curled up a little bit or even flat. It's actually now convex. It looks like a mountain shape, a peak, and that little ball bearing at the top can either drop all the way to one side of pure interoception, just feeling beyond any ability to pay attention to anything else, just feeling one's feelings, being angry, being sad, or even happy, right? Being so extremely happy or manic that you can't pay attention to the fact that it's totally out of context, right, inappropriate for what's going on around you, or dropping to the other side of the continuum where you're so dissociated that you're not engaged with what's going around you. You're truly, quote, unquote, checked out. That shape is one that I think almost all clinicians, if not all clinicians, and most people would say is pathologic because you are either completely checked out or you are completely absorbed in what's going on within you or around you. That mental model that I just created is a simple mental model. It is by no means exhaustive, but it does incorporate a lot of what we think about when we think about mental health and we talk about the ability to be mentally stable, to feel one's feelings, but to still be actively engaged in what's happening around us. And again, it's a continuum that spans from interoceptive awareness to dissociation where the extremes are pathologic and somewhere in the middle is healthier, and then there are practices that bias us toward being in the middle by default. What are those practices? Well, we know for sure that being sleep deprived, for instance, tends to take us away from that trench shape or U-shape continuum or even flat continuum and starts to make that continuum more convex. It tends to make us either feel like we're completely checked out and exhausted or that we are completely labile, we are yanked around by whatever experience is happening, we are just not able to manage. So sleep is, as I always say, the fundamental or foundational layer of mental health, physical health, and performance because it tends to put us in a healthier place. That is, when we're getting enough quality sleep consistently, it tends to put us in the middle of that continuum. Sleep deprivation does exactly the opposite. It pulls us apart. And when I say pulls us apart, that's not a real term. What it does is it tends to make that continuum less concave, right, less bowl shaped, and more convex, more hill shaped, if not a peak mountain shape where it drops us to one side or the other. In addition, a meditative practice done regularly, because it can allow us to become more interoceptively aware or it can allow us to become more exteroceptively aware, which is really just another form of dissociation, again, dissociation isn't always bad provided it's not at the extreme, a meditative practice can actually teach us to deliberately move along this continuum. So this is something, again, that hasn't been discussed a whole lot in the literature. It's been discussed, I should say, in pieces in different literatures. If you look in the clinical psychiatry literature, there's a wonderful collection of studies and reviews that will say that interoceptive awareness is terrific except for the person that is so aware of their internal functioning that they are not able to engage in the world. Similarly, you'll find a beautiful literature, research and clinical literature, that will say that dissociation is terrible in the case of trauma. In fact, it can put people in positions of repeating a behavior over and over that's damaging to them, but because they can disengage or they're dissociated from it that they continue the behavior, or dissociation can be very adaptive and beneficial if it allows people, for instance, to create some narrative distancing so they're not getting pulled into every argument, or if someone screams at them, they don't necessarily think that it's their fault. They are able to say, "Hey, wait," you know, use their prefrontal cortex and say, "Hey, wait, like, just because you're upset does not mean that I did something wrong. Let's look at the evidence rationally." Okay? So in thinking about the positive effects of meditation on mood, there are two aspects that are important. The first one we talked about earlier, which is being present to one's experience correlates with increased happiness. Having your mind wander, having your default mode network be one of mind wandering actually is correlated with being more unhappy. That was the earlier study that we talked about, that study published in "Science." Now, of course, meditation can make us more present, but if we do not pay attention to whether or not we are becoming more present to interoception or exteroception, that is, to interoception or dissociation, and we don't pay attention to whether or not our bias is one of dissociation versus interoception, we don't know where we are on the continuum, well, then the meditation actually can make things worse, not better. In other words, if you're somebody who has a tremendous amount of interoceptive awareness, well, then meditating on your internal state may not be good, and actually, there's some evidence that it may actually be bad. I'll give you one little tiny example. I've talked about this previously on the podcast, but in that very study from Wendy Suzuki's lab showing that 13-minute-a-day meditation is beneficial for focus, mood, et cetera, it's also very clear that for a number of people that do that typical third eye meditation for 13 minutes a day, if they do that too close to sleep or when they want to go to sleep, they have a hard time falling asleep, which makes perfect sense because they are becoming more interoceptively aware, they are ramping up their level of focus. A meditation practice typically is a focus and refocus practice, and falling asleep involves turning off your thoughts and your focus and focusing purely on sensation, and then your thoughts kind of fragment and you drift off to sleep. This is why I'm a big fan of using non-sleep deep rest or yoga nidra. We will provide links to non-sleep deep rest and yoga nidra protocols. I've talked about them on the podcast before, but those protocols are not meditation per se. They tend to have people defocus, they are anti-focus practices, whereas meditation tends to be a focusing practice. Along those lines, a meditation practice that is one that is exteroceptively biased, where you focus on things that are outside your body, can be wonderful for somebody who tends to focus too much on their inner landscape and their inner narrative, et cetera, it can help get them out of their head and body, which can be very beneficial. But for people that are not in touch with their emotions, aren't in touch with how they feel, it actually can drive them down the exact path that's wrong for them. So today's discussion is about meditation, and we want to make sure that we are parsing meditation in a rational way that matches the neural circuitry involved and, more importantly, for sake of practical purposes, that you are asking yourselves the right question. Are you interoceptively or exteroceptively biased? Do you tend to dissociate, or do you tend to sort of feel everything in a big way, right? I've heard this term of, you know, hypersensitive people or things that sort, and, you know, some of those are clinical terms, some of them are not. But you need to assess this, and you also need to assess where you happen to be at on a given day, which will be dictated, of course, by how well you slept, life experience, et cetera. So this interoceptive-to-dissociative continuum is one that you need to address prior to any meditative practice. And, again, the solution or the answer of what to do in response to your answer of whether or not you are more inward focused or outward focused, again, is very simple. Just do the opposite of where your bias lies. That is, if you're tilted towards interoception, do an exteroceptive focused practice. If you are more dissociative and you're... That sounds sort of pejorative, it sounds bad, right? But, again, if you are somebody who is more focused on events outside your body and you want to gain more interoceptive awareness and feeling state, if you will, well, then you want to do a practice that's third eye center practice or breathing focused. One of the reasons that many people meditate is that they've heard before or they've experienced that meditation can replace sleep or can reduce one's overall sleep need. So that's an interesting set of questions, and it's one that I dove into the literature to pursue an answer to, and I came up with an answer that was frankly a little bit complicated on the face of it but boils down to some very simple protocols that I think any and all of us can leverage in order to sleep better and maybe even reduce the total amount of sleep that we need, something that I think most people would want. You know, I realize that we all probably should enjoy sleeping, I certainly do, but that it's hard to get enough sleep, and wouldn't it be wonderful, for instance, to be able to get by on a little less sleep and still feel alert and rested? First of all, I want to point to the recent study, and, again, this is one that I've raised a few times and we'll post a link to it, entitled Brief, daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotion regulation in non-experienced meditators. This is the work, again, from Wendy Suzuki who was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast, who is now the Dean of Arts and Sciences at New York University and has run a laboratory focused on memory for a long time, is a terrific neuroscientist and researcher and teacher, et cetera, and was a terrific guest on the podcast. I keep returning to this paper because they used so many measures, they were very thorough, and the results were really interesting. Again, this is the 13-minute-a-day guided meditation session. I should just mention that the control group in this study listened to a podcast for 13 minutes that did not improve attention, memory, mood, emotion regulation, et cetera, as much as meditation did, which is not to say that podcasts aren't useful. I won't mention which podcast they used. Fortunately, it was not the Huberman Lab podcast, which I like to think at least increases understanding of certain key concepts of science and science-based tools. You're welcome to look at the paper and see which podcast they used. It's a quite well-known podcast, which is an interesting podcast, but it didn't change the brain in any fundamental way in this 13-minute session, whereas 13 minutes of daily meditation did. And, again, something I mentioned earlier but very important to reemphasize now is that they mentioned that if people in the experiment meditated too close to bedtime, they had trouble sleeping, again, which makes sense because meditation, at least in its most common form, in the form used in this paper, is a focusing and refocusing exercise. Falling asleep involves focusing less. There are other studies, however, that have shown, or that asserted, rather, that doing two 20-minute sessions per day of meditation can reduce the need for sleep. Those results are debated. First of all, understanding what sleep need is is very individual, and determining what people can manage on, meaning some people can manage to get by with six hours of sleep but would do better with eight, some people would actually manage probably better in terms of focusing and alertness if they slept a little bit less because they might be waking up midway through a sleep cycle. If you want to learn more about this, you can check out any one of three different episodes that we've done. One is Master Your Sleep. You can find that at hubermanlab.com. Everything is timestamped in that episode. The other is Perfect Your Sleep. And then, of course, we've done episodes on sleep with expert guests like Dr. Matthew Walker from UC Berkeley. All of those can be found at hubermanlab.com in all formats, they're all timestamped. With that said, this assertion that has been made many times over and certainly in the popular press that regular meditation can reduce one's overall sleep need is controversial for the following reason. Some groups find that indeed that is the case, and the interpretation is that the stress reduction that's brought about by regular meditative practice, and in this case, very regular, it tends to be one or, more typically, two 20-minute-per-day meditation sessions. That's quite a lot, I think, for most people. I mean, if you think about 40 minutes, isn't that much time overall, but very few people will stick to that twice a day, 20-minute meditation practice very consistently. Well, the idea is that the stress reduction, which is clear and not debated, brought about by that type of meditation practice is good at offsetting some of the cortisol increases associated with reduced sleep and leading people to be able to function cognitively and physically better on reduced sleep than they would had they not been doing the meditation practice. So the simple way of putting this is that if people meditate regularly, that's reducing stress. The reduction in stress is reducing cortisol. Again, cortisol is healthy, but it should be restricted to early part of the day. You don't want too many peaks in cortisol, especially not late in the day. By meditating, you get the healthy pattern of cortisol release, you sort of inoculate yourself somewhat against the unhealthy pattern of cortisol release, and as a consequence, either the sleep that people get is deeper and/or the total amount of sleep that they need is reduced. Now, a lot of people took that result and interpreted it as saying, well, if you can't sleep, then you can just meditate. So one night, you don't sleep or you have trouble sleeping, you just meditate the next day and you'll be fine. Well, certainly that is not supported by the literature. However, there is a practice, and, again, it's one that I've talked about on this podcast many times before, but if you haven't heard me talk about it, there's a practice called yoga nidra, which literally means yoga sleep. It is a practice of doing not so much a focused meditation, but more of a body scan focusing on the sensation of the body and actually trying to turn off that prefrontal cortex or reduce its activity. Yoga nidra scripts can be found on YouTube and elsewhere. They are paralleled by a similar practice that I've talked a lot about called NSDR, or non-sleep deep rest. I put one out into the world, a short one that's 10 minutes long. You can just simply go to YouTube and put in NSDR and my last name, Huberman, and there's one there. Again, all of this is completely zero-cost. Yoga nidra and NSDR have been shown in a fair number of studies, not as many as been done on traditional meditation, or I should say third eye centered meditation or mindfulness meditation, but have been shown to replenish levels of certain neuromodulators like dopamine and reduce cortisol, reduce a stress hormone at least as much and, by my read of the literature, significantly more than with traditional meditation. And there's a nice paper that we will provide a link to which is entitled Yoga nidra practice shows improvement in sleep in patients with chronic insomnia: A randomized control trial. Basically, this study looks at, as the title suggests, people with chronic insomnia, although the results certainly carry over or would carry over for people who don't have insomnia. The key result, I believe, in this paper, although there are many, is that, quote, "Salivary cortisol reduced statistically significantly after yoga nidra." What do I mean by that? There was a statistically significant reduction in cortisol levels, the stress hormone, immediately after the yoga nidra practice that we believe would be paralleled by a very similar if not equivalent practice of NSDR. NSDR is a lot like yoga nidra but removes a lot of the kind of, let's just call it the sort of mystical language and the intentions. It focuses more on the physiology and the body scans. You know, I want to acknowledge that yoga nidra has been around for thousands of years and was certainly there before NSDR. I also want to acknowledge that, and this was brought up also in "Altered Traits," that sometimes language can be a barrier toward people embracing practices. In fact, this was recognized by Jon Kabat-Zinn when he created what he called mindfulness-based stress reduction practices, or MBSR, which was simply mindfulness meditation to reduce stress, but he called it MBSR, mindfulness-based stress reduction, as a way to bring it into the clinics that would otherwise perhaps be averse to something called mindfulness meditation. Again, this gets more to the sociology and the cultural aspects than it does to any specific utility of one practice versus another. Here's the takeaway point. If you want to get better at falling and staying asleep or falling back asleep if you wake up in the middle of the night or if you are generally challenged with sleep issues, an excellent behavioral practice for which there are terrific data, meaning data that show that a stress hormone, cortisol, can be significantly reduced as well as certain neurotransmitters can be replenished as well as, and this is key and covered in this paper that I've mentioned a few moments ago on yoga nidra, that the total amount of sleep that you need can be reduced, at least somewhat, well, then yoga nidra or an NSDR practice done, frankly, any time of day is going to be beneficial. Whereas if your goal, I believe, is to increase your ability to focus, to improve your mood, and, perhaps most importantly, to be able to maneuver yourself in a deliberate way along that interoceptive-exteroceptive or interoceptive-dissociative continuum that we've talked about so much, and to really shift your default mode network from one of being a mind wanderer to somebody who can focus and who frankly is happier, well, then a more traditional third eye center type meditation or a more traditional exteroceptive-focused meditation would be beneficial. Again, which one of those you choose, either focusing inward or focusing on a point outside of you, again, should be dictated by whether or not you tend to be interoceptively biased or exteroceptively biased. But if you want to get better at sleeping, you want to get better at falling asleep, and you want to replace sleep that you've lost, I put that in quotes so that my colleagues like Matthew Walker don't come after me with... What would you come after me with, Matt? Probably with an alarm clock and, I don't know, blankets and a pillow or something of that sort. In all seriousness, it's very clear that replacing sleep that we've lost is an area of research that's still active and ongoing, but NSDR and yoga nidra are very promising, if not downright useful, for replacing sleep that you've lost. Certainly the small amount of data that exists now point to the fact that they are, not the least of which is a beautiful study published out of Scandinavia showing that a 30-minute yoga nidra aka NSDR practice can replenish levels of dopamine, which puts people in a position to be more action-oriented and focused, et cetera, when they come out of the yoga nidra, so certainly a very useful practice. It's a form of meditation, we could call it meditation-ish, but yoga nidra and NSDR are not typically what people think about when we talk about meditation. Of course, this is an episode about meditation. The reason I bring up yoga nidra and NSDR is that many people meditate to enhance their sleep ability and to reduce their total amount of sleep need. It appears that meditation is probably not ideal for that in comparison to yoga nidra and NSDR, but meditation is excellent, if not superb, for adjusting the default mode network toward more happiness by being more mindful and present and for placing oneself in that healthy model of interoceptive-dissociative continuum. So we've covered a lot of information, and I like to think that I've given you some key decisions to make in developing a meditative practice. The most important one, of course, being what will you do regularly? And maybe you're somebody who just answers that question by saying, "Look, I'm not going to meditate regularly. I just want to do the thing that's going to allow me to feel rested when I'm tired and is going to allow me to adjust my state of mind when I'm not where I want to be for whatever reason, too anxious or too exhausted, et cetera." And for those people, I would say a practice like NSDR or yoga nidra will be immensely beneficial, as will a more traditional form of meditation. I also want to just remind everybody that an app that guides meditation, also with some information and some intention setting, such as the Waking Up app from Sam Harris can be immensely beneficial. I've certainly found it to be beneficial. I know millions of other people have as well, so I encourage you to check that out. We've talked about determining where you are on these continuums of interoception and exteroception in order to dictate what particular type of meditation practice you should do in a given moment, whether or not you should focus your vision inward with eyes closed or focus your vision and your attention outward being a key component, whether or not you should do cyclic breathing, which will allow your focus to be off your breathing somewhat easier than if you do non-cyclic breathing, if you're doubling up on inhales or exhales, whether or not your breathing is going to be natural or not. And, of course, you need to determine whether or not your meditation practice is designed to enhance your level of focus or to relax you. I would say that if it's designed to enhance your level of focus, that doesn't necessarily mean that it won't be relaxing. You could do slow cadence breathing and third eye meditation, it could be very relaxing, and yet it's a focus and refocus practice, whereas something like yoga nidra and NSDR is going to be more along the lines of replenishing yourself, replacing sleep that you've lost, or maybe even reducing your sleep need. On previous podcasts, I've talked about hypnosis, and particularly the episode with Dr. David Spiegel, our associate chair of psychiatry. I don't want to get into hypnosis now, but just understand that hypnosis is distinct from breathwork, from yoga nidra, from NSDR, and from meditation even though it includes some of those components like focusing your attention, it involves actually directing your visual attention outward then inward to go into the hypnosis, it involves some breathing of a particular kind, it involves a specific imagery, et cetera. But hypnosis is distinct because hypnosis is really designed to fix or address a specific problem, whereas meditation, NSDR, yoga nidra, et cetera, typically are not. They can help fix problems such as anxiety, sleep issues, et cetera, but they generally are not directed toward a particular line of thinking. They can be, but typically they are not. Whereas hypnosis almost always, especially in the clinical context, not stage hypnosis, but the clinical context for which there's a lot of research to show it can, for instance, help with quitting smoking, literally a quadrupling of the effectiveness for smoking cessation with something like the Reveri app than if people just try and go cold turkey or for reducing insomnia or for reducing pain or for any number of things, including trauma, et cetera, hypnosis is really great at dealing with specific issues and problems and tackling those. Meditation tends to be focused on other things, no pun intended. I'm guessing some of you are probably wondering where to start or, if you're already an avid meditator, where to go with all this information. For that reason, I just wanted to offer you a particular form of meditation that incorporates all of the features that I've talked about up until now in a single meditation practice, and it's a meditation practice that, for lack of a better name, I called STB, or Space-Time Bridging. And the time component has to do with a very simple fact, which is when we focus our attention, visual attention or otherwise, on things close to or within our body, we tend to be fine slicing time. You could sort of think of your breath as more or less the second hands on your clock of existence, whereas when we tend to focus on things far away from us, we tend to parse or carve up time within bigger bins. If you've ever seen a airplane flying at a distance, it looks like it's moving very, very slowly. If you were right up next to that airplane, it's probably going 500 or 600 miles an hour, it would go by very quickly. This is not a coincidence. Believe it or not, how you slice the time domain of your life and your experience has everything to do with your vision, and the closer things are, the more finely you slice up time. The more closely your attention is placed on yourself, the more closely you slice up time. If you focus your visual attention very far or you think about the other side of the world, for instance, and you envision that, well, then you're actually slicing time more broadly. Hopefully that makes sense. Fine slicing would be like slow motion, higher frame rate. Looking in the distance, you're actually taking bigger time bins. So even though things look like they're moving more slowly, it's because your fidelity, your precision of measuring time is actually not as good. It's as if you only have the hours hand on the clock so it seems like it moves very slowly. Hopefully that makes sense to you. So there's a meditation practice that I call Space-Time Bridging that incorporates everything that I've talked about today. It balances interoception and exteroception, it balances interoception and dissociation, and it crosses the various time domains that the brain can encompass using vision. And it's a very simple meditation, it's one that I've been doing for years, and it's one that we're starting to do some research on, but I'm just going to share with you because I think it's actually quite fun and can be quite informative. In fact, people have told me that it can even lead to some interesting insights both during the meditation and outside the meditation. It's very simple, what you do, ideally you would do this outside or at a window, but what you do is you essentially close your eyes. I'm not going to do this now, I'm not going to close my eyes and do the meditation, but I'll describe it. You close your eyes and you focus your attention either on your third eye center or your breathing, and you try and put 100% of your perceptual awareness onto your breathing or your third eye center for the duration of three breaths, okay? So you're 100% or trying to be 100% in interoception. Then you open your eyes, you focus on the surface of your body someplace. I find that holding out my hand at sort of arm's distance and focusing on the palm of my hand and focusing there visually, so I'm splitting my attention now between my hand, and I'm also going to pay attention to my breath for the duration of three full inhales and exhales while also focusing on my hand, so you're splitting interoception and exteroception as best you can, about 50/50. Then you subsequently look at some location in your immediate environment, maybe 10, 15 feet away, and you focus your attention on that location while also splitting your attention so that you're still paying attention to your breathing, you do that for the duration of three breaths, but now you are in exteroception and interoception. Then you focus your attention at some distance further away, maybe the furthest distance you can see. Now, this is why it's useful to do out of a window or on a balcony or outdoors. You focus on the furthest point, maybe a horizon, some furthest point for the duration of three breaths while also paying attention to your breathing, and sort of imagine a bridge between the two if you find it to be challenging to focus on both. And then, and this is where it can be a little tricky, but then what you actually focus on is the fact, and this is not an imaginary thing, this is a fact that you are a tiny spec on this big ball that's floating out in space, right? The Earth that's floating out in space. And you try and focus on your three breaths while also acknowledging that you are a small body, literally, on this very seemingly large body, the Earth, but that's floating in a much larger, larger, expansive place, the universe, and you do that for three breaths. And then you close your eyes and you go right back into interoception, and you do that for three breaths. You focus on your interoception for three breaths. And you might want to march through these different locations a few times or back and forth if you like, but typically, I will just do it for one segment at pure interoception, palm of hand, some distance in front of me, horizon, whole globe, universe thing, back into body, et cetera. Why is this useful? Why would this be useful? Is it at all interesting, or is this just some crazy idea? Well, the reason it's useful, I believe, is that it has you deliberately step your awareness, your perception through every position along that interoceptive-exteroceptive continuum. Now, I did say to remain connected to, as they'll say in the yoga classes, aware of, I guess would be the more scientific way to state it, aware of one's breath, but if you wanted, you could actually try and put your awareness completely outside yourself, but most people will find that challenging to do if they're already paying attention to their breath. It's just hard to do, so I find it easier to just split my awareness from interoception to exteroception. But by stepping through these different locations and then deliberately placing your perception, your awareness back into pure interoception, what you do is you essentially are practicing or exercising this incredible ability that the human mind has to deliberately place your perception at specific locations along the interoceptive-exteroceptive continuum. And I think this is very useful because many of us, including myself, tend to get locked at one location along that continuum. For instance, if you're scrolling your phone for a long period of time, you may forget about your bodily sensations, but you generally forget about other things going on in the world. Or if you're very focused on things out in the world, you oftentimes can forget about your internal sensations and what's going on internally. And being functional in work, in life, in relationship, and in all aspects, including your ability to fall asleep, involves stepping yourself along these different locations, which, again, are not just physical locations of third eye center or your breathing or your hand or horizon. Those are just stations within space. But remember, each one of those, just by way of how your visual system and the time domain are interlocked with one another, sets your mind in a particular time domain. And so much of what involves being a functional human being involves dynamically adjusting our attention from what we are doing on our computer to a question somebody asks and then back again, or from text messaging to listening to a lecture or a podcast or from listening to a lecture or podcast and then going back into a mode of commuting, but making that commute either relaxing or maybe do work on your commute or connect with family or friends, et cetera. So much of the fatigue of life and the, I should say, the maladaptive behaviors and emotions that show up in life are really not about any set of behaviors or emotions being wrong or right, but rather inappropriately matched to the space-time domain that we're in, which, again, is just fancy nerd speak for saying being present and being mindful is a wonderful byproduct of a meditation practice, but it is but one of those stations along that space-time continuum. The key element here is to step yourself through a practice deliberately so that you are flexibly and dynamically able to engage in conversation, then disengage and focus, or focus and then disengage from the work you're focusing on and actually have a conversation or be in the world and move out of that interoceptive awareness to one in which you are dynamically engaged with the things around you. I realize this might sound a little bit vague. For that reason, I encourage you not to think about it too much, but rather to try the practice, see if it works for you. If it doesn't, that's fine. I think it is a good one for people that find that a third eye center or breathing-focused interoceptive meditation might be enjoyable to them or very beneficial to them, but they might want to try something new, and other people who might find that that tends to put them too much in their own head. I think it also ought to be very useful for people that tend to be overly exteroceptive, more on the dissociative end of the continuum, and need to bring in a bit more of interoceptive awareness, but either can't do that or are uncomfortable doing that because they're simply not interested in or comfortable with feeling so much of their internal state because that can either be overwhelming or that's just simply not the way they want to feel. Now, as we round up, I do want to acknowledge that there are an enormous number of rooms within the house, or rather, I should say, within the castle that is meditation, including, for instance, intention setting and mantras and an enormous number of different features of meditation practices that we simply did not have time to go into and/or for which the research on is not completely ironed out yet. And for that reason, in future episodes in not long from now, I'm going to be sitting down with experts in meditation that include neuroscientists and clinicians, but other experts in meditation that certainly are versed in those topics, and where they can't point to specific research studies can certainly point us toward the utility of things like mantras and intentions as they relate to getting the most out of a meditative practice, so I eagerly await those conversations, and I hope you will join me for those as well. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or you'd like to suggest future guests for the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following me on Instagram, Twitter, or Facebook, please do so. It's @hubermanlab on Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter, and all three of those places, I cover science and science-based tools, some of which overlaps with the content on the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. Thanks again for joining me for today's discussion about the science and practice of meditation. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 250 ---
Video ID: Z7MU6zrAXsM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7MU6zrAXsM
Title: Dr. Eddie Chang: The Science of Learning & Speaking Languages | Huberman Lab Podcast #95
Published: 2022-10-24 12:00:21 UTC
Description:
My guest is Eddie Chang, MD, a neurosurgeon and professor of neurological surgery at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and the co-director of the Center for Neural Engineering & Prostheses. We discuss the brain mechanisms underlying speech, language learning and comprehension, communicating human emotion with words and hand gestures, bilingualism and language disorders, such as stuttering. Dr. Chang also explains his work developing and applying state-of-the-art technology to decode speech and using that information and artificial intelligence (AI) to successfully restore communication to patients who have suffered paralyzing injuries or “locked in syndrome.” We also discuss his work treating patients with epilepsy. Finally, we consider the future: how modern neuroscience is overturning textbook medical books, the impact of digital technology such as smartphones on language and the future of natural and computer-assisted human communication. 

#HubermanLab #Science #Neuroscience 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Levels: https://www.levelshealth.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Eddie Chang
Support research in the Chang Laboratory: https://changlab.ucsf.edu/support-our-work
Dr. Chang’s lab: https://changlab.ucsf.edu 
Academic profile & publications: https://profiles.ucsf.edu/edward.chang 
UCSF clinical profile: https://www.ucsfhealth.org/providers/dr-edward-chang 

Articles
Neuroprosthesis for Decoding Speech in a Paralyzed Person with Anarthria: https://bit.ly/3sjv5Cx

Articles in the News
Tapping Into the Brain to Help a Paralyzed Man Speak: https://nyti.ms/3f0AM5c
How Brain-Computer Interfaces Could Restore Speech and Help Fight Depression: https://on.wsj.com/3f1iBMH
Decoded Brain Signals Could Give Voiceless People A Way To Talk: https://n.pr/3gujhdP

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Eddie Chang, Speech & Language 
00:03:00 Levels, Eight Sleep, InsideTracker, Momentous Supplements
00:07:19 Neuroplasticity, Learning of Speech & Environmental Sounds
00:13:10 White Noise Machines, Infant Sleep & Sensitization
00:17:26 Mapping Speech & Language in the Brain
00:24:26 Emotion; Anxiety & Epilepsy 
00:30:19 Epilepsy, Medications & Neurosurgery 
00:33:01 Ketogenic Diet & Epilepsy
00:34:56 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:36:10 Absence Seizures, Nocturnal Seizures & Other Seizure Types
00:41:08 Brain Areas for Speech & Language, Broca’s & Wernicke’s Areas, New Findings
00:53:23 Lateralization of Speech/Language & Handedness, Strokes
00:59:05 Bilingualism, Shared Language Circuits
01:01:18 Speech vs. Language, Signal Transduction from Ear to Brain
01:12:38 Shaping Breath: Larynx, Vocal Folds & Pharynx; Vocalizations
01:17:37 Mapping Language in the Brain
01:20:26 Plosives & Consonant Clusters; Learning Multiple Languages 
01:25:07 Motor Patterns of Speech & Language
01:28:33 Reading & Writing; Dyslexia & Treatments
01:34:47 Evolution of Language 
01:37:54 Stroke & Foreign Accent Syndrome
01:40:31 Auditory Memory, Long-Term Motor Memory 
01:45:26 Paralysis, ALS, “Locked-In Syndrome” & Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
02:02:14 Neuralink, BCI, Superhuman Skills & Augmentation
02:10:21 Non-Verbal Communication, Facial Expressions, BCI & Avatars
02:17:35 Stutter, Anxiety & Treatment 
02:22:55 Tools: Practices for Maintaining Calm Under Extreme Demands
02:31:10 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Huberman Lab Premium, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Huberman Lab is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Eddie Chang. Dr. Eddie Chang is the chair of the neurosurgery department at the University of California at San Francisco. Dr. Chang's clinical group focuses on the treatment of movement disorders including epilepsy. He is also a world expert in the treatment of speech disorders and relieving paralysis that prevents speech and other forms of movement and communication. Indeed, his laboratory is credited with discovering ways to allow people who have fully locked-in syndrome, that is, who cannot speak or move, to communicate through computers and AI devices in order to be able to speak to others in their world and understand what others are saying to them. It is a truly remarkable achievement that we discuss today, in addition to his discoveries about critical periods, which are periods of time during one's life when one can learn things, in particular, languages, with great ease as opposed to later in life, and we talk about the basis of things like bilingualism and trilingualism. We talk about how the brain controls movement of the very muscles that allow for speech and language and how those can be modified over time. We also talk about stutter, and we talk about a number of aspects of speech and language that give insight into not just how we create this incredible thing called speech or how we understand speech and language, but how the brain works more generally. Dr. Chang is also one of the world leaders in bioengineering, that is, the creation of devices that allow the brain to function at supraphysiological levels and that can allow people with various syndromes and disorders to overcome their deficits. So if you are somebody who is interested in how the brain works normally, how it breaks down and how it can be repaired, and if you are interested in speech and language, reading and comprehension of information of any kind, today's episode ought to include some information of deep interest to you. Dr. Chang is indeed the top of his field in terms of understanding these issues of how the brain encodes speech and language and creates speech and language and, as I mentioned, movement disorders and epilepsy. We even talk about things such as the ketogenic diet, the future of companies like Neuralink, which are interested in bioengineering and augmenting the human brain, and much more. One thing that I would like to note is that in addition to being a world-class neuroscience researcher and world-class clinician, neurosurgeon, and chair of neurosurgery, Dr. Eddie Chang has also been a close, personal friend of mine since we were nine years old. We attended elementary school together, and we actually had a science club when we were nine years old focused on a very particular topic. You'll have to listen in to today's episode to discover what that topic was and what membership to that club required. That aside, Dr. Chang is an absolute phenom with respect to his scientific prowess, that is, both his research and his clinical abilities, and he's one of these rare individuals that, whenever he opens his mouth, we learn. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Levels. Levels is a program that helps you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. I started using Levels about one year ago. The Levels monitor allowed me to see how different foods change my blood sugar level or my blood glucose level. This turns out to be immensely important for being able to predict how, for instance, certain foods will affect your energy level, your ability to exercise, your ability to recover from exercise, and how it will affect other hormones like testosterone, estrogen, thyroid hormone, and so forth. The other thing about using a Levels monitor is that it gave me insight into how food and exercise and other activities and even how well I was sleeping or how poorly I might happen to be sleeping impact my blood glucose levels. It even taught me that the sauna, that generating a lot of heat in my body, was changing my blood glucose levels, which turned out to inform how I should shift my eating patterns, foods I should eat, timing of eat, and so on and so forth. It really gave me great insight into how all the important aspects of my health were interlocking and affecting one another, not just how food was impacting my blood glucose. So if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, you can go to levels.link/huberman. That's levels.link/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover a few months ago, and it is simply incredible. In fact, I don't even like traveling anymore because they don't have Eight Sleep mattress covers in hotels and Airbnbs. One of the reasons I love my Eight Sleep mattress cover so much is that, as you might have heard before on this podcast or elsewhere, in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, you need your body temperature to drop by about one to three degrees, and I tend to run warm at night, which makes it hard to sleep and sometimes wakes me up in the middle of the night. When you sleep on an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can program the temperature of that mattress cover for specific times in the early, middle, and late part of your night so that the mattress stays cool, and as a consequence, you sleep very, very deeply. It also tracks your sleep, so it's paying attention to how many times you're moving, how deep your sleep is, it gives you a sleep score, all wonderful data to help you enhance your sleep. And of course, sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance, which makes an Eight Sleep a terrific tool for enhancing not just your sleep but all aspects of your life really. If you're interested in trying the Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to check out the Pod 3 cover, and you can save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, to Canada, the UK, and select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed with a quality blood test. One problem with a lot of DNA tests and blood tests, however, is you get data back about levels of metabolic factors, levels of hormones, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes interpreting your data and knowing what to do about it exceedingly easy. They have a personalized platform where you can go and you can see those levels of hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, and they point to specific nutritional tools, behavioral tools, supplement-based tools, et cetera, that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. And now for my discussion with Dr. Eddie Chang. Eddie, welcome. - Hi. Hi, Andrew. - Great to be here with you. This has been a long time coming. Just to come clean, we've known each other since we were nine years old. - Yeah. - But then there was a long gap in which we didn't talk to one another. I heard things about you, and, presumably, you heard a thing or two about me, for better or for worse. [Eddie laughs] And then we reconnected years later when I was a PhD student and you were a medical student. We literally ran into each other in the halls of the University of California San Francisco where you're now the chair of neurosurgery, so it all comes full circle. When you were at UCSF, you were working with Mike Merzenich, and I know that name might not be familiar to a lot of people, but he's sort of synonymous with neuroplasticity, the ability of the brain and nervous system to change in response to experience. So for our listeners, I would just love for you to give a brief overview of what you were doing at that time because I find that work so fascinating, and it really points to some of the things that can promote and maybe hinder our brain's ability to change. - Oh, wow. That's fantastic. So we did bump into each other serendipitously back then, and, at the time, I was a medical student at UCSF studying with Mike Merzenich. In particular, I was studying how the brain organizes when you have patterns of sound. And in particular, we were studying the brain of rodents and trying to understand how different sound patterns organize the frequency representation from low to middle to high frequency maps in the brains of baby rodents. And one of the things that I was very interested in was trying to understand how the patterns of the natural environment, let's say the vocalizations of the environment that the rat pups were raised in, or just the natural sounds that they hear, how that shapes the structure of the brain. And one of the things we did was to try an experiment where we raised some of these rat pups in white noise, continuous white noise that was essentially masking all of those environmental sounds. - And what was the consequence of animals being raised in white noise environment? - Well, one of the things that we didn't expect but we found, which was quite striking, is that there's this early period in brain development where we're very susceptible to the patterns that we hear or see. In neuroscience, we call this a critical period or a sensitive period. And we have this for our eyes, but we also have it for our ears. And one of the most striking examples of this is that any human can essentially grow up in a culture where they hear different speech sounds from one language to another, and it's like after a couple of years, you lose sensitivity to sounds that are not part of your native language and you have high sensitivity for the languages of your native culture. And that's pretty extraordinary that human brain has that flexibility yet, at the same time, has that specialization for language. And so we were trying to think about how do we model this, for example, in rodents, who obviously don't speak, but we're just understanding how sounds and environmental sounds modulate and organize the auditory cortex. And one of the things that we found that was quite striking was that if you basically mask environmental sounds from these rat pups, the critical period, this sensitive period where it's open to plasticity, it's open to change, it's open to reorganization, that window can stay open much, much longer. And in one way, it sounds like that's a good thing, but on the other hand, it's also a retardation. It actually slowed the maturation of the auditory cortex. It was ready to close when these rat pups were really young, but by raising them in white noise, we found out that you could keep it open for months beyond the time period that it normally closes. And so I think one of the things it taught me was that it's not just about the genetic programming that specifies some of this sensitive period, but it's also a little bit about the nature of the sounds that we hear that help keep that window for the critical period open and closed. - That's fascinating. And I know it's difficult to make a direct leap from animal research to human research, but if we could speculate a little bit, I can imagine that some people grow up in homes where there's a lot of shouting and a lot of inflection, maybe people are very verbose. Maybe others grow up in a home where it's quieter and more peaceful. Some people are going to grow up in cities. I just came back from New York City, it's like all night long, there's honking and sirens and it's just nonstop, and then I return here where it's quite quiet at night. Can we imagine that the human brain is going to be shaped differently depending on whether or not one grows up in one environment or another? And would that impact their tendency to speak in a certain way as well as hear in a certain way? What do we know about that? - Well, I think that, from my perspective, it's really clear that those sounds that we are exposed to from the very earliest time, even in utero, in the womb, where the sound is hearing the mother or father or friends while in the womb actually will influence how these things organize. And so there's no question that the sounds that we hear are going to have some influence, and those sounds are going to structure the way that those neural networks actually lay down and will forever influence how you hear sounds, and speech and language is probably one of the most profound examples of that. - I get a lot of questions about the use of white noise during sleep. In particular, people want to know whether or not using a white noise machine or a machine or a program that makes the sound of waves, for instance, if it assists their infant in sleeping, is it going to be bad for them because it's flooding the auditory system with a bunch of essentially white noise or disorganized noise? Do we have an answer to that question? - Not yet. I think that what you're asking is a really important question because parents are using white noise generators almost universally now, and for good reasons. You know, it is hard to have kids up at night. I've got three kids of my own and was very tempted to think about how to use some of these tools to just soothe them and get them to bed, especially when I was, like, so tired and exhausted. But I think that there is a cost, you know, to think a little bit about. You know, we're not exposed to continuous white noise naturally. There is a value to having really salient, structured sounds that are part of our natural environment to actually have the brain develop normally. So whether or not that has an impact, you know, while you're sleeping, it's not clear. I don't think that those studies have been done. What was really clear was that if you raise these baby rats in continuous white noise, not super loud, but just enough to mask the environmental sounds that that was enough to keep, you know, the auditory cortex, the part of the brain that hears, in this really delayed state which could essentially slow down the development and maturation of the brain. - And one could probably assume that slowing the maturation of areas of the brain that are responsible for hearing might, I want to underscore, might impact one's ability to speak, right? Because isn't it the case that if people can't hear, they actually have a harder time enunciating in a particular way, is that right? If I were to not be able to hear my own voice, would my speech patterns change? - Well, I think part of it is that, over time, we develop sensitivity to the very specific speech sounds in a given language, and the sensitivity improves as we hear more and more and more of it. And then on the other hand, we lose sensitivity to other speech sounds at the same time. But as part of that process, we also have a selectivity, a gain, a specialization even for those sounds, even relative to noise, noisy backgrounds and things like that. I tend to think about it like what is the signal-to-noise ratio? And so the brain has its own ways of trying to increase that signal-to-noise ratio in order to make it more clear. Part of that is how we hear and how it lays down a foundation for that signal-to-noise ratio, and so you can imagine a child that's raised continuously in white noise would be really deprived of those kind of sounds that are really necessary for it to develop properly. So I think with regard to those tools for babies, I think we should study it, we should try to understand this definitively. I think what we saw in rodents would tell us that there is potential, you know, things that we should be concerned about. But, again, it's not really clear, if you're just using at night, whether it has those effects. - I guess the critical question that a number of people are going to be asking is did you decide to use a white noise machine or not to help keep any of your three children asleep? - Well, I think the short answer is no. I mean, I obviously did a lot of work thinking and work on this and thought about it carefully, but there are other kinds of noise, or, I wouldn't even call it noise, other sounds that you can use that can be equally soothing to a baby. It's just that white noise has no structure, and what it's doing is essentially masking out all of the natural sounds. And I think the goal should really be about how do we replace that with other more natural sounds that structure the brain in the way that we want to be more healthy. - Well, I know that after you finished your medical training, you went on to, of course, specialize in neurosurgery. And last I checked, you spend most of your days either running your laboratory or in the clinic or running the department, and your clinical work and your laboratory work involves often removing pieces of the skull of humans and going in and either removing things or stimulating neurons, treating various ailments of different kinds, but your main focus these days, of course, is the neurobiology of speech and language. And so for those that aren't familiar, could you please distinguish for us speech versus language in terms of whether or not different brain areas control them? And I know that there's a lot of interest in how speech and language and hearing all relate to one another. And then we'll talk a bit about, for instance, emotions and how facial expressions could play into this, or hand gestures, et cetera. But for the uninformed person, and for me, to be quite direct, what are the brain areas that control speech and language? What are they really, and especially in humans, how are they different? I mean, we have such sophisticated language compared to a number of other species. What does all this landscape look like in there? - Yeah, well, that's a fascinating question, and I'm going to just try to connect a couple of the dots here, which is that in that earlier work during medical school, I was doing a lot of what we call neurophysiology, putting electrodes into the auditory cortex and understanding how the brain responds to sounds, and that's how we actually mapped out these things about the sensitivity to sensitive periods. That experience with Mike Merzenich and thinking about how plasticity is regulated in the brain and particular about how sound is represented by brain activity was something that, you know, was really formative for me. And because I was a medical student and was going back to my medical studies, it was that in combination with seeing some awake brain surgeries that our department is really well known for. One of my mentors, Mitch Berger, really pioneered these methods for taking care of patients with brain tumor and be able to do these surgeries safely by keeping patients awake and by mapping out language. - So they're talking and listening, and you're essentially in conversation with these patients while there's a portion of their skull removed, and you are stimulating or, in some cases, removing areas of their brain, is that right? - That's exactly right, and the only thing off there is it's not essentially, it is just that. The only difference between the conversation that I might have with my patient who's undergoing awake brain surgery is that I can't see their face and they can't see my face. We actually have a sterile drape that actually separates the operating field, and they're looking and interacting with our neuropsychologist, but I can talk to them and they can hear my voice and vice versa. And it's a really, really important way of how we can protect some of those areas that are really critical for language, at the same time, accomplish a mission of getting the seizures under control or getting a brain tumor removed. - And is that because occasionally you'll encounter a brain area, maybe you're stimulating or considering removing that brain area, and suddenly a patient will start stuttering or will have a hard time formulating a sentence? Is that essentially what you're looking for? You're looking for regions in which it is okay or not okay to probe? - Exactly, so the first thing that we do is that we use a small electrical stimulator to probe different parts of the areas that we think might be related and important for language or talking or even movements of your arm and leg. That's what we call brain mapping. And we use a small electrical current that's delivered through a probe that we can just put at each spot. And the areas that we're really interested in are, of course, the areas that are right around the part that is pathological, the part that's injured, or the part that has a brain tumor that we want to remove, so we can apply that probe and transiently, meaning temporarily, activate it. So if you're stimulating the part of the brain that controls the hand, the hand will move, it will jerk. Sometimes a fist will be made, something like that. Other times, while someone is counting or just saying the days of the week, you can stimulate in a different area that stops their speech altogether. That's what we call speech arrest. Or if someone is looking at pictures and they're describing the pictures and you stimulate in a particular area, they stop speaking or the words start coming out slurred or they can't remember the name of the object that they're seeing in the picture. These are all things that we're listening really carefully while we apply that focal stimulation. That's what we call brain mapping. - What are some of the more surprising, or maybe even if you want to offer one of the more outrageous examples of things that people have suddenly done or failed to be able to do as a consequence of this brain mapping? - Well, I think the thing to me that has been the most striking is that, you know, some of these areas you stimulate, and altogether, you can shut down someone's talking. So a person says, "I wanted to say it, but I couldn't get the words out." And even though I've seen this thousands of times now, it's still exciting every time that I see it because, it's exciting because you're seeing the brain, it's a physical organ, it's part of the body, outside of the veins on top of it, it doesn't look like a machine. But when you do something like that and you focally change the way it works, and you see that because the person can't talk anymore and they say, "I know what I want to say, but I couldn't get the words out," you're confronted with this idea that that organ is the basis of speech and language and way beyond that, obviously, you know, for all the other functions that we have for thinking and feeling our emotions, everything. So that, to me, is a constant reminder of, you know, this really special thing that the brain does which is compute so many of the things that we do, and in particular in the area around speech and language, generating words, something that is really unique to our species, is just extraordinary to see. Again, even though I've seen it thousands of times, it's just having that connection because it doesn't look like a machine, but it is doing something that is quite complicated, precise, and remarkable. - Do you ever see emotional responses from stimulation in particular areas? And do you ever hear or see emotional responses that are associated with particular types of speech? Because, for instance, curse words are known to, people with Tourette's often will curse, not always, sometimes they'll have tics or other things. But what I learned from a colleague of ours is that curse words have a certain structure to them. There's usually a heavy or kind of a sharp consonant up front, right, that allows people, at least as it was described to me, to have some sort of emotional release. It's not a word like murmur, which has kind of a soft entry here, I'm not using the technical language, and you pick your favorite curse word out there, folks. I'm not going to shout out any now or say any now, but that certain words have a structure to them that, because of the motor patterns that are involved in saying that word, you could imagine it has an emotional response unto itself. So when stimulating or when blocking these different brain areas, do you ever see people get angry or sad or happy or more relaxed? - Oh, well, definitely I've seen cases where you can invoke anxiety, stress, and I think that there are also areas that you can stimulate and you can also evoke the opposite of that, sort of like a calm state. - I think that brain area is slightly hyperactive in you, or at least more than me. In all the years I've known you, you've always been, at least externally, a very calm person. I mean, I always find it amusing that you work on speech and language and you have a very calming voice. And I'm being really serious. I think that there's a huge variation in that, right, in terms of how people speak and how they accent words. - Absolutely, yeah. So there are areas, for example, the orbitofrontal cortex that we showed that if you stimulate there... The orbitofrontal cortex is a part of the brain that's above the eyes. That's why they call it orbitofrontal, meaning it's above the eye or the orbit and in the frontal lobe, and it's this area right in here. It has really complex functions. It's really important for learning and memory. But one of the things that we observed is when you stimulate in there, people tended to have a reduction in their stress, and it was very much related to their state of being, meaning that if someone was already kind of feeling normal and you stimulate there, it didn't do much. But if someone was in a very anxious state, it actually relieved that. And then we've seen the corollary of that which is true, too, which is that there are other areas like the amygdala or parts of the insula that if you stimulate, you can cause an acute temporary anxiety, a nervous feeling, or if you stimulate the insula, people can have an acute feeling of disgust. So, you know, the brain has different functions and these different nodes that help process the way we feel. Certainly, I think that, to some degree, neuropsychiatric conditions reflect an imbalance of the electrical activities in these areas. One of the things that was something I will never forget was taking care of a young woman with uncontrolled seizures. We call that epilepsy. It's a medical condition where someone has uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain. Sometimes you can see that as convulsions where people are shaking and lose consciousness. There are other kind of seizures that people can have where they don't lose consciousness, but they can have experiences that just come out of nowhere just as a result of electrical activity coming from the brain. And about six years ago, I took care of a young woman who was diagnosed psychiatrically with anxiety disorder for several years. It turns out that it wasn't really an anxiety disorder. It was actually that she had underlying seizures, an epilepsy activating a part of her brain that evokes, you know, anxious feelings. - How was that discovered? Because I know a lot of people out there have anxiety. I mean, in the absence of a brain scan, how or why would one suspect that maybe they have a tumor or some other condition that was causing those neurons to become hyperactive? - Yeah, that's really important because so many people have anxiety, and the vast, vast majority are not having that because they're having seizures in the brain. I think one of the ways that this was diagnosed was that the nature of when she was having these panic attacks was not triggered by anything. They would just happen spontaneously. And that's what can happen with seizures sometimes. They just come out of nowhere. We don't fully understand what can trigger them, but they weren't things that were typically anxiety-provoking. This is something that just happened all of a sudden. And because you brought it up, this is not something that you can see on an MRI. We could not see and look at the structure of her brain, with an MRI, that she was having seizures. The only way that we could actually prove this was actually putting electrodes into her brain and proving that these attacks that she was having were localized to a part called the amygdala, it's a medial part of the temporal lobe, which is here, and associating the electrical activity that we were seeing on those electrodes with the symptoms that she had, and she ultimately needed a kind of surgery where she was awake in order to remove this safely. - Speaking of epilepsy, a number of people out there have epilepsy or know people who do. Are the drugs for epilepsy satisfactory? You know, I think about things like Depakote, you know, and adjusting the excitation and inhibition of the brain. I mean, are there good drugs for epilepsy? We know there are not great drugs for a lot of other conditions. And how often does one need neurosurgery in order to treat epilepsy? Or can it be treated most often just using pharmacology? - Yeah, great question. Well, a lot of people have seizures that can be completely controlled by their medications, a lot. But there's about a one-third of people who have epilepsy, which we define as anyone who's had three or more seizures that, you know, about a third of them actually don't have control with all of the modern medications that we have nowadays. And some of the data suggests that if you have two or three medications, it actually doesn't matter necessarily which of the anti-seizure medications it is, but there is data suggests if you've just tried two or three, the fourth, fifth, sixth, and beyond is not likely to help control it. So we are in a situation, unfortunately, where a lot of the medications are great for some people, but for another subset, they can't control it, and it comes from a particular part of the brain. Now, fortunately, in that subset, there's another part of that group that can benefit from a surgery that actually either removes that part of the brain, and nowadays, we'll use stimulators now to sometimes put electrical stimulation in that part of the brain to help reduce the seizures. - And you said a third of people with epilepsy might need neurosurgery? - Well, what I mean by that is, like, they continue to have seizures that are not controlled by all medications, and there's going to be another subset of those that may benefit from a surgery. It's probably not that whole third, it's a subset of that. It's just to say that epilepsy can be really hard to get fixed. And for people where the seizures come from one spot or, you know, an area, then surgery can do great. If it comes from multiple areas or if it comes from the whole brain, then we have to think about other methods to control it. Fortunately, nowadays, there's actually other ways. Surgery now, to us, doesn't just mean removing part of the brain. Half of what we do now is use stimulators that modulate the state of the brain that can help reduce the seizures. - I've heard before that the ketogenic diet was originally formulated in order to treat epilepsy and, in particular, in kids. Is that true, and why would being in a ketogenic state with low blood glucose reduce seizures? - That's a great question. And to be honest, I don't know actually if it was originally designed to treat seizures, but I can tell you for sure that for some people, just like with some medications, it can be a life-changing thing. It can completely change the way that the brain works. And it's not something that's for everybody, but for some people, there's no question, and it has some very beneficial effects. I think it's to be determined still, like why and how that works. - I've heard similar things about the ketogenic diet for people with Alzheimer's dementia, that there's nothing particularly relevant about ketosis to Alzheimer's per se, but because Alzheimer's changes the way that neurons metabolize energy that shifting to an alternate fuel source can sometimes make people feel better, and so a number of people are now trying it. But it's not as if blood glucose and having carbohydrates is causing Alzheimer's. And people get confused often that just because something can help doesn't mean that the opposite is harming somebody. So I find this really interesting. Sometime I'll check back with you about what's happening in terms of ketogenic diets and epilepsy. But you said that in some cases, it can help. Has that observation been made both for children and for adults? Because I thought that, originally, the ketogenic diet for epilepsy was really for pediatric epilepsy. - Yeah, that's right. So a lot of its focus has really been on kids with epilepsy, but certainly it's a safe thing to try, so a lot of adults, you know, will try it as well. - Interesting. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day, is that it gets me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health, and those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met, and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they'll give you a year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2. I'm curious about epilepsy for another reason. I was taught that epilepsy is an imbalance in the excitation and inhibition in the brain. So you think about these electrical storms that give people either grand mal, you know, shaking and kind of convulsions. But years ago, I was reading a book, a wonderful book actually, called "Einstein in Love" by Dennis Overbye. It was about Einstein and I guess his personal life. People who knew him claimed that he would sometimes walk along, and then every once in a while would just stop and kind of stare off into space for anywhere from a minute to three to five minutes, and it was speculated that he had absence seizures. What is an absence seizure? And the reason I ask is I occasionally will be walking along and I'll be thinking about something and I'll stop. But in my mind, I'm thinking during that time, but I realize that if I were to see myself from the outside, it might appear that I was just kind of absent. What is an absence seizure? Because it's so strikingly different in its description from, say, a grand mal convulsive seizure. - Sure, well, like I mentioned before, depending on how the seizure activity spreads in the brain or how it actually propagates, if it stays in one particular spot and doesn't spread to the entire brain, it can have really different manifestation. It can represent really differently. So absence seizure is just one category of different kind of seizures where you can lose consciousness basically, and what I mean by that is that you're not fully aware of what's going on in your environment, okay? So you're sort of taken offline temporarily from consciousness, but you could still be, for example, standing, and to people who are not paying attention, they may not even be aware that that's happening. - What are some other types of seizures? - Well, you know, I think some of the other kinds, the classic ones are temporal lobe seizures. So these are ones that come from the medial structures like the amygdala and hippocampus. Oftentimes people, when they have seizures coming from that, they may taste something very unusual like a metallic taste or smell something like the smell of burning toast, something like that. There are some people, with temporal lobe seizures, will have deja vu. They will have that experience that you've been somewhere before, but that's just a precursor to the seizure. And it just highlights that when people have seizures coming from these areas, they sometimes hijack what that part of the brain is really for. So the amygdala and hippocampus, for example, are really important for learning and memory. It's not surprising that when people have seizures there that it can evoke a feeling of deja vu or that it can evoke a feeling of anxiety. And the areas that are right next to it, for example, these areas are really important for processing smell. So these areas are right next to each other so you can have these kind of complex set of symptoms, the weird taste, the smell of toast, and then a feeling of deja vu, that's classic for a temporal lobe seizure, and it's because those parts of the brain that process those functions are right next to each other. - I'm told that I've had nocturnal seizures, and I've woken up sometimes from sleep having felt as if I was having a convulsion, the sort of sense of buzzing in the back of the head. This happened to me two or three times in college. Well, I woke up and my girlfriend was very distraught, like, "You were having a seizure." I was having full convulsion in my sleep. Is that correct? Is there such a thing as nocturnal seizures? What do they reflect? They eventually stopped happening, and I couldn't tether them to any kind of life event. I wasn't doing any kind of combat sport or anything at the time, I wasn't drinking alcohol much, it's never really been my thing. What are nocturnal seizures about? - [Eddie] Oh, well- - And do I need brain surgery? [Andrew laughs] [Eddie laughs] - Nocturnal seizures are just another form. Like, again, epilepsy and seizures can have so many different forms and not just, like, where in the brain, but also when they happen. And there are some people who, for whatever reason, it's very timed to the circadian rhythm. It's actually not just happening at night, but a certain period at night when people are in a certain stage of sleep that the brain is in a state that it's vulnerable to having a seizure, and so that's basically just one form of that. Again, it's not just about where it's coming from, but also when it's happening and how that's timed with other things that are happening with the body. - Interesting. Well, it eventually stopped happening so I stopped worrying about it. I haven't had seizures since. Returning to speech and language, when I was getting weaned in neuroscience, I learned that we have an area of the brain for producing speech and we have an area of the brain for comprehending speech. What's the story there? Is it still true that we have a Broca's and a Wernicke's area? Those are names of neurologists, presumably, or neurosurgeons that discovered these different brain areas. Maybe you could familiarize us with some of the sort of textbook version of how speech and language are organized in the brain, maybe share with us a little bit of the lesion studies that led to that understanding, and then I would love to hear a bit about what your laboratory is discovering about how things are actually organized, because from some discussions you and I have had over the last year or so, it seems like, well, let's just be blunt, it seems that much of what we know from the textbooks could be wrong. - Well, I love that question because, for me, it's very central to the research we do, and it's where the intersection between what we do in the laboratory in our research interfaces with what I see in patients. And one of the things that fascinated me early on in my medical training was in doing some of these brain mapping or watching them with my mentor or taking care of patients that had, you know, brain tumors in a certain part of the brain was that, a lot of times, what I was seeing in a patient did not correlate with what I was taught in medical school. And, you know, some people will think, well, this might be an exception, but after you see it for a couple times and if you're kind of interested in this problem, you know, it poses a serious challenge to what you've learned and how you think about how these things operate. And that actually got me really interested in trying to figure this out because, earlier, we talked about just this extraordinary thing that the brain is doing to create words and sentences, and that's the process by which I'm getting ideas out from my mind into yours. It's an incredible thing, right? It's the basis of communication, high information communication between two individuals that's really unique to humans. So in historical times, how this works has been very controversial from day one of neuroscience. A long time ago, people thought the bumps on your head corresponded to the different faculties of the mind. So for example, if you had a bump here, it might be corresponding to intelligence or another one over here, you know, to vision and these kind of things. That's what we nowadays call phrenology, and that was kind of the starting point. A lot of that has been, of course, debunked, but when you see those little statues of different brain partitions on someone's head, that's essentially how people were thinking about how the brain worked back then, a couple hundred years ago. Modern neuroscience began when, actually, it was very much related to the discovery of language. So modern neuroscience, meaning moving beyond this idea that the bumps on the scalp corresponded to the faculties of the mind, but there were things that actually were in the brain themselves, and they weren't corresponding to things that you could see superficially, like on the scalp or externally, that it was something about the brain itself. I mean, it seems so obvious now, but back then, this was the big academic, you know, debate. And the first observation that I think was really impactful in the area of language was an observation by a French neurosurgeon named Pierre Broca. And what he observed was that in a patient, not that he did surgery in, but that he had seen and taken care of, that the person couldn't talk. And, in particular, they called this individual Tan because the only words that he could produce was tan, tan. For the most part, he could generally understand the kind of things that people were asking him about, but the only thing that he could utter from his mouth were these words, tan, tan. And what eventually had happened was this individual passed away, and the way that neuroscience was done back then was basically to wait until that happened and then to remove the brain and to see what part of the brain was affected in this patient that they called Tan. And what Broca found was that there was a part in the left frontal lobe, so the frontal lobe is this area like I described earlier, which is, you know, up behind our forehead, up here, and in the back of that frontal lobe, he claimed that this was the seat of articulation in the brain. He literally used something like that in French, the seat of articulation, meaning that this is the part of the brain that is responsible for us to generate words. About 50 years later, the story becomes more complicated with a German neurologist named Carl Wernicke. And what Wernicke described was a different set of symptoms in patients that he observed a different phenomenon where people could produce words, but a lot of the words, and they were fluent in the sense that, like, they sound like they could be real words but from a different language, for example. And some of us call that, like, word salad or jargon. They were essentially making up words, but it was not intentional. It was just the way that the words came out. But in addition to that, he observed that these people also could not understand what was being said to them. So we could be having a conversation, and I'd be asking you, "Am I a woman?" And you might nod your head, you know, just because you're not processing the question. And so here are two observations. One is that the frontal lobe is important for articulating speech, creating the words and expressing them fluently. And then a different part of the brain called the left temporal lobe, which is this area right above my ear, that is an area that I think was claimed to be really important for understanding. So the two major functions in language, to speak and to understand, were kind of pinned down to that, and we've had that basic idea in the textbooks for, you know, over 200 years. - It's certainly what I was taught. - [Eddie] Is that right? - Oh, yeah, and certainly what we still, we still teach undergraduates, graduate students, and medical students that. - Well, that's what I learned, too, in medical school. And what I saw in reality when I started taking care of patients was that it's not so simple. In fact, part of it is fundamentally wrong. So just in a nutshell, nowadays, after, you know, looking at this very carefully over hundreds of patients, we've shown that surgeries, for example, in the posterior part of the frontal lobe, a lot of times, people have no problem talking at all whatsoever after those kind of surgeries, and that it's a different part of the brain that we call the precentral gyrus. The precentral gyrus is a part of the brain that is intimately associated with the motor cortex. The motor cortex is the part of the brain that has a map of your entire body so that it has a part that corresponds to your feet, it has a part that corresponds to your hands. But then there's another part that comes out more laterally on the side of the brain that corresponds to your lips, your jaw, your larynx, and we have seen that when patients have surgeries or injuries to that part of the brain, it actually can really interrupt language, so it's not as simple as just moving the muscles of the vocal tract, but it's also important for formulating and expressing words. So that's Broca's area that I think the field now recognizes not just because of our work, but many other people that have studied this in stroke and beyond, is that the idea that that is the basis of speaking in Broca's area is fundamentally wrong right now, and we have to figure out how to correct the textbooks that we kind of understand that so that we can continue to make progress. Now, in terms of the other major area that we call Wernicke's area in the posterior temporal lobe, that has held, I think, quite legitimately for some time. So that is an area that you have to be super careful when you do surgery there. That's an area where, if you have a mistake there and you cause a stroke or you remove too much of the tumor there, you go too far beyond it, then the person can be really, really hurt. Like, they'll have a condition that we call aphasia where they may not be able to understand words, they may not be able to remember the word that they're trying to say. They know what they're trying to say, but they can't remember the precise word that goes with the object that they're trying to think of. They may even produce words that I described before are like word salad or very jargony. So, you know, they might say something like tamiranai. That's not a real word, but it sounds like it could be, you know? And that's just because that part of the brain has some role not just in understanding what we hear, but also actually has a really important role in sending the commands to different parts of the brain to control what we say. - Not long ago, you and me and my good friend Rick Rubin were having a conversation about medicine and science, and Rick asked the question, "What percentage of what you learned in graduate and/or medical school do you think is correct?" And you had a very interesting answer. Would you share it with us? - I don't know. I don't remember the exact. But I would say that with regard to the brain in particular, I would say about 50% gets it right and accurate and is helpful, but another 50% is just the approximation and oversimplification of what's going on. The example that we talked about, language is just an example of that. It's just there are things that make it easier to learn and easier to teach and easier to even think about, and that's probably why we continue teaching in the way that we do. But I think as time goes on, the complexity of reality of how the brain works is, well, first of all, we're still trying to figure it out, and second of all, it is complex and it's still incomplete story. - It's early days. And we'll get into some of the technical advances that are allowing some correction of the errors that the field has made. And, look, no disrespect to the brain explorers that came before us, and the ones that come after us will correct us, right? That's the way the game is played. But what I'm hearing is that there are certain truths that people accept, and then there's about half of the information that is still open for debate and maybe even for complete revision. One thing that I learned about language and the neural circuits underlying language is that it's heavily lateralized, that these structures, Broca's and Wernicke's and other structures in the brain responsible for speech and comprehension of speech sit mainly on one side of the brain, but they do not have a mirror representation or another equivalent area on the opposite side of the brain. And for those that haven't poked around in a lot of brains, certainly you, Eddie, have done far more of that than I have, but I've done my fair share in nonhuman species and a little bit in humans, almost every structure, almost every structure has a matching structure on the other side of the brain, so when we say the hippocampus, we really mean two hippocampi, one on each side of the brain. But language, I was taught, is heavily lateralized, that is, that there's only one. So that raises two questions. One, is that true? And if it is true, then what is the equivalent real estate on the opposite side of the brain doing if it's not doing the same function that the one on, say, the left side is performing? - Well, that's one of those things that is, again, like mostly true, not 100%. And what I mean by that is that it's complicated. So for people who are right-handed, 99% of the time, the language part of the brain is on the left side. - And what is the equivalent brain area on the right side doing if it's not doing language? - Well, you know, the thing that's incredible is if you look at the right side and you look at it very carefully, either under an MRI or you actually look at the brain under slides in a microscope, it looks very, very similar. It's not identical, but it looks very, very similar. All the gyri, which are the bumps on the brain that, you know, have the different contours and the valleys that we call sulci, those all look basically the same. Like, there is a mirror anatomy on the left and right side, and so it's not been so clear what's so special actually about the left side to house language. But what we do know, and this is what we use all the time in assessing and figuring out, you know, this before surgery, is if you're right-handed, 99% of the time, the language is going to be on the left side of the brain. - Is handedness genetic in any way? I mean, when I grew up, - Yes. - a pen or a pencil or crayon was placed into my hand presumably, or I started using... My father was left-handed, and then where he grew up in South America, they forced him to force himself to become right-handed. They actually used to restrict the movement of his left hand so he was forced to write... And then you have hook lefties and hook righties. And I know this is a deep dive and we probably don't want to go into every derivation of this, but so for somebody who's left-handed, naturally just starts writing with the left hand, there's some genetic predisposition to being left-handed? - Absolutely. No question about it. Handedness is not entirely but strongly genetic. So there is something that ties all of this, and what does handedness, for example, have to do with the part of your brain that controls language? Well, it turns out that the parts that control the hand are very close to the areas that really are responsible for the vocal tract. Again, part of the motor cortex and part of this brain area called the precentral gyrus. And there are some theories that, because of their proximity, that these parts of the brain might develop together early in utero and they might have a head start compared to the right side, and because they have a head start that things solidify there. This is one theory of why this happens. In people who are left-handed, it still turns out that the vast majority of people have language on the left side, but it's not 99%, it's more like 70%. So if you're left-handed, it's still more likely that the language part of your brain is going to be on the left side, but there's going to be a greater proportion, maybe 20, 30%, where it's either in both hemispheres or on the right side. And just to make this a little bit more interesting is that when people have strokes on the left side, and if they are lucky enough to recover from those strokes, sometimes that involves reorganization, this term that we call plasticity earlier, where the areas around where the stroke take on that new function in a way that they didn't have before. That can certainly happen in the left hemisphere, but there are also instances where the right hemisphere can also start to take on the function of language where it was once on left and then transfers to the right. So the thing that I think about a lot is that the machinery probably exists on both sides, but we don't use them together all the time. In fact, we may strongly bias one side or the other. Just like we use our two hands in very, very different ways, it's a little bit the same with the brain. Well, it's because of what we do with the brain that actually is why we use the hands in different ways. And the same thing goes for language, which is that, again, the substrates, the organ, the language organ, the part of the brain that process it probably has very similar machinery on the left side as the right, and the right may have the capability to do it, but in real, everyday use, the brain specializes one of the sides in order for us to use it functionally. That's a theory. - You're bilingual, correct? - Yeah. - [Andrew] You speak English and Chinese? - Yeah. - For people that are bilingual and that learn two or more, well, bilingual is two, obviously, but learn both languages or let's say more languages from an early time in life, do they use the same brain area to generate that language? Or perhaps they use the left side to speak English and the right side to speak Chinese? Do we know anything about bilingualism in the brain? - Well, I think we know a lot about bilingualism in the brain. The answers are still out there, the final answers on it, and part of the answer is yes, absolutely, we use some parts of the brain very similarly. We actually have a study in the lab right now where we're looking at this where people who speak one language or another or are bilingual, and we're looking at how the brain activity patterns occur when they're hearing one language versus the other. And what's striking to see, actually, is how overlapping they really can be. Even though the person may have no idea of the language that they're hearing, the English part of the brain is still processing that and maybe trying to interpret it through an English lens, for example. So the short answer is that with bilingualism, there are shared circuitry, there's this shared machinery in the brain that allows us to process both, but it's not identical. It's the same part of the brain, but what it's doing with the signals can be very, very different. And what I mean by that precisely is not the instantaneous detecting of one sound to the next, but the memory of the sequences of those particular sounds that give rise to things like words and meaning, that can be highly variable from one individual to the next, and those neurons are very, very sensitive to the sequences of the sounds, even though the sounds themselves might have some overlap between languages. - Fascinating. Okay, so we've talked about brain areas and a little bit about lateralization. I want to get back to the hands and some things related to emotion in a little bit. But maybe now we could go into those brain areas and start to ask the question, what exactly is represented or mapped there? And for people who perhaps aren't familiar with brain mapping and representation and receptive fields, perhaps the simplest analogy might be the visual system where I look at your face, I know you, I recognize you, and certainly there are brain areas that are responsible for face recognition. But the fact that I know that that's your face, and for those listening, I'm looking into Eddie's face, the fact that I know that that's your face at all is because we are well aware that there are cells that represent edges and that represent dark and light, and those all combine in what we call a hierarchical structure. They sort of build up from basic elements as simple as little dots, but then lines and things that move, et cetera, to give a coherent representation of the face. When I think about language, I think about words and just talking. If I sit down and do a long podcast or I think about asking you a question, I don't even think about the words I want to say very much. I mean, I have to think about them a little bit, one would hope, but I don't think about individual syllables unless I'm trying to, you know, accent something or it's a word that I have a particular difficulty saying or I want to change the cadence, et cetera. So what's represented in the neurons, the nerve cells in these areas? Are they representing vowels, consonants? And how do things like inflection... Like I occasionally will poke fun at upspeak, but there's, I think, a healthy, a normal version of upspeak where somebody's asking a question, like, for instance, what is that? That's an appropriate use of upspeak as opposed to saying something that is not a question and putting a lilt at the end of the sentence, then we call that upspeak, which doesn't fit with what the person is saying. So what in the world is contained in these brain areas, what is represented, to me, is perhaps one of the most interesting questions, and I know this lands square in your wheelhouse. - Sure, let's get into this, Andrew, because this is one of the most exciting stuff that's happening right now is understanding how the brain processes these exact questions. And you asked me earlier, you know, what is difference between speech and language? Speech corresponds to the communication signal. It corresponds to me moving my mouth and my vocal tract to generate words, and you're hearing these as an auditory signal. Language is something much broader. So it refers to what you're extracting from the words that I'm saying, we call that pragmatics and sort of are you getting the gist of what I'm saying? There's another aspect of it that we call semantics. Do you understand the meaning of these words and the sentences? There's another part that we call syntax, which refers to how the words are assembled in a grammatical form. So those are all really critical parts of language, and speech is just one form of language. There's many other forms like sign language, reading. Those are all important modalities for reading. Our research really focuses on this area that we're calling speech, again, the production of this audio signal which you can't see but your microphones are picking up. There are these vibrations in the air that are created by my vocal tract that are picked up by the microphone in the case of this recording, but also picked up by the sensors in your ear. The very tiny vibrations in your ear are picking that up and translating that into electrical activity. And what the ear does at the periphery is translates all sounds into different frequencies. So its main thing to do is to take a speech signal or any other kind of sound and decompose it, meaning separate that sound into different kind of signals. And in the case of hearing, what it's doing is separating it out into low, middle, high frequencies at a very, very high resolution. It's doing it very quickly, and it's doing it in a really fine way to separate all of those different sounds. So if you look at the periphery near the nerve that goes to your ear, those nerve fibers, some of them are tuned to low frequencies, some of them are tuned to high frequencies, some of them are tuned to the middle frequencies, and that is what your ear is doing. It's taking these words and splitting them up into different frequencies. - And for those of you out there that aren't familiar with thinking about things in the so-called frequency space, bass tones would be lower frequencies and high-pitched tones would be higher frequencies, just to make sure everyone's on the same page. So the sound of my voice, the sound of your voice, or any sound in the environment is being broken down into these frequencies. Are they being broken down into very narrow channels of frequency, or are they, I want to avoid nomenclature here, or are they being binned as fairly broad frequencies? 'Cause we know low, medium, and high, but, for instance, I can detect whether or not something's approaching me or moving away from me depending on whether or not it sweeps louder [imitates sound approaching] or [imitates sound receding], right, towards or away. It's subtle, and of course it's combined with what I see and my own movement, But how finely sliced is our perception of the auditory world? - Oh, extraordinarily precise. I mean, we take these millisecond cues, the millisecond differences between the sound coming to one ear, let's say your right ear versus your left, to understand what direction that sound came from. Those are only millisecond differences, and that's how precise this works. But on the other hand, it does a lot of computation on this it does a lot of analysis as you go up, and a lot of our work is focused on the part of the brain that we call the cortex. The cortex is the outermost part of brain where we believe that sounds are actually converted into words and language. So there's this transformation where, at the ear, words are decomposed and turned into these elemental frequency channels, and then as it goes up through the auditory system, hits the cortex. There are some things that happen obviously before it gets to the cortex, but when it gets to cortex, there's something special going on, which is that that part of the brain is looking for specific sounds. And specifically what I mean by that is the sounds of human language, so the ones that are the different consonants and vowels in a different language. One of the ways that we have studied this is looking in patients who have epilepsy. And in a lot of these cases where the MRI looks completely normal, we have to put electrodes surgically on a part of the brain. The temporal lobe is a very, very common place, so we've done a lot of our work looking at how the temporal lobe processes speech sounds because we're looking for where the seizures start, but then we're also doing brain mapping for language and speech so we can protect those areas. We want to identify the areas that we want to remove to cure someone's seizures, but we also want to figure out the areas that are important for speech and language to protect those so that we can do a surgery that's effective and safe. And so in our research, and why it's become a really important addition to our knowledge is that we have electrodes directly recording from the human brain surface. A lot of the technology we work with right now is recording on the order of millimeters, and they can record millisecond time resolution of neural activity, and what we see is extraordinary patterns of activity when people hear words and sentences. If you look at that part of the brain that we call Wernicke's area in this part of the temporal lobe, this whole area lights up when you hear words or speech. And it's not in a way that is like a general light bulb warming up and it's generally lit up, but what you actually see is something much, much more complicated, which is a pattern of activity, and what we've done in the last 10 years is try to understand what does that pattern come from? And if we were to look at each individual site from that part of the brain, what would we see? What parts of words are being coded by electrical activity in those parts of the brain? Remember, the cortex is using electrical activity to transmit information and do analysis, and what we're doing is we're eavesdropping on this part of the brain as it's processing speech to try to understand what each individual site is doing. - And what are those sites doing, or could you give us some examples of what those sites are doing? So, for instance, are they sites that are specific for, or we could say even listening for consonants or for vowels or for inflection or for emotionality? What's in there? - [Eddie] Okay, well- - What makes these, what makes these cells fire? - Yeah, what gets them excited? - Yeah. - What gets them going is hearing speech. In particular, there are some of these really focal sites, again, just on the order of millimeter or, at some level, single neurons that are tuned to consonants, some are tuned to vowels, some are tuned to particular features of consonants. What I mean by that are different categories of consonants. There's a class of consonants that we call plosive consonants. This is a little bit of linguistic jargon, but I'm going to make a point here with that is that certain classes of sounds, when you make them, it requires you to actually close your mouth temporarily. - Hmm. Now I'm going to be thinking about this. So plosive, like plosive, like saying the word plosive requires that. - Exactly, so what's cool about that is that we actually have no idea what's going on in our mouth when we speak. We really have no idea. - Some people definitely have no idea. [Andrew laughs] [Eddie laughs] - Well, not just like in terms of what you're saying sometimes, but actually like how you're actually moving, you know, the different parts of vocal tract. And I have a feeling if we actually required understanding, we would never be able to speak 'cause it's so complex. It's such a complex feat. Some people would say it's the most complex motor thing that we do as a species is just speaking. Not, you know, the extreme feats of acrobatics or athleticism but speaking. - And especially when one observes, you know, opera or people who, you know, freestyle rappers. And of course it's not just the lips. It's the tongue. And you've mentioned two other structures Pharynx and larynx are the main ones. Can you tell us, just educate us at a superficial level what the pharynx and larynx do differentially? 'Cause I think most people aren't going to be familiar with that. - Okay, sure. So I'll talk primarily about the larynx here for a second, which is that if you think about when we're speaking, really, what we're doing is we're shaping the breath. So even before you get to the larynx, you got to start with the expiration. So we fill up our lungs and then we push the air out. That's a normal part of breathing. And what is really amazing about speech and language is that we evolved to take advantage of that normal physiologic thing, add a larynx, and what the larynx does is that when you're exhaling, it brings the vocal folds together. Some people call them vocal cords. They're not really cords. They're really vocal folds. They're two pieces of tissue that come together, and a muscle brings them together. And then what happens is when the air comes through the vocal folds when they're together, they vibrate at really high frequencies, like 100 to 200 hertz. Yours is probably about 100 hertz. The average- - Whereas yours is 200. [Andrew laughs] - No, no. Most male voices are around 100, okay? And then the average female voice around 200 hertz. - Well, and as you know, I've always had the same voice. - Yes, yes, the same- - This was a point of shame when I was a kid. Folks, my voice never changed. I always had the same voice. This is a discussion for another time. - Yeah, well, it's a great voice, you know, a great baritone voice, but I know in your voice, it's a low-frequency voice. And the reason why men and women generally have different voice qualities is it has to do with the size of the larynx and the shape of it, okay? So in general, men have a larger voice box or larynx, and the vibrating frequency, the resonance frequency of the vocal folds when the air comes through them is about 100 hertz for men and about 200 for women. So what happens is, okay, so you take a breath in, and then as the air is coming out, the vocal folds come together and the air goes through. That creates the sound of the voice that we call voicing, and that's the energy of your voice. It's not just your voice characteristic, it's the energy of your voice. It's coming from the larynx there, it's a noise. And then it's the source of the voice. And then what happens is that energy, that sound goes up through the parts of the vocal tract, like the pharynx into the oral cavity, which is your mouth and your tongue and your lips. And what those things are doing is that they're shaping the air in particular ways that create consonants and vowels. So that's what I mean by shaping the breath. It just starts with this exhalation. You generate the voice in the larynx, and then everything above the larynx is moving around, just like the way my mouth is doing right now, to shape that air into particular patterns that you can hear as words. - Fascinating, and immediately makes me wonder about more primitive or non-learned vocalizations like crying or laughter. Babies will cry, babies will show laughter. Are those sorts of vocalizations produced by the language areas like Wernicke's, or do they have their own unique neural structures? - Yeah, interesting question. So we call those vocalizations. A vocalization is basically where someone can create a sound, like a cry or a moan, that kind of sound, and it also involves the exhalation of air. It also involves some phonation at the level larynx where the vocal folds come together to create that audible sound. But it turns out that those are actually different areas, so people who have injuries in the speech and language areas oftentimes can still moan, they can still vocalize, and it is a different part of the brain, I would say an area that even nonhuman primates have that can be specialized, you know, for vocalization. It's a different form of communication than words, for example. - The intricacy of these circuits in the brain and their connections to the pharynx and larynx is just, it's almost overwhelming in terms of thinking about just how complicated it must be, and yet some general features and principles are starting to emerge from your work and from the work of others. If we think about that work and we think about, for instance, Wernicke's area, if I were to record from neurons in Wernicke's area at different locations, would I find that there's any kind of systematic layout? For instance, in terms of, you talked about sound frequency, we know that low frequencies are represented at one end of a structure and high frequencies at the other. This is true actually, at least from my earlier training, within the ear itself, within the cochlea, the early work of von Bekesy and from cadavers, right? They actually figured this out from dead people, which is incredible. A fascinating literature people should look up. And in the visual system, we know that, for instance, you know, visual position, where things are is mapped systematically. In other words, neurons that sit next to each other in the brain represent portions of visual space that are next to each other in the real world. What is the organization of language in areas like Wernicke's and Broca's? For instance, I think of the vowels, A, E, I, O, U, as kind of a coherent unit, but do I find the A neurons are next to the E neurons or next to the A, E, I, O, U. Is that vowel representation also laid out in order, or is it kind of salt and pepper, is it random? - That's been one of the, like, most important questions we've been trying to answer for the past decade. So there is a part of the brain that we call the primary auditory cortex, and the primary auditory cortex is deep in the temporal lobe. And if you looked at that part of the brain, there is a map of different sound frequencies. So if you look at the front of that primary auditory cortex, you'll find low-frequency sounds, and then as you march backwards in that cortex, it goes from low to medium to high frequencies. It's organized in this really nice and orderly way. And it turns out there's not just one. There's, like, mirrors of that tone frequency map in the primary auditory cortex. The areas that are really important for speech are on the side of that. And we now think that speech can go straight to the speech cortex without having to go through the primary auditory cortex, that it has its own pathway to get to the part of the brain that processes speech. And when we've looked at that question about is there a map, the short answer is yes, there is a map, but it is not structured universally across all people in a way that we can clearly see right now. It is like a salt and pepper map of the different features in speech. So before, we talked about these sounds that are called plosives. You make a plosive when the mouth or something in the oral cavity closes temporarily, and when it opens, that creates that fast plosive sound. So when you say dad or, you know, like the B in ball, that kind of thing, you will notice that your lips actually close, and then it's the release of that that creates that particular sounds, okay? So those are the sounds that we call plosive. Those are like ba da ga, pa ta ka, Those are a certain class of consonants that we call plosive sounds. There is another class of sounds that we call fricatives in linguistics. Fricatives are created by turbulence in the airstream as it comes out through the mouth, and the way that we make that turbulence is getting the mouth and the lips to close almost until they're completely shut or putting the tongue to near the teeth to almost get it completely shut but just have a narrow aperture, that creates a turbulence in the airflow that we perceive as a high-frequency sound. So those are the sounds like sha and tha, those kind of things. Those are, if you look at the frequencies, they're higher frequencies, and those are created by specific movements that you constrict the airflow to create turbulence, and we hear it as sha, sa, tha. - So if I say that. - [Eddie] Exactly. - And as opposed to a plosive where I'd say explosive. - [Eddie] Right. - Of course, I'm emphasizing here. Well, this explains something and solves a mystery, which is recently I've been fascinated by the work of a physician scientist back east, Dr. Shanna Swan, who's done a lot of work on things that are contained in pesticides and foods that are changing hormone levels, and she refers to phthalates, which is spelled... So it's both a plosive and a tha, so it's combining the two, and it's one of the most difficult words in the English language to pronounce, second only perhaps to the correct pronunciation of ophthalmology. [Eddie laughs] [Andrew laughs] So it's a combination of a plosive and one of these tha sounds, and that's probably why it's difficult. - That's exactly right. In fact, we have a term for that. That's called a consonant cluster. So sometimes syllables will just have one consonant, but when we start stacking certain syllables in a sequence, and there's rules that actually govern which consonants can be in a particular sequence for a given language, that makes it more complicated. And certain languages have a lot more constant clusters than others. - For instance- - So for instance, Russian, for example, has a lot of consonant clusters. English has a lot of them. There are other languages that have very, very few. For example, Hawaiian. Hawaiian has an inventory of about 12 to 14 different phonemes, 14 different consonants and vowels. English, on contrast, has about 40 different consonants and vowels. So languages have different inventories. They can overlap for sure, but different languages use different sound elements, combine and recombine those elements to give rise to different words and meanings. - Can we say that there is a most complicated language out there, or among the most complicated? Would it be Russian? - It's definitely high up there. English is up there, too, actually. Yeah, German as well. - And in terms of learning multiple languages during development, my understanding is that if one wants to become bilingual or trilingual, best to learn those languages simultaneously during development, ideally before age 12, if one hopes to not have an accent in speaking them later. Is that correct, or do you want to revise that? - Well, basically, the earlier, and the earlier is better, the more intense it is and the more immersive it is, the longer, you know, that you can be exposed to that is really important. A lot of people can get exposed to it early and basically lose it. Even though it's, quote, unquote, during that sensitive period, unless it's maintained, it can be very easily lost. Then I think another aspect of it that's very interesting is some of the social requirements for it too. It's pretty clear that you can only go so far just listening to these sounds from a tape recording or something like that. There's something extra about real human interactions that activates the brain's sensitivity to different speech sounds and allows us to become specialized for them for a given language. - So returning to what's mapped, what the representations are in the brain, I'm starting to get a picture now based on these plosives and these tha sounds. And what I find so interesting and logical about that is it maps to the motor structures and the actual pronunciation of the sounds, not necessarily to the meaning of the individual words. Now, of course, it's related to the meaning of the individual words, but it makes good sense to me why something as complex as language, both to understand and to generate, would map to something that is essentially motor in design because, as you point out, I have to generate these sounds and I have to hear them generated from others. However, there's reading and there's writing, and writing is certainly motor, reading involves some motor commands of the eyes and et cetera. Where do reading and writing come into this picture? Are they in parallel with, as we would say in neuroscience, or are they embedded within the same structures? Are they part of the same series of computations? - Yeah, so to address the first part is that we've got this map of these different parts of consonants and vowels, and when we look at how they lay out in this part of the brain that we call Wernicke's area, we've spent a lot of time really just dissecting this millimeter by millimeter. The term that you used is very apropos. It's salt and pepper. It's not random. There is this kind of selectivity to these individual speech sounds. And one point I want to make about it is this, is that in English, for example, there are about 40 different phonemes. Phonemes are just consonants or vowels or individual speech segments. But these articulatory features that you refer to, for example, the characteristic sounds that are generated by specific movements in the mouth, you can more or less reduce that to about 12 different features. Okay, these are specific movements of the tongue, the jaw, the lips, the larynx. There are about 12 of these movements, and just like you said, Andrew, by themselves, they have no meaning. They're just movements. But what's incredible about it is that you take these 12 movements and you put them in combinations and you start putting them in sequence. We as humans use those 12 set features to generate all words. And because we can generate nearly an infinite number of words with that code of just 12 features, we have something that generates essentially all possible meaning because that's what we do as humans, we generate meanings, I'm trying to communicate one idea to another, which, to me, is extraordinary. A parallel would be, for example, DNA. There's four base pairs in DNA, but with those four base pairs in a specific sequence can generate an entire code for life. And speech is the same way. It's like you've got these fundamental elements that, by themselves, have no meaning, but when you put them together give rise to every possible meaning. So with regard to your second point about reading and writing, it's a fascinating question. Speech and language is part of who we are as humans. That's part of how we evolved, and it's hardwired and, you know, molded by experience. Reading and writing are a human invention. It's something that was added on to the architecture of the brain. And because reading and writing are fairly recent in human evolution, it's essentially too quick for anything to, like, have a dramatic change in, let's say, a new brain area or some kind of specialization. Instead, what happens is that whenever any kind of behavior becomes ultra specialized in any of us or any organism, we can sort of take some areas that are normally involved with vision, for example, and specialize it for the purpose of reading. So all of us have a part of our brain in the back of the temporal lobe that interfaces with the occipital visual cortex that we call a visual word form area. There's actually a part of the brain that is very sensitive to seeing words, like, either typed or handwritten. There's a part of the brain that also is sensitive to seeing things like faces. So these are things that are all conditioned on what's important, you know, to survive. So reading and writing are an invention, and there are things that have mapped to functions that the brain already has. And one of the really important things about reading and writing is that when we learn to read and write, especially with the reading part, it maps to the part of the brain that we've been talking about, which is the part that's processing speech sounds. So some of us kind of think about it, these are two different things. One is hearing sounds through your ears, the other is reading where you're actually seeing things through your eyes and then getting into the language system. Well, it turns out that the auditory speech cortex is the primal and primitive fundamental area that's really important for speech, and what happens with the reading is once it gets through that visual cortex, it's going to try to map those reading signals to the part of the brain that's trying to make sense of sounds, the sounds of words, what we call phonology. Now, why is this important? It has a lot of relevance to how we learn to write. And in some kids with dyslexia... Dyslexia is a neurological condition where a child, in some cases, an adult, has trouble reading, for example. And in many of those cases, it's because that mapping between how we see the words to the way that the brain processes the sounds is something different, it's a little bit different than people who can read really well. So when you're reading, a lot of times, you're actually activating the part of the brain that is processing the words that you hear. - What is the current treatment for dyslexia? I've heard that it's a deficit in some of the motion processing systems of the visual system. You know, people, their eyes are jumping as opposed to more linear reading across, or I suppose if it were Chinese it would be... You know, I don't want to presume people are always reading English. Or I suppose if it's Hebrew, they're going from the opposite side of the page. What can be done for dyslexia? And do any of the modern treatments for dyslexia involve changing things from the speech side as opposed to just the, quote, unquote, reading side, given that speech and reading are interconnected? - Yeah, absolutely. So, again, I think in the beginning, people might have thought this was purely a visual abstraction or something really just about the visual system, but there's been more recognition that it could be both or it could be either, depending on the particular instance. It's very clear that there are many kids with dyslexia where the problem is a problem of a phonological awareness. So, you know, it can be very hard to detect because they may understand the words that you were saying, but because the brain is so good at pattern recognition, sometimes even if the individual speech sounds are not crystal clear, it can compensate that, so that you can have an individual who can hear the words but not be able to essentially hear them when they're reading those same words. And so what can happen with that is that you can have this disconnection between what they're seeing and what they need in order to hear it as words and process it as language. And so skilled readers usually need that route first. They've got to map the vision to the sound in order to get that sort of like foundation. But then over time, the reading has its direct connection to the language parts of the brain, and we don't necessarily always need to map to sounds. You know, you can basically develop a parallel route, and we, as readers, actually use both all the time. So for example, if it's a new word that you've never seen before, sometimes you try to, like, pronounce it in your mind, you know, and try to hear what that word is. Even though you're not actually saying it, you're trying to just generate what those sounds might be like. And that's the part where we're kind of relying on how we learn to read in the first place, which is mapping those word images to the sounds that, you know, go along with them. But in other times, if you're a really proficient reader, you're just seeing the words and you can map them directly to meaning without having to go through that process. - Yeah, I'm a big fan of listening to audiobooks, and of course I also listen to podcasts quite a lot, but I also am a strong believer, based on the research that I've seen, that reading books, physical books, it could be on a Kindle, I suppose, but reading a physical book is useful for being able to articulate well and structure sentences and build what are essentially paragraphs, which is what I'm required to do when I do solo episodes of the podcast. I've noticed over the years as text messaging has become more popular and there's essentially an erosion of punctuation or the need to have complete sentences, and now that's sort of transferred to email as well. It's become acceptable to just say, you know, fragmented sentences in email. It seems likely that it's starting to impact the way that people speak as well. And I don't think this has anything to do with intelligence or education level, but are you aware of any evidence that how we read and what we read and whether or not we consume information purely through reading or mainly through auditory sources, does it change the way that we speak? Because, after all, Wernicke's and Broca's area and the other auditory and speech production areas are heavily intermeshed, and so it would make perfect sense to me that what we hear and the patterns of sound that are being communicated to us would also change the way that we speak. - Yeah, that's a really fascinating point. There is this idea that there's, like, this proper way to speak, like that there's the right way, for example, what are the appropriate, you know... Like, for example, in school, you're oftentimes told, like, "You should say it like this, not say it like that," you know? And every language kind of has that. It turns out that that's really unnatural. Languages, and speech in particular, change over time, it evolves, and it can happen very quickly. You know, the things that we call dialects, for example, are just different ways of speaking, and someone can just be in one environment and change from one dialect to another, and some people, it kind of is really fixed. And there is this idea that, you know, like in school that we're told that there's this right way, but in reality, that's not true. Like, language change and speech change is completely normal and happens all the time, and it can be really dramatic. Like, certain cultures and communities, if they are isolated, they can develop a whole new language, a whole new set of words, for example, and new ways and dialects that are independent from people to the point where it's unintelligible even to others. And so the basic idea is that sound change is part of the way it works, and the brain is very sensitive to those kind of changes. - Speaking of learning new languages, I'm assuming it's possible to learn new languages throughout the lifespan, correct? - [Eddie] Yeah. - I've also heard these kind of fantastical stories of somebody has a stroke and then suddenly, spontaneously, can speak French fluently, whereas prior to the stroke, they could not. Is there any merit to those stories whatsoever? [Eddie laughs] I find it very hard to believe that there was a complete map representation of a language in somebody's brain that they were completely unaware of, and then because of damage to a brain area, that capacity to speak that language was somehow unveiled. It just seems too wild, and I don't want to say good to be true because nobody wants a stroke, but it just seems out outrageously implausible. - Well, there are aspects of that that certainly are implausible. So I don't know of any true case that I've ever seen or experienced myself or even read about where, for example, there was an injury to the brain that resulted in loss of, well, essentially a gain of function, meaning, like, just all of a sudden started speaking another language. So for example, if you had a stroke and you never spoke French, and then you had it and then all of a sudden you're speaking, that, I've never heard of and never seen. However, there is a condition that is well acknowledged and I have seen one case of this called a foreign accent syndrome, which is peculiar because there are people who have an injury to the part of the brain where it sounds like they're starting to speak this other language, but they're not actually speaking the language, it just sounds like it. And this goes back to what we were talking about earlier about these areas that are really important for speech control of the vocal tract, this area in the precentral gyrus. People have documented where, you know, patients have had strokes there, and after that, it sounds like they're speaking Spanish as opposed to English or it sounds like they have the intonational properties of French or Russian as compared to their original native language. They're not learning all the rest of it, like the meaning and the grammar, et cetera, but they're adopting some of the phonology, and part of that is just because it's not working the way it normally does. So there is something actually called a foreign accent syndrome that people can have after a stroke. - Interesting. I'm curious about auditory memory. When I was a kid, I used to get into bed at night, and I'd close my eyes and I would replay conversations that I had heard during the day or people's voices. I actually can remember calling your house when we were young kids, and because I don't speak any Chinese but I'd have to ask for you, I'd say, I think it was, Eddie [speaking Chinese]. - Yeah. - Yeah, and then whoever answered the phone would go get you, and then I'd say [speaking Chinese], which I believe means thank you, right? That's the total of the Chinese that I speak, by the way, but I will never forget that. I'll just never forget it, I hope. I suppose if I have a stroke or something of that sort, at some point, I'll forget it and I won't know that I've forgotten it. But in all seriousness, I remember that to this day. I couldn't spell that out, I wouldn't know how, certainly not in Chinese, but even a transliteration, I couldn't do using English letters. Where are memories of sounds stored? Because within our days and across our lives, we have an infinite number of auditory experiences, just like we have an infinite number of visual experiences. Where are they stored, and what is the structure of their storage? What am I calling upon, besides, of course, the motor commands that are required to say what I just said in Chinese, which I won't repeat again, 'cause I somehow managed to get it right the first time, or at least not terribly wrong, then I don't want to botch it the second time. Where is that stored, and how does that work? And, more importantly, as I speak my native language, English, am I pulling from a memory bank? Because it doesn't feel like it. I'm just telling you what I want to say. I'm doing my best to communicate clearly and succinctly. I'm usually not so good at the succinct part. But where is the bank of information? On my keyboard on my computer, I have the letters, and I have certain elements of punctuation and the space. What am I pulling from? Am I pulling from those plosives? But if so, how can I do it so quickly? Even for people that speak slowly, it appears more or less fluid. This, to me, is overwhelmingly impressive that the brain can do that. How does it do that? - Well, first of all, I am impressed that 35 years later... [laughs] - Well, I had to get ahold of you. [laughs] - Yeah, so I am impressed, 35 years later, that you can still remember that. - But only that. - That's fine, but I'm still very impressed. But it clearly was something important to you. So the short answer is that memory is very distributed. So it's almost like the question that you asked me is ill posed 'cause you asked me where? Well, it's not one specific area. It's actually really distributed. It's not just one particular area. In fact, I'm fairly certain that if we were to injure that part of the brain called the Wernicke's area, you may still even have memories of that. People can have injuries of Broca's area or certainly the precentral gyrus and be able to sing "Happy Birthday," for example, when it's embedded in melody or highly rehearsed things like counting despite not being able to speak, which is incredible, right? It's like you can see a patient, for example, who can't really put together a sentence. You ask them, "How are you feeling today?" And they can't even utter a word. But then you ask them to count sometimes, and they'll get up to any number really. And so there are some things that are really built into our motor memory and it's distributed. It's not one particular part of the brain, it's actually multiple areas where that memory is distributed. And thank God that's the way it is because it's very rare in the kind of surgeries that I do where you go in, you remove a piece of the brain, that someone forgets these kind of long-term memories or these long-term motor skills that they have. That's very, very rare. It's the number one question a patient will ask me, like, "Am I going to be the same? And am I going to remember, you know, my wife? Or am I going to remember, you know, these thoughts of my birthday when I was 10 years old?" And I've never really seen that kind of severe amnesia unless it's a very, very severe injury that involves almost the entire brain, and thank God. So a lot of that information is really distributed across the entire brain. - Speaking of storage of and ability to speak, you are doing some amazing work and have achieved some pretty incredible, well-deserved recognition for your work in bringing language out of paralyzed people, essentially allowing people who are locked into a paralyzed state or otherwise unable to articulate speech using brain-machine interfaces, essentially translating the neural activity of areas of the brain that would produce speech into hardware, wires and things of that sort, artificial, non-biological tools in order to allow paralyzed people to communicate. We will provide a link to some of the popular press coverage of that work and the original papers. But if you would be so kind as to tell us what those experiments look like, who these people are who are locked in and that you allow to communicate, and then especially interesting to me, some of the directions that you're taking this now, which is beyond just, you know, people being able to think about what they want to say and words coming out on a screen or through a microphone, but actually making the interactions between these people and the real world more elaborate and more real. If that seems mysterious to people, I'm going to let Eddie tell you what they're doing with this rather than put any more detail on it. - Oh, okay. Well, thanks for asking about this. This has really been some of the exciting recent work from the lab. So for the last decade, we've really been focusing on the basic science, meaning trying to understand how the brain extracts and produces speech sounds and words. We've done a lot of work trying to figure out how these parts of the brain control these individual elements that give rise to all words and meanings. And so it was about six years ago where we realized we actually have a pretty good idea of how this code works. We had identified all of these different elements that we could decode in epilepsy patients, for example, when they had electrodes on the brain as part of their surgeries, we could decode all of the different consonants and vowels of English. That was about six years ago. So a natural question was this, which is if we understand that electrical code, can we use that to help someone who is paralyzed and can't get those signals out of the brain to speak normally? And that's in the setting of people who are paralyzed. So there are a series of conditions, they include things like brain stem stroke. The brain stem is the part of the brain that connects the cerebrum, which is the top part, does our thinking and a lot of the motor control, speech, language, everything, and the brain stem is what connects that to the spinal cord and the nerves that go out to the face and vocal tract. So if you have a stroke there, basically, you could be thinking all the wild, creative, intelligent thoughts you have in the mind and the cerebrum, but you can't get them out into words or you can't get them out to your hand to write them down. So that's a very severe form of paralysis called brain stem stroke. There's another kind of conditions that we call neurodegenerative where the nerve cells die basically, or atrophy, in a condition called ALS, and that's a very severe form of paralysis. In its extreme form, people essentially lose all voluntary movement. - So Stephen Hawking would be a good example of someone with ALS, Lou Gehrig's disease? - He's an example of someone who had ALS but not a great example of what typical course of ALS. So for reasons not clear, the progression of his disease largely stabilized to the point where he could twitch, you know, a cheek muscle or move his eyes, let's say. In most people, it's very rapid, and many people, they die from it, actually, you know, within a couple of years of diagnosis, so- - Yeah, he lived a long time in that- - He lived a long time- - That slanted-over state in his wheelchair. - Right, exactly. But he wasn't breathing, you know, through a tube in his throat, for example, because people with severe ALS, the muscles to their diaphragm and their lungs essentially give out as well. They get weakness there and then they can't breathe anymore. So that's another form of paralysis. And so in our field, these are kind of like the most devastating things that can happen. I'm not going to really try to compare, like, what's worse, you know, having a brain tumor or a stroke, it's all bad. But this condition of what we call being locked in refers to this idea that you can have completely intact cognition and awareness but have no way to express that, no voluntary movement, no ability to speak. And that is devastating because psychologically and socially, you know, you're completely isolated. That's what we call locked-in syndrome, and it's devastating. I've seen that throughout my career, and it's really heartbreaking because you know that the person is there but you can't see, they can't communicate. So we've been studying this patterning of electrical activity for consonants and vowels, and essentially, once we figured out a lot of these codes for the individual phonetic elements, we took a little bit of a detour, or at least part of the lab started to focus on this very specific question. For people who have these kind of paralysis, could we intercept those signals from the brain, the cerebral cortex, as someone is trying to say those words, and then can we intercept them and then have them taken out of the brain through wires to a computer that are going to interpret those signals and translate them into words? So about three years ago, we started a clinical trial. It's called the BRAVO trial. It's still underway. And the first participant in the BRAVO trial was a man who had been paralyzed for 15 years. When he was about 20 years old, he came to the United States, was actually working in the Sonoma area and he was in a car accident, and he actually walked out of the hospital day after that car accident, but the next day, had a complication related to it where he had a very large stroke in the brain stem, and that turned out to be devastating. He didn't wake up from that stroke for about a week. He was in a coma for about a week. And when he woke up from that coma, he realized that he couldn't speak or move his arms or legs. And as he told me or communicated to us, that was absolutely devastating. He wanted really to die at that time. - Could he blink his eyes or move his mouth in any way? - He could blink his eyes, he had some limited mouth movements but couldn't produce any intelligible speech. It was, like, completely slurred and incomprehensible. And he survived this injury. A lot of people who have that kind of stroke just don't survive. But he survived. And I also realized that he's just an incredible person, like a force of nature in terms of his optimism, in terms of his ability to make friends despite his condition. The way he actually communicates, because he has a little bit of residual neck movements, is that he improvised and had his friends basically put a stick attached to his baseball cap. And because he could move his neck, he would essentially type out letters on a keyboard screen to get out words. In fact, this is how he communicated was through a device that he would essentially peck out letters one by one by moving his neck to control this stick attached to his baseball cap. - How many years did he use that method of communication? - [Eddie] For about 15 years. He hadn't really spoken for about 15 years. - Oh, goodness. - Yeah. So it was a devastating injury. But, you know, there's something to be said about the human spirit, and if there's anyone who embodies it, it is Pancho, that's his nickname, the first participant in our trial. He has that human spirit, he persevered, and, in fact, you know, could thrive in his community, basically, and friends, being able to communicate in this very slow and inefficient way. Maybe part of that spirit is why he volunteered to be the first person in this trial. It was a clinical trial, an experiment. It was a study. This is not an approved therapy by any means. This was really something that had not been done before, and we had a lot of ideas about it, but we didn't know. You know, we had proven a lot of this could be true in some people who are normally speaking, but to actually put it into someone who's paralyzed, number one, where we don't know the code is the same. Number two is someone who's not been speaking for 15 years, whether those signals are actually still there or not. So it was part of a clinical trial. It was, you know, something that our hospital and also the FDA, you know, had to approve and looked at very carefully, but given a lot of the work that we had done, there was some basis for why this might work. And so about two and a half years ago, we did a surgery where we implanted electrodes onto the parts of the brain that we've been talking about, these areas that control the vocal tract, the areas that control the larynx, the areas that control the lips and tongue and jaw movements when we normally speak. These are areas that presumably may be active, that was our hope, in his brain, but he just couldn't get those out to control his mouth in a normal way. And he underwent a surgery, a brain surgery where we put an electrode array and we connected it to a port that was screwed to his skull. And the port actually goes through his scalp, and he's lived with this now for the last three years. It is a risk of infection. These ports eventually have to become wireless in the future. But we've figured out a way to keep that port there where we can essentially connect him to a computer through that port. So he has an electrode array that's implanted over the part of his brain that's important for speech, it's connected to a port, and then we connect a wire to that port that translates those what we call analog, you know, brainwaves and converts them into digital signals. And then a computer takes those digital signals from those individual sites from the speech cortex and translates those into words. - Can you describe for us the first time that Pancho spoke through this engineered device? What was that experience like for you? And, at least from what he conveyed to you, what was that experience like for him? Because as somebody who was essentially locked-in, except for this, you know, rather crude pecking device, although I'm thoroughly impressed by how adaptive or adaptable Pancho was, and his friends engineering that device for him is really nothing short of clever because otherwise he would be truly locked in, right? But what was that moment like? I can only imagine. - That moment was incredible. It was truly incredible to be able to see him try to get out a word that was, for all practical purposes, unintelligible, but to be able to take the brain activity and to translate it into text on a screen. And that's what we did. We took those brainwaves, we put them through a machine learning or artificial intelligence algorithm that can pick up these very, very subtle patterns, you can't actually see them with your eye, in the brain activity and translate those into words. And I remember seeing this happening for the first time. You know, it doesn't happen, like, immediately. This is something that took weeks to train the algorithm to interpret it correctly. But what was incredible about it was to see how he reacted. And he would be prompted to say a given word, like, you know, outside, for example, and then he would think about it, try to say it, and finally those words would appear on the screen. And what was really amazing about it was you could really tell that he, like, got a kick out of that because he would start to giggle, you know, his body would shake in a way and his head would shake in a way that he would start to giggle, and that was cool to see. But then I also realized that when he was giggling, it kind of screwed up the next word's decoding. [Andrew laughs] [Eddie laughs] - Is that a bug you've since fixed? - No, we haven't fixed that. - Interesting. - We haven't fixed that, so it's easier just to tell him to stop giggling. [Andrew laughs] [Eddie laughs] - So what was the first word that he said? - Well, I think one of the first sentences that he put together was, you know, can you get my family outside? - Meaning get them out of the room? [laughs] - [Eddie] No, no. - All these years, he wanted to get away from his family? - No, I think what he meant was, can you get them- - Bring them in, yeah. - Bring them in. And so the way this worked was we trained this computer to recognize 50 words. We started with a very small vocabulary that's expanding as we speak. I think that this is just a matter of time before these vocabularies become much, much larger. But we started with a 50-set of words. We created essentially all the possible sentences that you could generate from those 50 words. Why that was important was you can use all those possible sentences to create a computational model, computer model of all the different word combinations to give different sentences given those 50 words, and then you can essentially do what we call autocorrect. It's the same kind of thing that we do when you're texting, for example. You get the wrong letter in there, but your phone actually knows, you know, because of its context what to correct it. So because the decoding's not 100% correct all the time, in fact, it's far from that, it's really helpful to have these other features like autocorrect, the stuff that we use routinely now with texting that makes it correct and then updates it. So it's a combination of a lot of things. It's the AI that is translating those brain activity patterns, but it's also things that we've learned from speech and speech technologies that, you know, we put all together and then all of a sudden, it starts to work. And so we were really excited because that was the first time that someone was paralyzed and could create words and sentences that was just decoded from the brain activity. - Incredible, and I know you're very humble, but I'm going to embarrass you by saying I always knew you were destined for great things since the early age of nine when we first became friends. But when I read the news coverage of your work with Pancho and the release of this language from this locked-in patient, it literally, you know, it brought tears to my eyes because, you know, it's an interesting thing as fellow neuroscientists, right, we explore the brain and we try and find mechanisms, and we try and compare those to what other people find and find truths and principles and build up from those, but pretty rarely is there a case where that route of exploration leads to something of clinical significance within one's own lifetime. I mean, that's the reality of science, and oftentimes it's a very distributed process. But in this case, it's been a magnificent thing to see you move along this trajectory parsing these language and speech areas and then to also do the clinical work in parallel. Speaking of which, these days, we hear a lot about Neuralink, Elon Musk's company. A neurosurgeon that came up briefly through my lab, but I can't take any credit for what he knows or does, which is Matt MacDougall is the neurosurgeon at Neuralink. There's some other excellent neuroscientists there and engineers there. We hear a lot about Neuralink because while brain-machine interface of the sort that you do and that other laboratories do has been going on for a long time, there's been some press around Neuralink about the promise of what brain-machine interface could do. For instance, early in our discussion, you talked about how, you know, language is constrained by these sound waves, and typically, it's a few people communicating or one person with many people through a podcast, for instance, or a speech. But the idea has been thrown out there that through the use of stimulating chips or through other brain-machine devicing that perhaps one could internalize 50 conversations in parallel, right? 50X communication, or that the memory systems could be augmented to remember 10 times as much information or even twice as much information in a given period of time. My understanding of what they're doing at Neuralink, which is admittedly crude and from the outside, a few discussions with people there, is that they too are going to pursue clinical goals first, things like trying to generate smooth movement in a Parkinsonian patient, trying to adjust movement patterns in someone with Huntington's disease, for instance, things of that sort before they embark on the more sci-fi-like explorations of 50Xing communication or doubling memory capacity and these kinds of things. Although, I don't know, they may be doing all of those things in parallel. What are your thoughts about super capabilities of the brain or, I don't even know what word to use, you know, supercharging the brain, you know, giving the brain functions for which we've never observed before in human history, right? We have our Einsteins and our Feynmans and our Merzenichs and, you know, it's unclear who to put in along that line side by side, but there are some, the Michael Jordans and et cetera, but we've never heard of or seen somebody who can jump 20 feet in the air. Or we've heard of people who have photographic memories, but I don't know that we are aware of any human being in history who could memorize the entire Library of Congress or all the works within the Vatican within an hour. Anyway, you get the idea. What are your thoughts about manipulating neural circuitry to achieve suprahuman or superhuman or supraphysiological functions? Are we there, or should we even be thinking about that? Is it possible given that neurons simply communicate through electrical activity and electrical activity can be engineered outside of the brain? How do you think about it? And here, we don't even have to think about Neuralink in particular. It's just but one example of companies and people in laboratories that are quite understandably considering all this. - Well, it's a really interesting time right now. The science has been going on for decades. The work that we've done in this field that you call brain-machine interface has been going on for a while. And a lot of the early work was just trying to restore things like arm movement or having people or monkeys control a computer cursor, for example, on the screen. That's been going on for decades. What's been really new is that industry is now involved and some of this is now becoming commercialized, and we're starting to see us now cross over to this field where it's no longer just research, that we're talking about medical products that are designed to be, you know, surgically implanted in some cases. You know, there's people doing this kind of work non-invasively as well that don't require surgery. The specific question that you are asking about is an area that we call augmentation. So can you build a device that essentially enhances someone's ability beyond supranormal, super memory, super communication speeds beyond speech, for example, I guess superior precision athletic abilities? I think that these are very serious kind of questions to be asking now because, as you mentioned, the pathway so far is really to focus on these medical applications. I personally don't think that we've thought enough actually about what these kind of scenarios are going to look like, and I don't think we've thought through all the ethical implications of what this means for augmentation in particular. There's part of this that is not new at all. Humans throughout history have been doing things to augment our function, coffee, nicotine, all kinds of things, all kinds of medications that cross over from medical to consumer. That is everywhere. So the pursuit of augmentation or performance or enhancement is really not a new thing. The questions really, as they relate to neurotechnologies, for example, have to do with the invasive nature. For example, if these technologies require surgery, for example, to do something that is not for a medical application. Again, there, that is not exactly new territory either. People do that routinely for cosmetic kind of procedures for physical appearance, not necessarily cognitive. So I do think that, provided the technology continues to emerge the way that it does, that it's going to be around the corner, and it probably is not going to be in ways that are super obvious. I don't think it's going to be like, can we easily memorize every fact in the world, but in forms that are going to be much more incremental and maybe more subtle. In many ways, we already have that now. Like, for example, you don't have to have a neural interface embedded in your brain to get information, essentially access to all information in the world. You just have to have, you know, your iPhone. Whether you could do it faster through a brain interface, I definitely wouldn't rule that out. But think about this, that the systems that we have already to speak and to communicate have evolved over, you know, thousands and millions of years and they're supported by neural structures that have bandwidth of millions of neurons. There is no technology that exists right now that people are thinking about that are in commercial forms, certainly not even in research labs, that come anywhere close to what has been evolved for those natural purposes. So I'm essentially saying two sides of this, which is we're already getting into this now, this is not new territory, this topic of augmentation, both physical and cognitive, we've already surpassed that. That's part of what humans do in general. But we are entering this area of, like, enhanced cognition, these areas that I think the technology is going to be the rate-limiting step in how far it can go, and we have not had the full conversations about, number one, is this what we actually want? Is this going to be good for society? Who gets access to this technology? These are all things that are going to become real-world problems. - There's certainly a lot to consider. In thinking about augmentation and another theme that I've yet to ask you about but I'm extremely curious about, which is facial expressions. Before we talk about the relationship between the musculature of the face and language and the communication of emotion, I'd love for you to, if you would, touch on a little bit of what you're doing with patients like Pancho to move beyond somebody who's locked in being able to type out words on a screen with their thoughts. There's a rich array of information contained within the face and facial expression. And while somebody like Pancho going from having to, you know, be completely locked in to being able to peck out letters on a keyboard to being able to just think of those letters and having them spelled out, that's a tremendous set of leaps forward towards normalcy. It's still far and away different than Pancho speaking with his mouth, which I think, knowing some people who are restricted, who are quadriplegic, you know, a lot of what they struggle with in the real world is actually a height difference sometimes because they're seated while other people are standing. We don't often think about this, but to always have to look up to communicate with people is a very different interface in the world. They manage quite well, of course. But could you tell us what you're doing in terms of merging the brain-machine interface with extraction of speech signals from people who are locked-in like Pancho with facial expressions? - Sure, yeah. Well, like we described before, progress is being made. The proof of principle is out there that you can decode speech. That will continue to optimize, and I'm very confident that that's going to improve very, very quickly in the coming years to the point where it's like, you know, not just a small vocabulary, but a large vocabulary and at reasonable rates, at a level that's going to be really helpful. I'm very optimistic about that. I think it's the right time to start really thinking about a broader vision of what communication really is. So for example, I'm here with you in person. We could have done this virtually, probably, it's pretty easy to do that. We could've recorded this really separate, but there is something about being able to actually see your expressions and to understand other forms of communication. So another really important one is nonverbal, the expressions that you're making. You know, for example, if you have a quizzical look on your face if I'm saying something not clear, that's a sign to me that I need to rephrase it or to say it in a different way or to slow down, for example. Or if there's something that really excites you, I want to continue to say more about it and talk more in detail, you know, essentially about a given thing. So facial expressions actually are a really important part of the way we speak, and there's two things. It's not just the expressions of, like, how you're feeling and perceiving what I'm saying, but it's also seeing my mouth move and your eyes actually seeing my mouth move and my jaw move in a particular way that actually allows you to hear those sounds better. So having both the visual information but also the sounds go into your brain is going to improve intelligibility, also make it more natural. - And memory for what is spoken? - Perhaps. - So here's a call for people not just listening to podcasts but watching them and listening to them on YouTube, I suppose, if we were to sort of translate this to the real world. - Exactly, exactly. And the reason why we're also very interested in this idea of not just having text on a screen, but essentially a fully computer-animated face like an avatar of the person's speech movements and their facial expressions is going to be a more complete form of expression. Now, you can imagine right now, that might just be someone looking at a computer screen interpreting these signals, but I think the way things are going, in the next couple of years, a lot more of our social interactions, more than even now, are going to move into this digital virtual space. And, of course, most people are thinking about what that means for most consumers, but it also has really important implications for people who are disabled, right, and how are they going to participate in that. And so we are thinking really about, for people like Pancho and other people who are paralyzed, what other forms of BCI can we do in order to help improve their ability to communicate? So one is essentially building out more holistic avatars, you know, things that can essentially decode, you know, essentially their expressions or the movements associated with their mouth and jaw when they actually speak to improve that communication. - So do you envision a time not too long from now where instead of tweeting out something in text, my avatar will, I'll type it out, but my avatar will just say it, it'll be an image of my avatar saying whatever it is I happen to be tweeting at that moment. - That's what we're working on, yeah. So I don't think that... That is going to happen and it's going to happen soon, and there's a lot of progress in that. And, again, we're just trying to enrich the field, you know, of communication expression to make it more normal. And we actually think that having that kind of avatar is a way of getting feedback to people learning how to speak through a speech neuroprosthetic, that's the device that we call, it's a speech neuroprosthetic, that that is going to be the way that can help people learn how to do it the quickest. Not necessarily, like, trying to say words and having it come on a screen, but actually have people embody, feel like it's part of themselves or that they are directly controlling that illustration or animation. - This idea of an avatar speaking out what we would otherwise write is fascinating to me. On Instagram, I post videos, I don't filter them, but I know there's a lot of discussion nowadays about people using filters to make their skin look different or the lighting look different, a lot of filtering and also the use of captions, so that essentially what you end up with is somewhere between an actual raw video of what was spoken and an avatar version of it. - Yeah. - I mean, if the mismatch between what's spoken and what's in the caption is too dramatic, then it doesn't quite work. But I watch these carefully when people use captions, and oftentimes there's a smoothing of what was said into the captions so it seems much more succinct and accurate. Oftentimes, the reverse is also true where the caption is inaccurate and then it creates this kind of jarring mismatch. In any case, I think this aspect in the clinical realm of using an avatar to allow people like Pancho to essentially be a face that communicates through spoken language from an avatar that looks like them is fascinating and indeed important, and I think how avatars emerge in social spaces is going to be really fascinating. I get a lot of questions about stutter. I think that for people who have a stutter, it is itself anxiety-provoking. Is stutter related to anxiety? If one has a stutter, what can they do? Does stutter reflect some underlying neurologic phenomenon that might distinguish between one kind of stutter and another? What can people with stutter do if they'd like to relieve their stutter? - Yeah, great question. Stutter is a condition where the words can't come out fluently. So you have all the ideas, you've got the language intact. You know, remember, we talked about this distinction between language and speech. Stuttering is a problem of speech, right? So the ideas, the meanings, the grammar, it's all there, and people stutter but they can't get the words out fluently. So that's a speech condition, and, in particular, it's a condition that affects articulation, specifically about controlling the production of words in this really coordinated kind of movements that have to happen in the vocal tract to produce fluent speech. And stuttering is a condition where people have a predisposition to it, so there is an aspect of stuttering, you are a stutterer or you're not a stutterer, right? But people who stutter don't stutter all the time either, so you could be a stutterer who stutters at some times but not others. And, really, the main link between stuttering and anxiety is that anxiety can provoke it and make it worse. That's certainly true, but it's not necessarily caused by anxiety. It can essentially trigger it or make it worse, but it's not the cause of it, per se. So the cause of it is still really not clear, but it does have to do with these kind of brain functions that we've been talking about earlier, which is that in order to produce normal fluent speech, we're not even conscious of what is going on in our mouths, in our larynx. We're not conscious, and if we were, we would not be able to speak because it's too complex, it's too precise. It's something that we have really developed the abilities to do, and we do it naturally, right? It's part of our programming and part of what we learn inherently, you know, just through exposure. So stuttering is essentially a breakdown at certain times in that machinery being able to work in a really coordinated way. You can think about, you know, the operations of these areas that are controlling the vocal tract. Let's say speech is like a symphony. In order for it to come out normally, you've got to have not just one part, the larynx, but the lips, the jaw. They can't be doing their own thing. They have to be very, very precisely activated and very, very precisely controlled in a way to actually create words. And so in stuttering, there's a breakdown of that coordination. - If somebody has a stutter, is it better to address that early in life when there's still neuroplasticity that is very robust? And if so, what's the typical route for treatment? I have to imagine it's not brain surgery typically. I'm guessing there are speech therapists that people can talk to, and they can help them work out where they're getting stuck and the relationship to anxiety. - Yeah, exactly. I mean, part of it is about that anxiety, but a lot of it really has to do with therapy to sort of like work through and think of tricks basically sometimes to create conditions where you can actually get the words to come out. Some forms of stuttering are really initiation problems. Just getting started itself is very hard. You want to start with initial vowel or consonant, but it won't emit. And so a lot of the therapy is really just focusing on, like, how do you create the conditions, you know, for that to happen? There's another aspect to it that I find very interesting is that the feedback, essentially, what we hear ourselves say, for example, and every time that I say a word, I'm also hearing what I'm saying, so that's what we call auditory feedback. That turns out to be very important, and sometimes when you change that, it can actually change the amount someone stutters for better or for worse. And it's giving us a clue that the brain is not just focused on sending the commands out, but it's also possibly interacting with the part that is hearing the sounds, and there's something might be going on in that connection that breaks down when stuttering occurs. So there are individuals that are stutterers but they don't stutter all the time. In those instances, there's something happening in those particular moments where this very, very precise coordination needs to happen in the brain in order to get the words out fluently. - We've talked a little bit about caffeine and why you avoid it. Because your work requires such precision and calm, and, frankly, to me, it seems like you're running a lot of operations, no pun intended, in parallel when you're doing surgery, not just thinking about where to direct the instruments, but also thinking like a chess player several steps down the line what could happen, what if, if-then type thinking. What are some of the other practices and tools that you use to put yourself into state for optimal neurosurgery or for, you know, thinking about scientific problems for that matter? We keep threatening to go running together, but I know you run, correct? - Yeah. - Do you find running to be an essential part of your state regulation? - Absolutely, yeah. So for me, most exercise that I do, I really don't do for physical reasons. I do it for mental reasons. I can tell, for example, if I don't go on a run or a swim just after a day or two, and it can have translation, for example, in the way I feel in the operating room or even the way I interact with other people. So there's no question that, you know, the mind and body are deeply connected, and for me personally, being able to have opportunity to disconnect for a while, it turns out to be really, really important. Now, the operating room, for me, is another space, kind of like running or swimming, where I'm disconnected from the rest of the world. I don't bring my cell phone into the operating room. I'm disconnected from the external world for that time that I'm in the surgery, and all I am doing is just focusing. Now, that doesn't mean that I'm having complex thoughts or doing something very complicated. Sometimes it is like that, but it's not always like that. There are things that we do in surgery that are, like, routine and rote and are from muscle memory. So, for example, suturing skin or doing certain kinds of dissection or drilling part of the bone, for example, these are all things that become very rote after a time. So, for me, even being in the operating room actually can sometimes fulfill that purpose. So I really look forward to being in the operating room because that intense focus allows me to sort of disconnect from all the other things that I'm worrying about, you know, that are happening out in the outside world. You know, we all have those kind of things that happen, and I'm certainly no exception to that. But, strangely, the operating room, for me, is a sanctuary. I love being there because we have some control over the environment. I know what is there, I know the anatomy of the brain, my motions are going through routines. And so for me, that's not actually very different than going on a run and letting my, you know, legs move in specific ways. It's just the same thing for my hands. - Do you listen to music or audiobooks when you run, or are you divorced from technology when you run? - Well, music helps me, like, just stay motivated and distracted from being out of breath and other things. And for me, it's a way to just catch up with, like, the world. So sometimes I do, but I do notice that, like, I don't run as well, for example. In the operating room, it's a little different. You know, different surgeons have preferences. I'm more of the camp where I don't like any distraction whatsoever. I like people to be able to hear the words that I'm saying without having background noise. I don't really think about relying on music or other things to try to put me in a state of mind. You know, I think just being there alone and just, you know, trying to treat it the way it is, it's a sacred moment where someone's life is really directly under your hands, That enough kind of focuses me very quickly, and I like that. It really detaches me from a lot of the things that are preoccupying me, and for those couple of hours that we have a surgery, we're just focused on one thing only. - That's fantastic. Again, I think of, in the range of brain explorers, the neurosurgeons, those of your profession, are, to me, like the astronauts of neuroscience because they're really going to the farthest reaches possible, and they're testing and probing and really at the front edge of discovering from the species that we arguably care about the most, which is humans. Eddie, I have to say, from the first time we became friends 38 years ago... - Something like that. - Something like that. I'm almost reluctant to say, so I only reveal it in part that Eddie and I became friends because both he and I shared a love of birds, and we had a club at our school of which there were only two members, Eddie and I. - Small club. - Small club. There was one honorary member, and there were certain requirements for being in this club that we won't reveal. We took a pact of secrecy, and we're going to obey that pact of secrecy. But to be sitting here with you today, for me, is a absolute thrill, not just because we've been friends for that long or that we got reacquainted through literally the halls of medicine and science, but because I really do see what you're doing as really representing that front, absolute cutting edge of exploration and application. I mean, the story of Pancho is but one of your many patients that has derived tremendous benefit from your work. And now as the chair of a department, you, of course, work alongside individuals who are also doing incredible work in the spinal cord, et cetera. So on behalf of myself and everyone listening, I just really want to thank you for joining us today to share this information. We will certainly have you back because there's an entire list of other questions we didn't have time to get to, but also just for the work you do, it's truly spectacular. - Andrew, thanks so much. You know, I'm very humbled basically by what you just said, and I feel that it's really an extraordinary honor actually and privilege, you know, to be here with you and reconnect and talk about all these ideas. It's probably not random, you know, that we ended up in similar spots and interests. I think when we were kids, you know, it starts with some deep interests and kind of nerding out on topics, and it's probably not a coincidence, you know, that we have such deep interest in this work now. I just feel really lucky to be able to do what I do. It's fun every day, almost every day, be able to go to work and take care of folks and learn at the same time and then just close the loop, you know, how do we apply the knowledge that we learn one day to someone who comes in next week? It's really fun. And we don't know everything, we're not even close to it, but the journey to figure this out, it's really extraordinary. I mean, it's like you said, it's exploring new lands. Literally in the operating room when I'm looking at the exposed cortex trying to understand is it safe to walk down this part of the cortical landscape or this other trail? You know, which one is going to be the one that is going to be safe versus the other that results in paralysis and inability to talk? Well, maybe I shouldn't call it fun, but it's very important, too, in addition to being really intellectually important for how we understand how the brain works. And so, yeah, I feel just really lucky to be in that opportunity. - And we're lucky to have you being one of the people doing it, so thank you ever so much. - Thanks. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Eddie Chang. If you'd like to learn more about his research into the neuroscience of speech and language and bioengineering, his treatment of epilepsy and other aspects and diseases and disorders of the brain, please check out the links in our show note captions. We have links to his laboratory website, his clinical website, and other resources related to his critical research as well. If you're learning from and are enjoying the Huberman Lab podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the information we've covered or suggestions about future guests, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous Supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that the Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman, and there, you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast. I should just mention that that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. That premium channel will feature monthly AMAs, or Ask Me Anythings, where I answer your questions in depth, as well as other premium resources. If you'd like to subscribe to the premium channel, you can simply go to hubermanlab.com/premium. I should mention that the proceeds from the premium channel go to support the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which will continue to be released every Monday per usual, as well as supporting various research projects done on humans to create the sorts of tools for mental health, physical health, and performance that you hear about on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab.com/premium to subscribe. It's $10 a month or $100 per year. If you haven't already subscribed to our zero-cost newsletter, we have what is called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on Newsletter. Those newsletters include summaries of podcast episodes, lists of tools from the Huberman Lab podcast. And if you'd like to see previous newsletters we've released, you can also just go to hubermanlab.com, click on Newsletter in the menu, and you'll see various downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, we just ask for your email, we do not share your email with anybody, and, again, it's completely zero-cost. If you're not already following me on social media, it's hubermanlab on Twitter, on Facebook, and on Instagram, and at all three of those places, I cover topics and subject matter that are sometimes overlapping with the information covered on the Huberman Lab podcast but that's often distinct from information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab on all social media channels. Thank you once again for joining me today for the discussion about the neuroscience of speech, language, epilepsy, and much more with Dr. Eddie Chang. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 251 ---
Video ID: q1Ss8sTbFBY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q1Ss8sTbFBY
Title: Fitness Toolkit: Protocol & Tools to Optimize Physical Health | Huberman Lab Podcast #94
Published: 2022-10-17 12:00:37 UTC
Description:
I describe a fitness protocol that maximizes all the major sought-after aspects of physical fitness, including strength, endurance and flexibility. I discuss fundamentals of resistance training protocols, including repetitions, sets, inter-set and inter-workout rest periods and periodization of intensity and volume to improve strength and hypertrophy. I also explain how to integrate this with endurance training across the week by controlling the duration, timing and intensity of cardiovascular workouts. I also cover science-based protocols on leveraging the mind-body connection, deliberate breathing (during and after exercise), stretching, deliberate heat and cold exposure, and non-sleep deep rest (NSDR) for better workout performance and faster recovery. Further, I tackle a range of real-world issues that can affect a consistent training schedule, such as whether you should train if you are sick, have had a poor night of sleep or had a stressful event and how to start training again after a break and whether you should train in a fasted or fed state. Physical fitness is a key variable for immediate and long-term health. This episode provides a modifiable “foundational” template that can be adjusted based on your current fitness level, goals, time constraints, and access to different types of equipment. 

#HubermanLab #Fitness #Exercise

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
A potent physiological method to magnify and sustain soleus oxidative metabolism improves glucose and lipid regulation: https://bit.ly/3yKcinr
Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy with Concurrent Exercise Training: Contrary Evidence for an Interference Effect: https://bit.ly/3VquEDL

Books
Relax into Stretch: Instant Flexibility Through Mastering Muscle Tension: https://amzn.to/2D22cR9

Other Resources
Dr. Andy Galpin: How to Build Strength, Muscle Size & Endurance: https://bit.ly/3D2ifP5
Jeff Cavaliere: Optimize Your Exercise Program with Science-Based Tools: https://bit.ly/3ELv0Pe
Dr. Peter Attia: Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones for Vitality & Longevity: https://bit.ly/3ggkB3K
ATHLEAN-X: https://athleanx.com
ATHLEAN-X Neck Training: https://youtu.be/wjiZaCJ6tCA
Anna Skips: https://www.instagram.com/anna.skips
10-minute Non-Sleep Deep Rest Protocol: https://youtu.be/AKGrmY8OSHM

Timestamps
00:00:00 Foundational Protocol for Fitness
00:03:35 Huberman Lab Premium
00:04:35 Tool: Soleus (Calf) Push-Ups, Glucose Utilization & Metabolism
00:14:42 InsideTracker, ROKA, Helix Sleep, Momentous Supplements
00:18:53 Core Principles of Fitness & Modifiable Variables
00:23:37 Day 1: Long Endurance Workout
00:34:38 Day 2: Leg Resistance Training, Strength & Hypertrophy
00:38:09 Key Principles of Resistance Training
00:49:57 Day 3: Heat & Cold Exposure, Recovery
00:59:22 Day 4: Torso & Neck Resistance Training
01:08:40 Day 5: Moderate Intensity Cardiovascular Training, Running Alternatives
01:15:28 Day 6: High-Intensity Interval Training, Maximum Heart Rate
01:22:56 Day 7: Arms, Neck & Calves Resistance Training
01:27:30 Flexibility of Foundational Protocol, Workout Spacing
01:31:49 Tool: Mind-Muscle Contraction, Physiological Sighs 
01:35:57 Safety & Endurance/Cardiovascular Workouts
01:37:18 Tool: Stress or Poor Sleep & Workouts, Recovery & NSDR
01:40:04 Should You Train Fasted or Fed?
01:42:43 Tool: Static Stretching & Flexibility, Irradiation & Resistance Training
01:47:56 Tool: Hanging from a Bar & Fitness Metric 
01:49:02 Should You Train Sick?, Ramping Training
01:52:19 Tool: Deliberate Slow Breathing & Recovery
01:53:47 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Huberman Lab Premium, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing fitness. Fitness, of course, is vitally important for cardiovascular health, for strength, for endurance, for lifespan, for healthspan. I can't think of anyone out there that wouldn't want to have healthy hormonal function, healthy cardiovascular function, to live a long time and to feel vital, that is to have a long healthspan as well as a long lifespan. Fitness and fitness protocols are tremendously powerful for developing all of that. However, despite there being an enormous amount of information out there on the internet and in books and elsewhere, it can be a bit overwhelming. So today's episode is really designed to synthesize science based tools that we've covered on the podcast, some with expert guests like Dr. Andy Galpin or Dr. Peter Attia, or world renowned Movement specialist Ido Portal, or physiotherapist and strength and conditioning coach, Jeff Cavaliere. We've had all of them as guests on the podcast, and each and every one of them provided a wealth of knowledge in terms of the various things that you can do to optimize very specific or multiple aspects of fitness. Today, we're going to do something a little bit different than usual. Typically on the Huberman Lab podcast, I offer mechanism upfront or first, and then we talk about protocols that you can use that really lean on those science and science based mechanisms. Today I'm going to describe a specific protocol that serves as a general template that anyone, in fact, everyone can use in order to maximize all aspects of fitness. So that includes endurance, strength, flexibility, hypertrophy, aesthetic changes, et cetera. However, this general framework can also be modified, that is customized to your particular needs. So if you're somebody who really wants to build more strength or bigger muscles, you can change the protocol and the overall program according to that. And I'll talk about very specific ways to do that. Or if you're somebody who really just wants to maintain strength, but you want to build endurance, we'll talk about that. And of course, we will cover real life issues, such as should you train if you are sleep deprived, what about food? When should you eat? What if you haven't eaten and you're hungry? Should you still train? Et cetera, et cetera. We're going to cover all of that, again, in the context of this, what I would call foundational template of fitness. Now, this foundational template of fitness is something that I personally use. In fact, I've used it for over three decades, hard to believe that I'm that old, but I just recently turned 47, and I still use this basic protocol or template across the week and modify it according to what my particular goals are that year, that month, even that day, because I, like you, live in the real world and sometimes I've been traveling or I miss a workout, yes, it does happen, or life isn't organized in exactly the way that I need to in order to have everything go according to the protocol that's on paper. So we're going to discuss real world issues and how to work with the real world issues in order to get the most out of your fitness program. And again, by the end of today's program, I can assure you, you will have a template protocol that you can build up from, build out, change and modify, and that will really serve your fitness goals according to the science and what peer-reviewed studies and the experts that appeared on this podcast and other podcasts really tell us is best and optimal for our fitness. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. I want to be very clear that the Huberman Lab podcast will continue to be released every Monday at zero cost to consumer, and there will be no change in the format of these podcasts. The premium channel is a response to the many questions we get about specific topics, and it will allow me to really drill deep into specific answers related to those topics. So once a month, I'm going to host and ask me anything, so-called AMA, where you can ask me anything about specific topics covered on the Huberman Lab podcast and I will answer those questions. Those of course will be recorded. They will also be other premium content available to premium subscribers such as transcripts and short videos of new tools and unique tools for mental health, physical health and performance. If you want to check out the premium channel, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium. There is a $10 a month charge or $100 per year, and I should mention that a large portion of the proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium Channel will go to support scientific research that develops the very sorts of tools that we talk about on the Huberman Lab podcast. The rest of the support for the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel will go to supporting the regular Huberman Lab podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Before we dive into today's content about fitness and fitness protocols, I want to tell you about a brand new study that is very exciting and frankly very unusual. This is a study that was published out of the University of Houston, examining what I would call a micro exercise or a micro movement. It's a very small movement of a very small portion of your body, in fact, just 1% of your musculature, that when it's performed continuously while seated has, at least what they report, are very dramatic positive changes in terms of blood sugar utilization and metabolism. So the title of this study is "A potent physiological method to magnify and sustain soleus oxidative metabolism improves glucose and lipid regulation." This study was published in iScience, and as I mentioned earlier, it is getting a lot of attention and it's very unusual. Without going into all the details of this study, let me just briefly give you a little bit of the background. First of all, you have a muscle called the soleus. The soleus muscle is a more or less wide flat muscle that sits beneath what most people think of as their calf, although it's part of the calf muscle. The other portion of the calf is called the gastrocnemius. The soleus sits below that. Now, the soleus muscle is a unique muscle because it's largely slow twitch muscle fibers. It's designed to be used continuously over and over again for stabilizing your body when you're standing upright, for walking. This is a muscle that's designed to contract over and over and over again. In fact, you could walk all day on this muscle and most likely it would not get sore. You probably done that and it did not get sore. In contrast, a muscle like your bicep or your tricep, if I were to have you perform hundreds or thousands of repetitions, even with a very lightweight one pound weight or a two pound weight, eventually it would fatigue. You would feel a sort of a burn there. It's a very unusual set of muscles to use repeatedly. But the soleus is an unusual muscle in that it really is designed to be used continuously. Now, this study was focused on how people who sit a lot of the day and don't have the opportunity for a lot of physical movement or maybe who don't even exercise at all can improve their metabolism and glucose utilization. Without going into a deep dive about glucose utilization, because we've done the deep dive on this podcast, episodes such as metabolism, et cetera, you can look those up at hubermanlab.com. They're all timestamped and available there. Anytime you eat, your blood sugar goes up to some extent. So your blood glucose, as it's called, goes up to some extent. And then insulin is a hormone that's used to essentially chaperone and sequester and use that blood glucose or it's basically the idea is you don't want blood glucose to go too high. Hyperinsulinemia is something associated with blood glucose that's too high because insulin goes up to essentially match the level of blood glucose. You don't also don't want to be hypoglycemic, you don't want to have blood sugar that's too low, and insulin is involved in both regulating peaks and troughs in blood sugar, blood glucose. So we can basically say, and this is very simple, but we can basically say that you don't want blood glucose to be elevated too much or for too long. That's not good. In fact, people who have diabetes because they don't make insulin, people who have type 1 diabetes do not make insulin at all, their blood glucose is so high that they actually have to take insulin in order to regulate otherwise their blood glucose can go so high that it can damage cells and damage organs. It can even kill people. People who have type 2 diabetes are so called insulin insensitive. They make insulin, but the receptors to insulin are not sensitive to it, and so they make more insulin than normally would be made and blood glucose isn't regulated properly, et cetera, et cetera. The take home message about blood glucose is that you want your blood glucose levels to go up when you eat, but not too high and you don't want them to stay elevated for too long. This study looked at how people who are largely sedentary or at least sitting can increase the utilization, the clearance of glucose from the bloodstream after eating, and they also looked at overall metabolism. For people, get this, that were using just that 1% of muscle, the soleus, by doing what they call a soleus pushup. So the soleus pushup can be described very simply as if you're sitting down with your knee bent at approximately right angle, like a square corner, and pushing up, or I should say lifting your heel while pushing down on your toe and contracting the calf muscle as it were, and then lowering the heel and then in lifting that heel again, lowering the heel, lifting the heel again, each one of those is what they call a soleus pushup. This study had people continuously do soleus pushups and they looked at things like blood glucose utilization, they looked at metabolism and so on. Now, a couple of important things about this study before I tell you what they discovered, which was frankly pretty miraculous, almost hard to believe, and yet I believe the data looked to be collected quite well, and there are a lot of statistics and the study looks to be quite thorough. First of all, they used an equal number of male and female subjects. There were a wide range of body mass indices, okay? So this wasn't just super fit people or people that were purely sedentary and not fit. They used a wide variety of ages, time of day, people who tended to walk a lot or not walk a lot. They measured changes in metabolism and blood glucose utilization and people that had done these soleus pushups while seated in the laboratory, and I must say, they had them do these soleus pushups for quite a long while, continuously. So they had them do it for as long as 270 minutes total throughout the day. So if you divide that, that's four and a half hours, you might say, well, four and a half hours of lifting the heel and putting the heel down, lifting the heel, putting the heel down, that's a lot. But they didn't always do it continuously. They had some breaks in there. So this is the sort of thing that you could imagine you or other people could do while seated, while doing Zooms or while on calls or maybe even while eating, doing that sort of thing. Although I'm not suggesting that you constantly be focusing on soleus pushups throughout your life. The point is that people who did these soleus pushups experienced dramatic improvements in blood sugar regulation and in metabolism despite the fact that the soleus is just 1% of the total musculature. So here I'm going to read from the abstract about what they found, people who did these soleus pushups, despite being a tiny muscle and using very little local energy... In fact, they measured muscle glycogen, the burn or essentially the utilization of fuel within the muscle, and there was very little utilization of fuel within the soleus itself, and that's because the soleus has this unique property of needing to basically keep you going all day, walking all day or moving all day. What they saw was a large magnitude, for example, 52% less postprandial, that's after a meal, glucose excursion, So 52% less increase in blood glucose and 60%, six zero less hyper insulinemia, so reduced levels of insulin. They also, miraculously, observed that despite this being, again, a small muscle, 1% of the total muscle mass, so very small oxidative use, they saw big improvements in systemic metabolic regulation. So this is interesting and I think something that we should at least know about. I'm not aware that anyone's replicated this study yet. I know there's a ton of excitement about this study in the popular press, and if the data turn out to hold up, which I like to imagine they will, I can understand why there's so much excitement. What this means is that if you're somebody who cares about blood glucose regulation, you want to keep your metabolism running, please don't stop exercising, the other ways that you exercise. But if you're somebody who wants to maximize your health, doing these soleus pushups fairly continuously while seated is going to be beneficial. And in addition to that, I know that there are going to be people out there who, for instance, might be injured or you're traveling and you're stuck on a plane or you're in the classroom and you're forced to study all day or take notes all day. You're just not getting enough opportunity to get those steps that you want to take, whether or that's 10,000 or fewer or more, getting enough steps or movement. Maybe you don't have time to get out and do your run, or maybe you're also running, weightlifting and doing yoga classes and things of that sort, but you want to further improve your fitness, at least in terms of your metabolic health. This seems like a terrific, very low investment way to do it. Certainly zero cost. It does take a little bit of attention, so you have to divert your attention from other things you're doing to make sure that you're still doing these soleus pushups. I'm sure that many of you are going to have a lot of detailed questions such as how high did they lift the heel and did they contract the muscle very hard or not? Couple of things about that, they did not have subjects really contract the muscle hard. They did measure the angle of heel raise and it was anywhere from 10 to 15 degrees so they didn't have to go way, way up on their tippy toes or things of that sort. In any event, 270 minutes, four and a half hours of doing these soleus pushups is a lot, but by my read of the data and the rather significant, or I should say very significant effects that they observed on blood glucose regulation and metabolism, et cetera, seems to me that doing less would still be beneficial and that you don't necessarily have to do the full 270 minutes in order to get the benefits that they observed. More about the study includes the fact that the benefits they observed were very long lasting, as long as two hours after a meal, they could still see this improved blood glucose utilization. I don't know because I wasn't able to find it in the methods whether or not they were doing the soleus pushups while they were consuming blood sugar in this study. The point being that if you're somebody who cares about their fitness, this study is interesting, because what it means is that, again, if you are forced to be immobile or sitting longer than you would like, if you're stuck in a meeting or Zooms or class or on a plane, et cetera, or if you're simply trying to add a bit more fitness and metabolic health to your overall regimen, soleus pushups, at least to me, seem like a very low investment, simple, zero cost tool to improve your metabolic health. For those of you that want to peruse the study in more detail, we will provide a link to this paper published in iScience in the show note caption. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals. Now, I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about hormones, blood lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes understanding all of that very easy and even better points to specific directives, that is things you can do in terms of your lifestyle, your nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, in order to bring those numbers related to metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera, into the ranges that are optimal for you, your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly. ROKA understands this and has designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses to be worn in any number of different conditions and for you to still be able to see with crystal clarity. Now, I wear eyeglasses at night, when I work or when I drive, and I wear sunglasses during the day. I don't wear sunglasses when I get my morning sunlight viewing, a practice that I'm absolutely religious about every single morning, but throughout the day, I'll wear sunglasses when I drive or if I'm heading into bright sunlight to protect my eyes. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are terrific because they were designed for performance, so they were designed for things like cycling and running, so they won't slip off your face if they get sweaty. They're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time I can't even remember that they're on my face, they're so lightweight. However, they also can be worn anywhere, to work, to dinner, et cetera. They have a terrific aesthetics. Unlike a lot of other performance eyeglasses out there that you can only find in designs that really make people look like a cyborg. ROKA makes the cyborg versions, some people like those, but they also make versions of their eyeglasses and sunglasses with frames that you can wear out to dinner, to work, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to roka.com. That's R-O-K-A .com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your unique sleep needs. Now, sleep is the fundamental layer that is the most important aspect of mental health, physical health and performance. I've said that before on this podcast, and I'm going to be saying it over and over again. If you're sleeping well, everything else is better, and if you're not sleeping well, everything else gets far worse. So sleep is vital, and sleeping on the correct mattress is absolutely vital. Helix understands this, and they have a brief quiz that you can take. So you simply go to their website, you take this quiz, ask you questions such as you tend to run hot or cold during the night, you tend to sleep on your back, your side or your stomach, or maybe you don't know, and they match you to a mattress that's ideal for your particular sleep needs. For me, that was the Dusk mattress, D-U-S-K. I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress for well over a year now, and it's the best sleep I've ever had. If you like to try Helix Mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take that brief two minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for your sleep needs. You'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. The Huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live Momentous spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman, and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about fitness and let's talk about how you can develop the optimal fitness protocols for you. So that includes what to do each day of the week and your fitness protocol across the week, and indeed across the month and the year and even year to year. When we had Dr. Andy Galpin on the podcast, he said something very important that we want to keep in mind today, which is concepts are few, methods are many, that is there are an infinite number of different programs and exercises and set and rep schemes and different runs and burpees and pushups, et cetera, et cetera that one can follow. However, there are really just a few basic concepts or principles of muscle physiology, of cardiovascular function, of connective tissue function that provide or set the basis for the adaptations that we call fitness or that lead to fitness. So I'm going to list those off now. We can talk about a fitness protocol that's really aimed mainly toward developing skill. That's one. Or speed. That's another. Or power, which is speed times strength, or specifically strength, or hypertrophy, growth of muscles, or endurance such as muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is, for instance, your ability to stay in a plank position or to do a wall sit, to sit on an invisible chair against a wall, or other forms of endurance like near pure anaerobic endurance. So a one minute sprint or less or a one minute all out cycling on stationary bike, this sort of thing, or endurance that occurs in the kind of 3 to 12 minute total duration range. So that might be sprints or high intensity interval type training. It could be an all out swim, it could be all out row. That's another form of endurance, taps into different fuel systems, different aspects of muscle physiology, et cetera. And then endurance that lasts 30 minutes or more, which is typically what people think about when they think about endurance. But of course, the other forms of endurance matter. So we've got skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, muscular endurance, anaerobic endurance, what I would call 3 to 12 minute endurance, although it goes by other names as well, and 30 minutes or more endurance type exercise and adaptations. Each and every one of these requires different principles, different concepts in order to improve, say your muscular strength or your hypertrophy or both. However, there's a general theme that sits beneath all adaptations leading to fitness, and that's what we're really going to set down as the base layer, the foundation of everything we talk about today. And that's that we need to think about what are the modifiable variables? Again, I'm borrowing directly from the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. He was the one that said, modifiable variables are the key thing to think about. What are you going to modify? What are you going to change in order to increase one or some of the various things I listed off before, skill, speed, power, strength, hypertrophy, endurance, et cetera, et cetera. And some of the key concepts that emerge from that discussion are that we need to think about progressive overload. Normally when people hear about progressive overload, they think about adding more weight to a bar or picking up heavier dumbbells, but that could also be progressive overload in the context of running up a hill of steeper incline or running a little bit faster or a little bit further and so on and so forth. Now, as I promised earlier, today we are not going to drill into each and every one of the mechanisms that underlie the different adaptations that are going to develop speed and strength and endurance, et cetera, because that was covered in the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin and the other podcast with experts that I mentioned earlier. And we again, will provide links to those podcasts if you want to drill into those mechanisms. Instead, what we are going to do is we're going to start with a program that essentially is designed for you to maximize all aspects of fitness to the extent that you can simultaneously maximize all aspects of fitness, but then to change or modify that protocol so that if you want to build up more, for instance, strength and you want to just hold onto the endurance you have, you don't want to build endurance, at least not in that week or that month, you can do that. Or if you want to improve your endurance while maintaining your strength, you can do that. And so on and so forth. Most people, I do believe, would like a combination of strength and endurance and flexibility and maybe even hypertrophy, particularly for certain muscle groups that maybe are not as well developed as other muscle groups. They want to bring balance to their physique, both for sake of aesthetics and for sake of health and for sake of general functioning, to maybe even to eliminate pain, the protocol that I'm going to describe really works as a foundational template for that as well. So let's drill into that foundational protocol and I'll keep referring to it as the foundational protocol, not because it's the one that I use, although it is the one that I use, and not because it's the one that we're talking about today, although it's the one we're talking about today, but because we need some general framework from which to build out the more specific protocols that we'll get into in a bit more detail later. So in this foundational protocol for fitness, what you'll notice is that on any one given day, you're going to focus on one particular aspect of fitness. Maybe it's endurance, maybe it's strength, maybe it's hypertrophy, in particular, it might be hypertrophy for a particular muscle group or muscle groups. That said, across the entire week, it's designed to bring fitness and different forms of fitness to all aspects of your body. So this particular protocol begins on Sunday, although that's simply the day that I happen to begin the protocol. And again, this protocol is not important because it's the one that I follow. I follow it because it is important. In other words, it's a protocol that's really gleaned from the scientific literature and the experts, that is for you. So this fitness protocol is really about you. I just may refer to it as the one that I follow simply for ease of communication. And for me, my week begins on Sunday. So I do my very best to get a workout in on Sunday. And for me, that workout is that of a endurance workout. It's designed to either maintain or increase my endurance, and the endurance type that I'm referring to is endurance of 30 minutes or more. In fact, for me, the goal is always to get either 60 to 75 minutes of jogging. So this would be so-called zone two cardio, people probably have heard of zone two cardio, but if you haven't, that's okay. Zone two cardio is something that you could measure with a heart rate monitor or other device, but you don't need to. Zone two cardio is the kind of cardiovascular exercise in which you're pushing yourself to move such that you're breathing faster than normal, your heart is beating faster than normal, however, you are still able to sustain a conversation. But if you were to push yourself any harder, that is move faster or go up a steeper incline at the same rate you happen to be at any one moment, you would lose that ability to speak, you wouldn't be able to complete sentences, you would be out of breath or you'd have to pause mid-sentence. Now, it's near impossible, even with a heart rate monitor, to stay exactly in zone two unless you're very, very skilled at that. So I don't obsess over that, and in fact I don't wear a heart rate monitor when I do this exercise, but for me, the goal is to head out on Sunday and get 60 to 75 minutes of jogging in zone two. Now of course I like to jog, but that doesn't mean that you have to jog. You could replace jogging with rowing on a rowing machine or maybe even rowing an actual boat if you have access to that or cycling or swimming, something that allows you continuous movement for 60 to 75 minutes at that zone two threshold we talked about earlier. For me, that can include some hills, and when I say hills, they could be very steep hills, but I simply slow my pace down in order to stay in that roughly zone two range. Or it could be that they are more low grade hills and I might just slow down a little bit or I might even push myself a tiny bit that day. But really I'm just trying to build that long endurance. I'm trying to build up my capacity or maintain my capacity to go a long distance without fatiguing. Now some days, meaning some Sundays, since I tend to do this almost always on Sunday, although there are exceptions, instead of doing the 60 to 75 minute jog, what I'll do is I will head out for a long hike that could be two and a half hours or three hours or maybe even a four or five hour hike. Sometimes it's very long. And I'll do that sometimes simply to mix up the routine, because sometimes jogging and jogging the same routes gets boring to me. I do enjoy running, that's something I've been doing for a very long time, but sometimes it just gets a little bit tedious and I want to do something different. Also, sometimes I want to be social on Sundays. I want to head out on a hike with my partner or I want to meet up with friends and hike with them. And so taking a long hike on Sunday is something that also could be quite social. And then I don't have to worry about also getting in my workout when I'm heading out on a hike with my partner or going out to meet with friends or things of that sort. I will say that there's a specific tool or a specific change that you can make to this Sunday long endurance, or at least what I consider long for me, I mean it's by no means a marathon or an Ironman, but this long endurance training, and that's the use of a weight vest. So something that I've really started utilizing more recently, and by more recently, I really mean within the last year or so, is I purchased one of these weight vests that can be anywhere from 10 to 50 pounds. What I use in the weight vest is irrelevant. But it certainly changes the level of effort required when taking a hike or even a walk. Now there's an additional benefit of the weight vest, which is that if you are going out for a hike or even for a walk for social reasons and you're with somebody that's not quite at the same fitness level that you are, frankly it's a little bit rude to just keep walking ahead of them and running back or running ahead and running back. Oftentimes you really want to spend time with the person and you don't want them to feel as if they're holding you up. And so the weight vest is a terrific way to get some additional work, then, as you'll find if you wear a weight vest, it is additional work on, say, a shorter hike. So maybe the person you're with only has time for an hour long hike, or maybe they just don't have the fitness to do a two hour, three hour hike. So I'll throw on the weight vest and I'll head out for a walk with them or a hike with them, or sometimes I'll go out on a long hike with a weight vest myself. So again, the point of this, for me, Sunday, although it could fall on any day for you, workout, is really to build up that long form endurance. And this fits well with what Dr. Andy Galpin and Dr. Peter Attia referred to as the real need to get in some long endurance type work at some point or even multiple points throughout the week. For me, this long Sunday jog of 60 to 75 minutes or long Sunday hike or weighted walk or weighted hike really accomplishes that goal. Sometimes leads to a little bit of soreness, particularly in my calves or if I'm wearing the weight vest, sometimes my midsection will get sore because I'm trying to remain upright. So I think it also builds up some muscular endurance, not just cardiovascular endurance, but again, throughout the entire time that I'm jogging or hiking, what I'm trying to get to is a place where I can feel that my pulse rate is definitely elevated, but it's not so elevated that I have to stop because I'm out of breath. And because I know some people out there might be really neurotic about this sort of thing, if you have to stop because you're out of breath, that doesn't mean that you blew the workout, that you now aren't getting endurance. Of course, you're getting benefits from it. So I'm not absolutely neurotic about always staying exactly in that heart rate zone. I might stop and have a conversation for a moment if it's a longer hike, although I really try and keep moving and I try and push myself just a little bit further than where I'm exceedingly comfortable. And so for me, doing this long Sunday hike or jog really provides a foundation, a base for endurance that then the other endurance workouts that I'll describe later, that take place later in the week, can build on. Now, as I mentioned earlier, we will get back to the mechanisms that this taps into and why this is so useful. There are multiple benefits to doing these kinds of endurance type workouts in zone two cardio. But by putting it at the start of my week, again, my week starts on Sunday, I'm sure that regardless of how the rest of the week goes, that I got my endurance training in, and of course I'm going to want to, and I will do endurance training other days during the week, but if something comes up or I happen to get sick or I'm really behind in terms of work and I can't get other workouts in, this Sunday long jog or hike really provides that fundamental, I can honestly say foundation, for cardiovascular fitness and endurance that I can hang my hat on and say, okay, I've got that one in the bag, and I can then look to other days of the week to focus on other aspects of fitness. Now, a really important point to make about this Sunday endurance workout is that allows you to check off a box and that box is 75 or so minutes of zone two cardio, because as you may have heard, either in this podcast or from others out there like Dr. Peter Attia, getting 180 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week has enormous positive effects on longevity and enormous positive effects on general health, again, in terms of cardiovascular function, but also metabolic fuel utilization, also in terms of your musculature and your ability to use your body over long distances for long periods of time. So while it doesn't complete all 180 to 200 minutes per week, it certainly gets you a good distance, pun intended, toward that goal. Now, I want to acknowledge that some people might be starting a fitness program, and so 60 to 75 minutes of jogging might be too long or a three hour weight vested hike, or some people might even do what's called a ruck, like you wear a rucksack, that might be too much, in which case certainly start with less and go on flat ground and go at the rate that allows you to get into zone two, but that is not excessively difficult for you. And then as you build up fitness, you can add time or you can add weight through a weight vest, or if you don't want to buy a weight vest or can't afford one, there's a simple solution to that, I actually have a good anecdote about that. One time I was heading out for a hike with a friend of mine, he was a former SEAL team operator, I'll never forget this, and he said, oh yeah, "I'll bring you a sack." And I thought he meant like a sack lunch, like he was going to bring lunch. And I showed up and he basically gave me a backpack that was loaded with a bunch of stuff and the backpack weighed about 40 pounds. And then we took a hike. So I was thinking lunch, he was thinking weighted backpack, and weighted backpack or even just any kind of strong sack that you can put over your shoulders or even carry in your arms, it's going to work exceedingly well to build in some extra requirement for effort. So you certainly don't have to purchase a weight vest in order to get the benefits of bringing additional weight along with you on these long cardiovascular events. But again, build up over time, you can add time, you can add weight, and that's also a really nice feature of adding weight, which is at some point your schedule might be such, or you just don't really want to keep adding more and more and more time on this long endurance Sunday, in this case, workout, in that case add weight. You can also, as you build up fitness, you can add speed to it, your zone two and what zone two is won't shift, but what work is required from you in order to get into zone two will shift. That is as you get more and more fit, you'll have to move faster and or bring more weight in order to stay in zone two and that will simply tell you that you are indeed improving your endurance. Okay, so then Monday rolls around and I, like most everyone else out there, I work on Monday, I get right into my emails and preparation for podcasts and running my laboratory, et cetera. However, I make sure that at some point on Monday, and for me that some point is typically and ideally early in the morning, so 7:00 AM or so, I train my legs on Monday, so that includes quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves. Why do I do that workout on Monday? And what is that workout designed to do? Well, that workout is really designed to make sure that I'm either maintaining or building strength in my legs. And this is not simply for aesthetic reasons. This is not simply to grow bigger calves or grow bigger quadriceps and hamstrings, although it can accomplish that as well depending on how you train. We'll talk about details of training. The reason for training legs on Monday is several fold. First of all, they are the largest muscle groups of the body, and by training your legs on Monday, it sets in motion a large number of metabolic processes that carry you some distance even through the whole week in terms of elevating metabolism, in terms of amplifying certain hormonal events in your body, et cetera, that are really beneficial. In addition to that, I'm of the belief that the legs are the foundation of the body, and provided you can train legs safely, that training legs is vitally important, not just for strength of the legs, but also for strength of your entire body. Again, some of that is through systemic hormonal effects because if you're going to train the large muscle groups of your body under substantial loads, you will get systemic release of hormones, not just testosterone, although certainly testosterone, but also things like growth hormone... You get increases in all sorts of so-called anabolic hormones that even if you're somebody who's not trying to increase muscle size, because I realize a lot of people are not trying to do that, these are hormones that shift your metabolism and your overall tendon strength and ligament strength and overall musculature into what I would call a strong foundation. So for me, Monday is leg workout. It also just feels good to get the leg workout out of the way earlier in the week, and it accomplishes another goal, which is that I sometimes will take one or two days off of a leg workout because they can be very intense and they are large muscle groups, and I'll explain what I do on the off days, they're not pure off days, they actually include some recovery type training or even some all out training. But by training legs on Monday, I'm able to get what I consider the hardest strength and hypertrophy workout out of the way, and, again, set all those positive physiological effects in motion for the entire week. The other thing is that no workout exists in isolation. What you do one day is going to be determined by what you did the previous day. And even though the previous day I may have taken a three hour weight vested hike, never are my legs so sore from that long slow endurance work, because it is long and slow, that I'm unable to train legs. Contrast that with a, say, high intensity interval training workout, which comes later in the week, and my legs might be sore. In fact, they might not even be recovered such that I'm able to do a real legwork, I want to say a real workout. I'll describe what that means in a moment. So legs come on Monday, and I think that for those of you that are using or interested in using resistance training, I suggest getting your leg workout done early in the week. And for those of you that have heard the phrase, don't skip leg day, I will go a step further and say, don't skip leg day, in fact, make leg day your first day of strength and hypertrophy training. Put it on Monday. Okay, so now that we're talking about resistance training, the question is going to come up about sets and reps and all of that business. That was covered in a lot of detail on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin, and I'm going to get into some of that detail now, but I'm going to wait until I describe the entire set of workouts for the week before I go into even more detail, because there's a way of what's called periodizing that is changing the sets and reps, et cetera, across the week, and indeed from month to month, that's really optimal. But I don't want to make it seem as if all of that just pertains to the leg workout. It actually pertains to all of the resistance training. So I'll just give you a couple of teasers about the key principles of resistance training that I think are almost universally, if not universally, then generally accepted in the strength training and physiology community. And then later I'll get back to some of the overarching principles that apply to all strength and hypertrophy workouts across the week, including the ones for the torso, the arms, et cetera. Okay, so legs fall on Monday, I should say that leg workouts, like all resistance training workouts, for me, consist of about, again, I'm not neurotically attached to this, but about 10 minutes of warming up and then about 50, five zero, to 60 minutes of real work. Now, of course, some of that is going to be rest between sets, but by real work, I mean really hard work, not necessarily to failure, we'll talk about failure in a little bit, but hard work where I'm struggling to complete the final repetitions, if not going to failure to continue to move the weight repetitions. And again, the entire work portion of that workout is about 50 to 60 minutes. Why? Well, past 60 minutes, you start getting increases in cortisol that really impede recovery. And I personally am somebody that does not recover very well from high intensity exercise. I realize that within the literature, it is believed, and I think generally accepted, that when you stimulate muscle hypertrophy or strength increases, it impacts the nervous system, it also causes things like protein synthesis, et cetera. There are a number of different forms of adaptation that occur to give you muscle strength and size changes. And these days people talk a lot about needing to stimulate muscle growth or muscle strength at least every 48 hours. But I can tell you that I recover route there slowly, and I benefit from working the same muscle group about twice per week, with longer, or I should say more days of rest in between those workouts. So if I train legs on Monday, believe it or not, I'm only training legs on Monday. I do not have a second leg workout during the week. However, on Friday, I do a high intensity interval training session that serves two purposes. One is it serves the purpose of triggering a certain type of endurance and getting my heart rate very, very high. And in addition to that, because of the way I do that workout, it acts as a sort of supplement or a more moderate intensity workout for quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves, such that I at least never lose strength, and in fact, generally build strength from one leg workout to the next, provided I'm doing things correctly. So what I'm not referring to is the kind of classic super high intensity training once per week and then not actually training that muscle group again. For me, it's really training each muscle group twice per week, once directly and then once indirectly, either during another weight training workout or during a cardiovascular, I should say endurance training workout. So again, legs on Monday, the workout is 50 to 60 minutes, after a brief warmup. I generally pick two exercises per muscle group. So again, I'm doing calves, I'm doing quadriceps, and I'm doing hamstrings. You should pick the exercises that work for you. So that's why I'm actually not going to share which exercises I use. I'll give you a couple suggestions about the ones I do use, but really, exercise selection, as Dr. Andy Galpin pointed out, is a very important variable. And the key thing to emphasize for that variable is that you need to be able to perform the movement safely. So I know there's a huge debate out there, and people love to argue about whether or not one can squat or deadlift for long periods of time, or should or should not. Some people say you absolutely should. I personally do not squat and do not deadlift. I've actually never done much squatting or deadlifting, and I know some people out there are probably rolling their eyes or switching the channel at this point. But I can say that for me, I've been able to achieve the strength and hypertrophy goals that I've been seeking, doing things like leg extensions and hack squats or for hamstrings, doing things like leg curls and glute-ham raises or for calves doing standing and seated calf raises and so on. I think a key principle that everyone should pay attention to is one that was taught to me by an excellent strength coach years ago, and I still use this and at least it works for me. For each muscle group, try and find an exercise in which you get that muscle into a weighted stretch position. So this would be, for instance, the standing calf raise, down at the bottom, it's weighted and you're in a deep stretch provided you're doing the movement correctly. As well as another exercise where you're getting contraction in the shortened position of the muscle. So for the hamstrings, that would be the leg curl, for the calves, it would be a seated calf raise, for the quadriceps, the leg extension is, if the machine is designed right and you're doing it correctly, the peak contraction is largely going to occur at the legs extended position, but then another exercise for each muscle group that puts the muscle into more of a stretched or at least a larger range of motion or compound type movement, but ideally where there's some stretch there. So I guess I will tell you what exercise I do, for the quadriceps is going to be leg extensions and hack squats. I use hack squats because I don't do free bar squats for safety reasons, and I like the hack squat machine. I'll do leg curls and glute-ham raises for hamstrings, and I'll do standing calf raises and seated calf raises for the calves. Again, those are the movements that I use because I can perform them safely in the repetition ranges and with the weights that are required for me to either maintain or build leg strength and calf strength. But you might decide that for you, dead lifts are absolutely essential and terrific, or squats free bar squats are absolutely terrific or front squats. I'm not here to tell you which exercises to do or not do. I am telling you that it's probably wise to at least consider doing at least two exercises per muscle group, probably three maximum, if you ask me if you're doing your entire legs and calves in one day. But to think about doing one exercise where the muscle's brought into that shortened peak contraction position, like leg curls or leg extensions or seated calf raise, and then another exercise for each muscle group where there's more of a elongation and maybe even a stretch on the muscle group. In fact, that's a principle that you'll hear me talk about later when I talk about training other muscle groups for strength and hypertrophy. So now you know approximately how long to train, you might be somebody who can get away with training for an hour and a half, and that won't impede your recovery. For me, that really starts to impede my recovery. Also, if I'm staying on task, that 60 minute limit really works well for me. Do I occasionally train for 75 minutes? Yes, because if I'm waiting for a piece of equipment, sometimes I have to just wait longer. So that happens. But I really try and keep the total duration of the workout shorter. How many sets and reps and rest intervals? Well, that was covered by Dr. Andy Galpin as well. Without getting into the total science, here's a brief summary of how to structure that. It's pretty clear that if you're going to do lower repetitions and heavier weight, that you're going to want to do a bit more volume. I know that this spits in the face of what a lot of people think, but so if you're going to do five sets of five, and I would consider five repetitions low repetition range, heavier weight, and if you're going to train with higher repetitions, you can do fewer sets. That certainly works for me. I generally follow a program where for about a month, so three to four weeks, I will do all my resistance training in the repetition range of about four to eight repetitions. So that's rather heavy. A few more sets. So it might be anywhere from three to four sets per exercise. Again, still just two exercises. And longer rest between sets, anywhere from two minutes to maybe even four minutes if it's really heavy leg work. And then for the next month, switch to repetition range that's closer to 8 to 12, maybe even 15 repetitions per set, but do fewer sets overall, so maybe just two to three sets per exercise. Again, just two exercises per muscle group typically. And shorten the rest between sets so that it's more in the 90 second, maybe even as short as 60 second rest between sets, but typically 90 seconds to about two minutes or two and a half minutes. So basically it's one month heavier, the next month, slightly lighter, although I wouldn't say lighter, I would say moderate weight and moderate rep range. That tends to work well for me. It also adheres to a principal that came up during the discussion, again, with Dr. Andy Galpin, that for hypertrophy, you really can use repetition ranges anywhere from 5 to 30, three zero, reps. But he emphasized changing the repetition ranges in order to offset boredom. Frankly, I like to train heavier. I enjoy training in the four to eight rep range. However, I notice that if I do that for more than four weeks in a row and I don't switch over to training in the 8 to 12, maybe in 15 repetition range for about a month, well then I can't make continuous progress. I start to actually lose ground. But by switching back and forth, I actually can make continuous progress at least across the year. So I hope that that principle, or I should say that protocol was communicated clearly. It works very well, I assure you. Does that mean that I never get 10 repetitions on a week when I'm supposed to train in the four to eight repetition range? No. Occasionally I'll venture up into the 10 repetition range, but I really try and cluster the low repetition work for about a month, again, across all workouts and all exercises and the slightly higher, I would even say moderate repetition work across to the next month. One thing that you'll notice since we are talking about total fitness programming is that during the months where you are doing moderate repetitions, you'll notice that your endurance work will actually be facilitated. And I do not think that's a coincidence. In fact, it's not a coincidence. It's because when you are training very heavy or in the heavier range, lower repetitions, et cetera, you're tapping into different processes in those muscles. So when you head out for that long Sunday hike, or as you'll soon hear, whereas on Friday you're going to do high intensity interval training, what you'll notice is during certain months of weight training, when you're training more heavy, those workouts will feel, literally will feel different than they will during the months when you're doing moderate repetition work. I am not a competitive athlete. I'm not running races or triathlons like some of my friends. I'm very impressed by them. I'm really just trying to get overall cardiovascular fitness, overall strength, overall hypertrophy where I need it, maintain muscle size, et cetera, in muscle groups where I'm just trying to maintain. That's really my goal. So I'm not trying to optimize any of these workouts for any one performance feature, but in a little bit, we'll talk about how you can change various aspects, that is, variables of these protocols, in order to say, for instance, really emphasize hypertrophy or really emphasize endurance. Okay, so with what I would call a standard endurance workout done on Sunday, and I say standard because most people, when they hear endurance, they think of the ability to endure, to continue in a repeated movement or exercise over some period of time, with that workout done on Sunday, and then with the leg workout done on Monday, you can feel really good about how you're heading into the week. However, after training legs on Monday, I experience that doing cardiovascular workouts the next day is either inefficient or at least doesn't really allow me to completely recover from my leg workout. Now, I realize that some people are going to immediately scoff at that, and in fact, there are really beautiful papers out there talking about how one can actually do a fair amount of cardiovascular exercise without interfering with their strength and speed and hypertrophy improvements and vice versa. In fact, there's a terrific review that was mentioned on the podcast with Dr. Andy Galpin. This is a review that we'll provide a citation to, and a reference and a link to, which is the review by Murach and Bagley, which talks about whether or not there's interference between strength and endurance workouts. Really interesting review if you want to peruse that. But with all that said, I like to take Tuesday as a no endurance, no resistance training day, but that doesn't mean that I'm not doing anything for my overall health and fitness. On Tuesdays, I do a series of heat cold contrast. In other words, I get really, really warm and then I get really, really cold, I get really, really warm and I get really, really cold repeatedly. And the way I do that is by getting into a hot sauna. So for me, that's really hot, but I've built up my heat conditioning, so please don't do this unless you've built up your ability to withstand heat. And I'll get in for about 20 minutes. Sometimes 15, but usually 20 minutes. Then I get out and then I will get into an ice bath or a cold water bath that's about 45 to 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Again, don't get into water that's so cold that you go into shock. I'll explain what a good cold stimulus could be for you and how to determine that. Or if I don't have access to my sauna and my ice bath, what I can do if I'm traveling is I will take a hot bath and then alternate with cold shower, hot bath, cold shower. It's hard to do hot bath ice bath unless you have two baths. I don't know any hotel rooms, at least I've never stayed in one that has two baths, although I'm sure they're out there. But for me, this is heat cold contrast. And really what this day is about is two things. First of all, I'm trying to accelerate recovery from the leg workout I did previously. Also, if you listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab podcast about deliberate heat exposure or you listen to our episode of the Huberman Lab podcast about deliberate cold exposure, I talk about some of the benefits of heat and cold, and I get into a lot of details about how you can access heat. You can do baths, you can do saunas, you can even take hot showers. If you don't have access to any of that, you could even wrap your body from the neck down in a garbage bag, plastic garbage bags, believe it or not, wrestlers used to do this, put on some sweats and go running. That'll get you warm. Again, be careful not to overheat and then you can get into a cold shower. So there's a lot of ways, depending on your budget and what you have access to. I don't use cryo, these cryotherapy chambers, they're hard to find. They're expensive. Again, I use sauna and ice bath and I will do anywhere from three to five rounds, which is a lot, anywhere from three to five rounds of heat for about 20 minutes and cold for about 5 minutes. How cold should the cold be? We covered this in the episode on deliberate cold exposure. Here's a general rule of thumb. It should be cold enough that you really want to get out, but not so cold that it's unsafe. And that will vary from person to person. So I cannot give you a simple prescriptive there. Same thing with the heat, hot enough that you're sweating and that you want to get out, but not so hot that you're running the risk of injuring yourself or killing yourself. And again, that will vary from person to person. So you have to build up slowly, be careful and build up empirically. I do that on Tuesdays again as a way to accelerate recovery and because it's very clear that there are cardiovascular benefits, maybe even benefits for the brain related to the cardiovascular benefits because of course the brain needs a lot of blood flow and needs a lot of nutrients and other things flowing into and out of there, debris out and nutrients and other things into the brain. Heat can help accelerate that or improve that. And so I'm doing that to improve cardiovascular function, improve brain health, and then the cold contrast provides a sort of accelerator on that or an amplifier I think is the better way to phrase it on that process because in the cold you get vasoconstriction and then in the heat you get vasodilation. And so you're maximizing that process, which is actually a neural process. Nerves actually innervate the blood vessels and capillaries and even the arteries in order to allow that constriction and dilation process to occur. So Tuesday is really about recovery, but my recovery day isn't necessarily about just laying around and not doing anything. I might still also take some walks that day. Remember, I want to try and get that 200 minutes of zone two cardio across the week, and sometimes, not often, but sometimes I'll get in a few minutes or more of walking quickly that day. But generally I'm working a lot on Tuesday as I do on Monday, and I'm a little bit tired and maybe even a little bit sore from my leg workout the previous day Monday. So I try and get that hot cold contrast. There are other benefits to hot and cold contrast. We have a description of the different protocols for hot and for cold and their contrast at our Huberman Lab newsletter. You can find that by going to hubermanlab.com. Go to the newsletter tab under the menu and you can sign up. You can actually download those protocols very easily without even signing up if you just want to access them straight off. So Tuesday is really about recovery and about getting some additional cardiovascular benefits from heat cold contrast. One other thing that's built into the rationale for doing a lot of heat and cold on one day as opposed to doing it every day... Well, in addition to it being a little bit more convenient because certainly some people don't access to heat and cold sauna and cold dunks et cetera every day. So maybe getting to do that one day is more accessible or feasible. But in addition to that, it's very clear that while there are benefits to doing sauna often, and we talked about this in the deliberate heat episode and the episode with Dr. Rhonda Patrick when she was a guest on this podcast, it's also clear that if you do sauna seldom, that is once a week, but you do a lot of it on one day, so in this case, it's an hour, if it's, remember, it's one more, it's three to five rounds of 20 minutes of sauna followed by about 5 minutes of cold or so, by doing that all on one day, the peer reviewed research that's covered in the episode on deliberate heat, this is a study out of Finland, showed that you get massive, even 16 fold increases in growth hormone, which are extremely beneficial for metabolism and for recovery. So these massive increases in growth hormone are seen when you are doing these sessions of sauna that are repeated on the same day and you're only doing that about once a week. Whereas if you do sauna more often, there are certainly benefits to that, but it's time consuming and you need access to sauna more often than one day a week if you're doing it more than one day a week. But if you do it one day a week and you're doing a lot of sessions within that day, as I've detailed here, you see these massive increases in growth hormone that are not observed if you're doing sauna more often for the other benefits of sauna. Now the effects of cold are many, it's not just vasoconstriction, but the effects of cold are also counterbalanced by some of the problems with deliberate cold exposure that maybe you've heard about on this podcast and a lot of other podcasts and seem to be a kind of a buzz theme on Twitter and elsewhere. And the point is this, there are a number of quality studies showing that if you do deliberate cold exposure, in particular ice baths or getting into very cold water immediately after an endurance training session or a strength and hypertrophy session, it can indeed, yes, it can disrupt or prevent some of the adaptations that you are seeking with strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts. Okay, so you heard that right. And I believe that to be true based on now several quality peer-reviewed studies. So by doing your deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you're not going to get those effects, that is the blocking of hypertrophy or the blocking of strength improvement or the blocking or prevention of improvements in endurance that would occur if you immediately got into the ice bath after a hypertrophy strength or endurance workout. Now the caveat to that is if you are somebody who likes to do cold showers, I am not aware of any data that says that cold showers cannot be performed after a strength hypertrophy or endurance workout. Cold showers are different than submersion up to the neck in an ice bath or another cold body of water for a number of different reasons. In fact, they tap into different aspects of the nervous system entirely. We don't have time to go into that now, it's covered in the episode on deliberate cold exposure, but the simple point is by doing your heat and cold contrast, or hey, listen, if you're somebody who doesn't have access to sauna or you don't like hot baths and you just do some deliberate cold exposure on Tuesday, you are doing that separate from your strength and hypertrophy and endurance workouts such that it will not impede the benefits of those workouts. Okay, so long endurance on Sunday, leg resistance training on Monday and on Tuesday, heat cold contrast. That brings us to Wednesday. And on Wednesday we get back to a resistance training workout. And the resistance training workout that I emphasize on Wednesday is one in which you train your torso. Yes, literally your torso. I know this is counter to this so-called bro science of bro splits. I don't know who originated that term, it's a terrible term. It essentially alienates anyone who's not a bro or considers themselves a bro. But in any case, this is not about training chest or back or shoulders. In fact, it's really about strengthening the muscles of the torso and of course includes the chest and the shoulders and the back. And I'm sure, as I say this, a number of people out there who are obsessed with hypertrophy and muscle growth and filling out their shirts or whatever it may be, are thinking, oh no, this is just kind of all around fitness. But no, the point is, on Wednesday you train your torso and that's going to involve some pushing, so that's, for you that might include some training of things like bench presses or incline presses as well as shoulder presses or lateral raises, things for the shoulders as well as for the back, some pulling exercises. These could be bent over rows or chin-ups or pull-ups. Again, there are enormous number of exercise for each and every one of these muscle groups. Now, I believe there's a clear benefit to training all these muscle groups together on the same day, because much in the same way that training legs all on one day can lead to these systemic effects because they're large muscle groups, working both the pushing muscles and the pulling muscles of the torso on one day, at least in the context of this program, is very time efficient, and tends to wick out into a number of different dimensions of health that at least I'm interested in and I think a lot of other people are interested in. What are those? Well, let's think again, I want to be strong in not just my legs, but my upper body. I also may want, may want to engage some hypertrophy, to grow certain muscle groups in order to create a sense of balance. I could be for aesthetic reasons, but also for balancing strength and for health of, and the integrity of the joints, et cetera. And in addition to that, by training a bunch of different muscle groups together, you have the opportunity to get the more systemic hormonal effects and metabolic effects that occur when you're not just training one muscle group and isolating that one muscle group, but rather training a bunch of muscle groups together. So Wednesday I train torso and I do that in push pull fashion just for kind of time efficiency. Sometimes that means doing a pushing exercise and then a pulling exercise. Sometimes it might even mean doing a set of pushing and then a set of pulling and going back and forth. However, if you're in a gym, in particular, a crowded gym, please don't be one of those people that colonizes multiple pieces of equipment and says, I'm working there, I'm working there, and that can be quite a dance and it can be hard to orchestrate a workout like that. So sometimes it will be starting off with a set of shoulder presses and then doing all your sets of those and then moving to your chin ups and then moving perhaps back to shoulders and realizing, ah, oh, someone's on the machine that I wanted, or using the equipment that I wanted, so I'll just finish up the pulling, I'll finish up the back work and then go in to the push. I don't obsess over the alternation in any kind of strict way. I really just try and get the muscles of the torso trained. And again, it's two exercises per muscle group. And one of those exercises is going to be something where there's, I realize this isn't physiologically accurate, but a shortening of the muscle or where they, at the end of the movement, the muscle is under maximal contraction. I could throw out some names of exercises just for purpose of understanding. So this would be like cable crossovers for the chest, the peak contraction is at the end, whereas something like an incline press, there's more of a stretch provided it's done over a full range of motion at the beginning of the movement. So again, something where there's a stretch and something where there's a peak contraction. For the shoulders, it's a little bit harder to do, although there are ways to do that. And Jeff Cavaliere has excellent workouts available, zero cost, on YouTube. He also has excellent programs on his athleanx.com site. but certainly has a lot of excellent protocols on his YouTube and Instagram. But on YouTube you can put in his name and any muscle group that you want to train. And he has some terrific videos describing exercise choice and other features of exercise parameters. Again, a peak contraction or shortening of the muscle, peak contraction exercise and a stretching exercise. And so for the back, one might say, okay, a seated row or a bent over row or a dumbbell row where the elbow is brought behind the torso for a peak contraction movement. And then for more of a stretching movement might be something like a chin up or a pull-up. And as I say this, I understand that stretching and peak contraction aren't the exact terms that one would use if they were a physiotherapist or a strength and conditioning coach, but I think for the typical person who's trying to generate strength and hypertrophy in those muscles or maintain strength and hypertrophy in those muscles, this kind of nomenclature way of describing it at least should be clear and even efficient. And just to remind you, as with the leg workout, the total duration of the torso workout is going to be 50 to 60 minutes after a brief warmup. The sets and repetitions are going to be dictated in the same way that I described earlier. So for about a month it's going to be more sets. So anywhere from three to five sets in the lower repetition range, so four to eight repetitions, so that's going to be heavier weights and longer rest as I described earlier, the rest intervals. And then for the next month it's going to be moderate repetitions, fewer sets, the same way I described earlier. And if you want more details on all of that, you can find that in the newsletter related to the optimal or foundational fitness protocol that you can access at hubermanlab.com. One thing I should note about the Wednesday torso workout is that I am a big believer in training the, what I believe is the highly avoided, or at least overlooked but vitally important aspect of total body stability, strength and safety, really, safety, which is the neck. Now I realize a lot of people don't want a large neck, and I totally understand for aesthetic reasons why they don't want that. It's kind of interesting actually, if you think about it, that people who have a large neck are often told they have no neck. People say that guy has no neck or they have no neck when in fact they're referring to the fact that they have a very large neck. I don't know how that came to be. Somebody put in the comments why that is, how come when people have a big neck they refer to it as no neck. So why do I train the neck? I train the neck for a couple of reasons. One is years ago I had an accent where I actually fell off a roof and I'd been training my neck at that time for a sport that I was involved in and I walked away from it with a sore neck but not a broken neck. And I thought, wow, it's really great that I have been training my neck. In addition to that, I was once in a car accident where I was parked... I just bought the car, was my first new car purchased, parked in that car with my mother, my grandfather in the backseat at the red light and someone rammed into us at full speed. Now fortunately, none of us were hurt. We were all rattled. And once again, I was very sore in my back and in my neck. But I think one of the reasons why I was able to essentially walk away from that, I didn't have any sustained damage was because I trained my neck, but I started training my neck for sport and I continue to train my neck because I notice when I don't train my neck I start getting shoulder issues. And if you talk to an excellent physiologist like Dr. Kelly Starrett of The Ready State, is an excellent channel, you can find them on all the social media and standard channels or you talk to anyone out there who really understands the strength of the torso and the upper body and even the back. What you learn is that, of course, being the upper portion of the spine, stabilizing your neck is very important. Now, training the neck can be a little bit detailed and specific and even dangerous if you do it wrong. Again, Jeff Cavaliere has a terrific set of videos on training the neck properly. I know a lot of people out there might think neck bridges and I used to do neck bridges. I occasionally still sneak in a neck bridge here or there, although I don't recommend it because in discussions with Jeff, he will tell you, and it's true, that the discs eventually go and you can run into serious issues from doing bridges and it doesn't happen gradually so you can't notice it happening. It just happens suddenly. So I might occasionally do a neck bridge, but in general I'll train neck by wrapping a plate in a towel so that I don't end up with an imprint of the weight value on my head or face. And then moving the neck from side to side or front or back, and again, we'll provide a link to those videos. It's a terrific set of videos that describe how to train your neck properly and safely. So even if you're not trying to grow your neck, you definitely want to make sure that you use some light weights to make sure that your neck is stable and upright. And I say stable and upright because it's very clear that for reasons related to texting and staring down at computers and related to weak neck relative to the rest of the muscles that stabilize the spine, a lot of people, their default stance or their default posture is with chin forward and that's not good. Not only is it aesthetically not good, but it also can create all sorts of issues related to back pain and headaches and things of that sort. This is a real thing, training your neck allows you to stand upright, sit upright. I even believe that it allows you to do things like public speaking or have conversations with people on the street in a way where you are front facing as opposed to looking down. So Wednesday is torso and neck and then comes Thursday and that means another cardiovascular exercise session, although it's a brief one. Unlike the endurance training on Sunday, the cardiovascular session on Thursday, and again, for me it falls on Thursday, but for it could fall on a different day depending on when you started this protocol, is going to be about, again, about 35 minutes of, for me, running, although it could be rowing or it could be cycling, it could be something of that sort. The goal of this workout is what's important. The goal of this workout is to tap into, remember that long list that we talked about earlier where you've got skill and speed and power and strength and hypertrophy, et cetera, different forms of endurance, is to get into that range of endurance where your heart rate is elevated quite a bit more than zone two, but that you're not really going all out sprint. So what that means for me is warming up for about 5 to 10 minutes. That could be jogging, a little bit of light calisthenics, might even be hopping on a stationary bike, although to be honest I loathe the stationary bike, and then setting a timer and doing about 30, but ideally 35 minutes of what I call 75% to 80% of all out. Okay, now I realize this spits in the face of all you heart rate monitor wearing super techy exercise types. But when I think of all out sprint, I think of 100%. And what is that? In my mind that's somebody is chasing me with a needle full of poison and I am sprinting away at maximal speed. That for me is 100%. So after a brief warm up, what I'm going to do is go out, typically outside, although sometimes it has to be on a treadmill if I'm traveling, and move, run for about 30 to 35 minutes at about 75% or 80% of that all out. What that means is that I'm striving to keep a steady pace, but in reality I don't. I sometimes have to stop at a stoplight, there are cars, please don't run into traffic just to maintain that speed and that timing, that would be terribly antagonistic to fitness, in particular, lifespan. That running tends to be running in which I'm breathing hard so I'm not able to restrict myself to purely nasal breathing. And I should have mentioned earlier, on the Sunday long ruck or weighted hike or jog, if I'm alone, I try and do pure nasal breathing. If I'm with other people or I'm talking, obviously I'm not going to do pure nasal breathing because I'm talking, although I'm sure that sometimes they wish I was doing pure nasal breathing. That Thursday workout accomplishes a number of things. First of all, it really gets my heart rate up and it improves multiple aspects of endurance, because as you recall earlier, the different bins of endurance that include muscular endurance, anaerobic, that 3 to 12 minute range and then 30 minutes or longer, none of them really precisely match what's accomplished in this 35 minute or so cardiovascular session where I'm pushing hard but not all out. But that's exactly the reason to do it, which is that it taps into multiple fuel systems for the muscle and multiple aspects of the heart and capillaries and arteries and veins that are involved in generating that movement. So it really cuts a broad swath into multiple categories of endurance. And also just keep in mind what this foundational or optimal fitness protocol is really designed to do. In my mind, a foundational fitness protocol is one that leaves you or has you in a state where if you need to walk really far and carry a bunch of weight, you can do it. If you need to lift a heavy object with your legs, you can do it. If you need to run really fast for two minutes, you can do it. And if you need to run a little bit further, like maybe in 10 minutes for whatever reason, you can do that. So it's a really kind of all around fitness program and that 35 minute run, again, could be swapped with a 35 minute erg row. Or sometimes if you only have access to a stationary bike, you could do that. I suppose if you didn't have access to any equipment and running is not your thing, one thing that I have done, especially if I've been stuck in a hotel 'cause I arrived late someplace and I really want to get this workout in, you could do the dreaded burpee. I know there are a lot of opinions out there, some people think burpees are downright dangerous, other people love burpees. You could do that. Or you could do really fast but full jumping jacks. I know that's a little PE class, right? Physical education class-ish. But sometimes if I need to get the workout in, what I'll do in a hotel if I've arrived late in particular day of travel is I will find the stairwell, the fire stairwell, I'll make sure by the way that I can get back into the building 'cause I've been locked in those stairwells before. And I will simply walk really fast up the stairwell as many flights of stairs as there are, or maybe even jog it, not quite sprint, but a run up those stairs over and over and over again in order to get that 35 minutes of 75% to 80% of max output cardiovascular work done. And if I'm really just restricted to my hotel room, I'll just do jumping jacks for 30, 35 minutes, sometimes while watching something on TV. And believe me, if you're doing full jumping jacks, like really extending your legs, really getting arms overhead and really doing the full movement, by the time you hit five or six minutes you are going to be sweating and your heart rate is really going to be up. I also sometimes will travel with a jump rope. I always try and travel with a jump rope and skip rope, much to the dismay of the people who are housed below me in the hotel room. Skipping rope, I should mention, can be a very effective way of getting cardiovascular training while you're on the road. But in all seriousness, if you're in a hotel room or an apartment and you can't really jump high and you're very good at jumping rope, what you'll find is it's not going to get you into that higher elevated heart rate zone. Okay? It can be great for zone two type training, but if you're really good at skipping rope, and I wouldn't say I'm really good at it, but I've done enough skipping rope that I can just kind of cruise and talk and it, it's more zone twoish, even feels like walking at times. Now you can do double unders where you're really jumping and putting the rope under you twice each time or crossovers, et cetera, depending on your skill level. But again, if you're in an apartment or you're in a hotel, that's going to be harder to do. And because there's some skill involved, sometimes you're stopping more often than you're continuing. By the way, and I just have to mention this, a really terrific Instagram channel is @anna.skips. This is a teacher, a science teacher, or I believe it's a math, maths as they say in the UK 'cause she's in the UK, maths teacher. I don't know Anna, but I know she skips 'cause she has this amazing Instagram channel called Anna Skips. And what's really cool about her Instagram is she shows you her progression from not being able to skip rope at all to the absolutely incredible types of rope skipping that she's doing each morning while getting sunlight, which of course is essential health protocol. So check out Anna Skips on Instagram, really inspiring and made me want to get better at skipping rope. I'm still working at it. Okay, so with that Thursday cardiovascular, let's call it endurance, but cardiovascular training workout done, around roles Friday and on Friday I'm going to do another cardiovascular training session, and I alluded to this earlier, but this cardiovascular training session is also designed to tap into some of the ability of hard, I should say high intensity interval training, to tap into strength and hypertrophy increases for the legs. 'Cause remember, we train legs on Monday and what the science tells us is that protein synthesis in a muscle group can be stimulated about every 42 to 72 hours. And so we've had Tuesday off, Wednesday off and Thursday off and you don't want to lose progress that you made from that terrific Monday leg workout. But in order to make sure that you can do the other things that follow in this program and pick back up on Monday with another leg workout, at least for me with my recovery abilities and my work schedule, I'm not going to do an entire other leg workout because it's going to set the whole thing out of whack. That is, I won't be able to consistently do the same workouts on the same days of each week. Now with that said, a little bit later I'll explain what happens if you have to miss a workout and how you can combine days, et cetera. But I really strive to get certain workouts done on certain days consistently at least as best I can. So Friday is high intensity interval training, and that can take a variety of different forms. For me, the ideal thing to do, for me, again, you could do something completely different. Exercise choice, again, should be governed by what you can do safely so you don't injure yourself and that you can perform effectively and that gets you or provides you the stimulus that you want. And what I'm trying to do on Friday is get my heart rate way, way up. Talked about this in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. In addition to the benefits of getting 180-200 minutes of zone two cardio per week, minimum, it's a really good idea to get up to that max or near max heart rate at least once a week. And you're not going to do that for very long periods of time. You're not going to do that for 30 minutes. You can't sprint all out for 30 minutes unless you're Steve Prefontaine. If you haven't seen the movies "Without Limits" or "Prefontaine," you should absolutely see those. He was able to go out and run 12 laps, what seemed to be an all out sprint or close to it. Incredible. But most people are not going to do that or going be carried away on a stretcher if they try. These high intensity interval training for me ideally would be on so-called assault bike or Airdyne bikes. So these bikes that have the fan, which might seem like, oh, just cools you off, but actually there's a lot of resistance there. So what I will typically do is a 20 to 30 second all out sprint using arms and legs and then 10 seconds rest and then repeat all out sprint for 20 to 30 seconds, 10 seconds rest, repeat. And I'll do that for anywhere from 8 to 12 rounds, which, trust me, even if you start out a little bit less, or I should say not all out intensity or effort, by the time you hit the fifth or sixth one, you will be certainly headed into if not near your maximum heart rate. Now what is your maximum heart rate? Do you need a heart rate monitor? No. If you like using that sort of thing, great. But again, Andy Galpin beautifully supplied us with the information. He said if you take the number 220 and you subtract your age, that for most people, most, is going to be your maximum heart rate. Although for certain people who are very fit or certain ages, that's not going to apply. So it's a little bit too crude to measure, but it's a good starting place and you can look up other information or see that podcast episode, we provide the link to it in the show note captions if you want to get more details on that. I don't use a heart rate monitor. What I'm trying to do is get to that point where I quote unquote feel like I want to die. Now I don't want to die, and please don't die, right? If you're not in good cardiovascular health, do not just jump right into this fitness protocol. But I want to get to the point where I really feel like I could not pedal any faster or pull any faster on the assault bike, the Airdyne bike, or if I'm doing this workout in a place or at a time or because I choose to not use a bike or a rower, 'cause you could also use a rower, I will simply do sprint jog intervals. I will sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, then jog for 10 seconds, sprint for 20 or 30 seconds, and then jog for 10 seconds and just repeat. I used to have a big field next to my laboratory, my old laboratory, and I used to bring my bulldog Costello out there. He was really good at the first sprint part and then he would just lie down and watch. he didn't even do the jog part. I would just go back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, panting like a bulldog nonstop, barely able to recover before sprinting again. And the basis of this workout again is several fold. First of all, it's to get the heart rate really high, up towards maximum heart rate at least once a week. So you accomplish that this Friday. Also, if you are sprinting and then jogging or you are really pushing hard on an assault bike or an Airdyne bike, or using a, for instance, a skier or a skier machine or any number of different cardiovascular training tools, you are going to get activation of the legs, of course not to the same degree as you would with squats or dead lifts or leg extensions or leg curls. That's simply not the case. But you're going to trigger strength and hypertrophy and other types of adaptations in those muscle groups. So this for me also represents the second leg workout of the week where I'm not touching any weights. One important point that I don't think I've heard mentioned anywhere else, but that I hope to have Dr. Kelly Starrett on the podcast to discuss and that I've discussed with him one on one, which is be careful with all out sprints or all out anything cardiovascular exercise, you can get injured doing those. So for instance, if you go out and you just sprint across a field, all out, 20 or 30 seconds and then walk back and can do it again and again, don't be surprised if the next day you have some sciatica or even some pelvic floor pain. I don't recommend going all out on any movement that you can't perform with perfect form. Okay? So for me, I really try and stay away from all out sprints. I'll sprint it about 95% of what I can do because I find if I go all out sprint, I don't know what the reason is, but it might be an over extension of a limb or something like that, I'm not a sprinter, I'm not a sprinting coach. I do hope to get Stu McMillan on here or Dan Pfaff, who are excellent sprinting coaches, at some point they were world class sprinting coaches, but I'm not a pro sprinter, I'm not even a amateur sprinter, I'm a fitness sprinter. So the Airdyne or assault bike or the rower is really a safer option for me. And if I'm running or I'm doing some sort of movement where I'm unconstrained, really, in terms of how far my stride is, I mean I'm obviously constrained by the musculature, I'm really careful to not overextend or do something like that. And the only way to do that is to not go all out. So again, the goal for this Friday workout is to really get the heart rate high, do high intensity interval training... A number of different ways you could do that. You can look up HIIT, HIIT workouts online, find the one that's best for you and really pick something that's safe that you can do consistently, and I believe that ideally will also trigger a bit of either strength and hypertrophy and speed power maintenance or even give you a little bit of a stimulus so that by the time you roll around to that leg workout on, again, on Monday, you've got a little bit of an additional boost to your leg strength, hypertrophy, speed and power. So we've covered Sunday through Friday, and then Saturday rolls around and Saturday is when you train arms, calves, and neck. So this may sound as if you're training a bunch of small muscle groups, biceps, triceps, necks and calves, and that's true, but I should mention that you are also training your torso a second time and you're doing it indirectly, or sometimes not indirectly. Why do I say this? Well, keep in mind, again, that for strength and hypertrophy, you're going for that once about every 48 to 72 hours, you want to stimulate that, on Wednesday is when you train your torso, right? Chest, shoulders, back and neck. You've had Thursday to rest, Friday to rest. I know a lot of people are going to want to emphasize those body parts and they're going to think, oh, you have to train it twice a week. But if you have modest recovery ability or low recovery ability, such as I do, and you're doing these other cardiovascular training sessions, et cetera, well then, on Saturday is when you will train arms, calves and neck directly. But included in that, remember, two exercises per muscle group, one with a peak contraction, one with somewhat of a stretch in there. Included in that, I suggest doing some sort of dip movement, which I think it was Pavel Tsatsouline said the dip is synonymous with or at least similar to an upper body squat. Excuse me, Pavel if I got that wrong. Maybe it wasn't you that said that, but big admirer of his work, and certainly the dip is a great exercise to hit multiple muscle groups, chest, shoulders, and triceps, maybe even some back to some extent depending on how you do it. So doing some dipping movement will indirectly stimulate strength hypertrophy, et cetera, in the chest and shoulders and including some sort of pulling movement for the bicep, like a chin up or palms facing movement, pulling up from to the bar, especially if it's a close grip type movement. But even if it's a wide grip type movement, will of course trigger strength and hypertrophy, maintenance or improvements in the biceps, but will also trigger strength hypertrophy in the lats in the back. Okay, so Saturday is this arm workout that I'll just give an example of a potential workout where you might do a few more exercises and maybe not just two, but maybe three to make sure you get the torso indirect stimulation. So what would this look like? Well, this might be your sort of classic dumbbell curls for the bicep and maybe incline curl for the bicep because it has more of a stretch on an incline bench, and then you might finish with two sets of chin ups. So palms facing you, chin ups, or three sets of chin-ups depending on whether or not you're in a heavier load month or a more moderate weight month. Again, activating the biceps muscles 'cause arms day, but also activating strength and hypertrophy in the lats or at least maintaining it so that, because you're not training those torso muscles again until Wednesday, you're not allowing the hypertrophy and strength gains that you generated on Wednesday to atrophy, to disappear. Then, thinking about triceps, it might be some sort of triceps isolation or peak contraction movement. So that could be tricep kickback or some overhead extension would be more of a stretch type movement than a kickback. But then also doing regular old dips. You might even start with dips, which again, are going to activate those torso muscles and the triceps. And then calf work in the same way that you did on Monday. And neck work... Again, I am a believer in training neck multiple times per week. And if you are able to finish all of that in 45 or 50 minutes, great. Most people will find when you're doing a lot of small muscle groups, it actually takes longer because you have to go around to more exercises. But again, just adhere to the same principles we talked about before, about 50, five zero, to 60 minutes of real work after a warmup with an asterisk next to that, that if someone's on the equipment or you can't find the dumbbells you need, et cetera, then maybe 75 minutes max. But really trying to not extend that workout too long, making sure that you activate the arms directly, but also activating the torso muscles indirectly, and again, I won't repeat it this time, again, but following the same weight and repetition and rest interval scheme that we talked about earlier, a bit heavier, lower reps, more sets and longer rest for about a month. And then alternating to more repetitions yet fewer sets, right? Shorter rest intervals and do that for about a month. This carries through for all the resistance training workouts regardless of the day of the week. So we've completed the total arc across the week and we can summarize it as saying Sunday is, let's just say long endurance, Monday is leg resistance training, Tuesday, heat cold contrast, Wednesday, torso training plus neck, Thursday, I would call it moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise, so that 35 minute moderate intensity cardiovascular exercise, Friday, high intensity interval training of sprinting or some variation thereof and Saturday, arms, calves, neck and torso, indirect work. That's the total structure. But I want to emphasize again, you do not need to start this on Sunday. That is, you could make the long endurance work start on Tuesday and then just fill in the rest as described before. It's really up to you. There's another important point I want to make, which is that neither I nor anyone is going to be successful in doing the exact workouts on the exact same days of every week because of travel, work, illness, other demands, et cetera. The thing about the schedule that I like so much that I do believe that will benefit you as well is that you have some flexibility there. What's the flexibility? Well, let's say you train your typical Sunday workout of endurance, then you train legs on Monday and then you don't manage to do your heat cold contrast on Tuesday for whatever reason. Well, you can put it on Wednesday. Just make sure that if you're going to do the cold stimulus, that you don't do it too close, not within four, ideally eight hours after the training of torso, but you could do it before or you could do it just heat and skip the cold that particular week, right? Not ideal, but better than not doing anything. Let's say, for instance, the leg workout was particularly brutal, you don't sleep that well on Monday night or Tuesday night. Well then should you do the torso workout on Wednesday? Well, I would say, why not move the heat cold contrast to Wednesday and then push that torso workout to Thursday and maybe also try and do that 35 minute run on Thursday every once in a while rather than lose the total control of the program and let everything shuffle forward. Here's the basic principle. I do believe that any one of these workouts, whether it's for endurance or resistance training, can be shifted either one day forward or one day back, right? You could delay it by a day or you could accelerate it by a day in order to make sure that you get everything done across the week. In fact, I would say the best way to think about this foundational fitness program is not from the details up, but from the top down, from the big picture down to the details, and say to yourself, once a week you're going to get some long endurance in, another day during the week, you're going to make sure that you get a kind of moderate faster endurance workout in, and then one other day during the week, you're going to get an all out sprint, high intensity cardiovascular exercise workout in. You're going to get those three workouts in somehow. And then in addition to that, you will also do resistance training for every muscle group in your body. And that means doing your legs hard at least once a week, your torso hard at least once a week and your arms hard at least once a week. And of course you are also paying attention to training your calves. And I do, for reasons I described before, believe that you want to train your neck at least to keep it strong. You may not want to generate hypertrophy there. People vary in terms of how quickly their neck grows. Some people grows very, very fast. Other people, for the life of them, they can't get much hypertrophy in their neck. But keeping that neck strong, at least through some very light work to moderate weight work, very, very important, for reasons I stated earlier. If you set out those goals, then the specific days that you do each workout isn't as critical, but the specific spacing is. So for instance, you're not going to want to do your high intensity interval training the day after you train your legs, because if you're doing that high intensity interval training correctly, you're going to be taxing your legs and eating into their recovery. And so you want to space them out by two or three days. So I think you'll notice that the point is really to optimize everything on the whole rather than any one specific aspect of training or adaptation. Now that said, I do realize that some people might be hyper focused on things like strength and hypertrophy and the aesthetics that come with it. A key point about strength hypertrophy and weight training, and this is something that has been covered on multiple podcasts, certainly the one with Jeff Cavaliere and with Dr. Andy Galpin and the one that I did on building muscle strength and hypertrophy, the solo episode. And that is the following, it is the rare individual who has perfectly balanced musculature, right? Most people can be a bit quad dominant or hamstring dominant, or they have trouble activating their glutes or somebody has a terrible time trying to activate their chest muscles, but they're very strong in the back, et cetera. It's very clear that we can know that not just based on aesthetics, right, but based on deliberate contractibility of those muscles. So I don't want to get into this in too much detail for sake of time, but this is something that has peer reviewed research to support it and was also discussed extensively with Jeff Cavaliere when he was a guest. And that actually he's really popularized this notion and it's absolutely true, which is that if you can contract a muscle very hard to the point where it almost feels like it's cramping, if you can do that even when there's no weight in your hand or there's no resistance against it, so you're just using your mind muscle connection to contract that muscle hard and isolate it, chances are you'll be able to generate hypertrophy and strength gains pretty easily in that muscle compared to muscles that you have a harder time activating. So during all resistance training, that mind muscle link is really important, so much so that some people will even try and emphasize contraction of the muscles in between sets, et cetera. I personally, because I'm not somebody who likes a mirror when I work out, and I'm not somebody who wants to spend time in between sets flexing muscles and et cetera for whatever reason, I want to actually rest between sets, and I'm more concerned with performance during those sets and really putting my mind into the muscle during the set, I really try and emphasize deep relaxation between sets. And so here's a tool that again is built out of science and I should say peer reviewed studies, some of which are being done in my lab, but other labs as well, which is that in between sets what I really strive to do is to bring my heart rate down as much as possible, calm myself down as much as possible, and I'll do the so-called physiological sigh in order to do that. That's two inhales through the nose, back to back, [sighs] and then long full exhale through the mouth. I just did it partially there for the sake of time, again. So a big deep inhale through the nose and then sneak in a little bit more on a second inhale to maximally inflate the lungs and the alveoli in the lungs, and then a full exhale of all your air via the mouth to empty your lungs. That's the fastest way that we are aware of to calm your nervous system down. And really, in between sets you can use that to calm yourself down and conserve energy. But then as you move into the weight training set, you really want to ratchet up your focus and attention to the muscles that you're going to be using. Now, I'd like to acknowledge that there's a huge range of parameters in terms of how to actually perform during the set. You can focus on a particular muscle and try and really isolate from the beginning of the movement. Some people will really try and isolate it only during the peak contraction. Some people accentuate the negative. There's speed and cadence. There are, again, remember, concepts are few, methods are many. And if you're interested in the various methods of eccentrics and concentrics and all the different ways of changing up cadence and so forth during sets, there's an enormous amount of quality information out there, far too much for us to get into detail now. But what I describe the general principles of how to set your mind, if you will, during the set, you should be focused on the muscles that you're using and or moving the weight. If movement of the weight is more important, you can either focus on moving the weight or challenging muscles, right? You can either try and isolate muscles and make specific muscles do the work or simply moving the weight. Moving the weight is going to be more geared towards strength improvements, but focusing on the muscle, so called mind muscle link is going to shift that very same set more toward hypertrophy. I realize I'm painting with a broad brush here, but nonetheless this is grounded in the way that the nervous system governs muscular contraction. And while I think most people are familiar with the number of different variables associated with the resistance training, sets, reps, rest intervals, cadence, et cetera, there are also a tremendous number of very important variables for endurance in any kind of cardiovascular training. And there are a lot of excellent resources out there about that. I think the most important one, in fact I will go on record saying what I believe to be the most important variable for any endurance or cardiovascular training is that because it's a repetitive movement, that you are able to complete the movement safely, meaning you're not putting your body into range of motion or into positions that can damage joints or put you in any kind of compromised state. And some people might think, well, that seems kind of silly. But if you've ever set the, for instance, the seat too high on a stationary bike and then done Airdyne or assault bike type interval training sprints, if it's set too high and you're over-striding, as it were, the next day, you can really pay the price in terms of some back pain or sciatica. And sometimes that pain can extend for quite a while. So of course you don't want to approach any exercise with so much caution that it's neurotic and preventive and yet you don't want to approach any exercise in any way that's so cavalier, forgive the pun, Jeff, that you're also going to compromise the integrity of your joints and musculature and connective tissue. Let's talk about some real world practical variables. For instance, let's say you get a poor to terrible night's sleep. Should you train the next day or not? Well, that really depends. I can honestly say I've had some of the best training sessions, resistance training or endurance training sessions after a really poor night's sleep. But that's the rare event. More often than not, if I'm not sleeping well, I've had a terrible night's sleep, the next day I will just skip training that day. I know that will shock a number of you out there, or perhaps you're already calling me names, weak, et cetera. But I find that if I've slept really poorly or I've had a very stressful event the day before and I don't sleep well, training the next day sets me up for getting ill and getting ill sets me up for not being able to train for multiple days. So it is my preference in that case to skip a day and really focus on recovery. And then, as I mentioned earlier, slide that workout to the next day and rarely double that workout up with another workout, but then just slide the schedule forward by a day. But I really try and strive, that is, I really try to double up at least some workouts later in the week in that case, so that I can get back on schedule of starting the seven day protocol again on the same day. I don't want to be excessively vague there. What I'm trying to say is I try and adhere to the same schedule, but if I get a poor night's sleep, I'll just simply skip the workout the next day, slide the workout forward. There is one exception to that, and it's an important exception, which is there are times when I've not slept well or I've had some particularly stressful event the day before and haven't slept well, but I'm able to do so-called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest the next day. So there have been times when I've only got three or four hours of sleep the night before and I'm feeling really behind the ball the next morning, but I really want to get my workout in. So instead what I will do is a 10, but ideally in that case a 30 or even 60 minute non-sleep deep rest. And there's a 10 minute non-sleep deep breath protocol read by me. But it is a non-spiritual, non-mystical, science-supported non-sleep deep breath protocol available on YouTube. You can simply put my name, Huberman, put NSDR, and Virtusan, V-I-R-T-U-S-A-N, into YouTube and you'll find that script. There are other NSDR scripts that you can find now on Spotify and on YouTube. And if you fall asleep during those non-sleep deep rest scripts, that's great. And if you don't, you will also find that it will restore your ability to perform mental and physical work. So there are times when I haven't gotten as much sleep as I would like, or I'm feeling a bit more stressed for whatever reason, and I'll do NSDR, and then I will go train. And that often works fabulously well for me. And then I don't have to skip a workout entirely just because I didn't get a good night's sleep. A lot of people ask whether or not you should train fasted or fed, and this is a very controversial area. I personally prefer to do my cardiovascular work not having eaten anything in the previous 3 to 10 hours. And typically that's because I wake up and I'll do the cardiovascular training within about an hour of waking up, sometimes later, because my first meal generally falls, generally, not always, falls around 11:00 AM. I don't do any kind of formal intermittent fasting, but typically my meal schedule somewhere between 11:00 a.m. and my last bite of food is around 8:00 p.m. but I'm not super strict about that. I might eat in as late as 9:00 p.m. and I might eat something at 10:00 a.m. if I wake up really hungry, I might have something before 11:00 a.m., I'm not neurotic about it. But in terms of training, I like to train fasted and that includes the resistance training workouts and those come early in the day for me. And typically if I'm going to train legs on Monday, for instance, which is when I train legs, I'll make sure that the night before I'm ingesting some starch, some carbohydrate, like rice or pasta or something of that sort to make sure that when I do that morning leg workout, I have enough glycogen in the muscles, et cetera. Again, nutrition is a somewhat controversial area. In fact, it can evoke very strong feelings 'cause I know we've got vegans and we've got omnivores and we've got carnivores and people who are keto. This isn't really the format for us to get into all of that. I think the rule to follow is figure out what optimizes your training for your particular training goals. For me, that most often means training fasted and then eating pretty soon after I train. And if it's a high intensity resistance training workout, and frankly, all of my resistance training workouts are pretty high intensity, I'm not going to failure on every set, but at least, say, about 30% of those sets I'm going to failure. And the other sets I'm working very hard nonetheless, well then I eat some starches after I train and I also ingest some protein in the form of a protein drink or a meal that includes some protein food. But I don't like to eat before I do resistance training or at least not within the hour or two before I do resistance training. There are exceptions to that, and I should say that the same basically applies to endurance work. If I'm going to head out for a run, typically I don't want my belly full of food or any food at all, but there are times where I wake up hungry and I very much need to eat something or I have something scheduled socially like a breakfast and I'll have that breakfast and then an hour or 90 minutes later I'll do my workout because I want to make sure that I finish the workout. I, again, am not neurotically attached to training fasted or fed. For me, fasted is preferred, but if I have to train fed, better to train than to not train at all. We haven't talked so much about flexibility yet, but we did an entire episode of the Huberman Lab podcast on flexibility and I encourage you to check out that episode if you're interested in increasing your flexibility. But the basic takeaway from that episode is that if you look at what I like to call the center of mass of the research, that is most of the studies and what the conclusions of most of the quality studies point to, so not the exceptions, but the kind of general rules that have been gleaned over time from multiple labs over multiple decades, et cetera. What you find is that static stretching, that is, holding a stretch and in fact exhaling and relaxing the midsection and torso and relaxing into the stretch as opposed to staying full of air and tense, but mentally and physically relaxing into the stretch, but not stretching maximally, that is not extending as far as you possibly can go, but more like 60% or even less. And then holding those static stretches for anywhere from 30 to 60 seconds and then repeating, doing that two or three times throughout the week for multiple muscle groups, so it could be for your quadriceps, could be for hamstrings, for your lats. There are protocols out there. In fact, we have a newsletter that is focused entirely on protocols for flexibility and stretching. You can find that again by going hubermanlab.com. You don't even need to sign up for the newsletter, although we invite you to if you like, but you can simply go there, scroll down to the flexibility newsletter and all the protocols are there for each of the muscle groups, et cetera. But what I typically try and do is some stretching in the evening, because I train in the morning, as I'm perhaps getting ready for bed or if the TV is on, which in our house doesn't typically go on because we don't have a TV, but of course there are computers and people are on their computers, et cetera. Well, I'll try and do some stretching while I do that. I also have a standing desk, so during the day at work, regardless of whether or not I train that morning or not, or I'm going to train in the afternoon, I'll try and do some static stretching for my hamstrings, my quads, my lats, my shoulders, my back, really doesn't take much time and I really try to space that out throughout the week, which, if you look at the peer reviewed research, matches well to what's known to be most effective, which are going to be short, repeated sessions ideally every day. But truth told, I fail. I categorically fail. I was about to think of whether or not I ever stretch every day. I fail to do it every day, but I get about three or so stretching sessions in per week. And again, it's just static hold, trying to really relax into the stretch. Now the relax into the stretch is something has been talked about in martial arts circles and Pavel Tsatsouline has an excellent book on stretching, we can provide a link to that, talks about this, has a lot to do with relaxation of the nervous system and the way that the nerves innervate muscles and allow for stretch, if you will. Also, the way that the tendons and ligaments are innervated by nerves. The converse is also true. And here, again, this is a principle that Pavel has put forth, I believe he calls it irradiation, meaning irradiating out or emanating out from a source, which is that while exhaling and relaxing the torso, the midsection, some people call it the core, although some people don't like that term, can facilitate relaxation and stretching through a larger range of motion. So too can contracting the core, the midsection, or gripping very tightly with the fist can facilitate muscular contraction because of the way that the nervous system heavily, we can even say over-represents the fists in the brain. And so how would you apply this to your overall foundational fitness protocol? Well, it turns out that, let's say, you're doing a movement that involves one limb moving and then the other, let's say it's bicep curls, just for sake of example, turns out that you will actually be stronger in moving that dumbbell with the arm that happens to be moving if you grip the handle very tightly, but also grip the handle of the opposite dumbbell very tightly. Now that said, in between sets, I encourage you to do the opposite. To try and completely relax in between sets, combine that with the physiological sigh, and then when the set, the next set commences, employ that very strong grip, both, again, of the weight that's moving and the weight that at that moment might be stationary or in isometric position. So the nervous system, of course, is what controls muscles and that operates in both directions. If you want to relax, try and use long exhales, maybe even physiological sighs and really concentrate on mentally and physically relaxing, in particular your core and your fists. And if you want to generate force, right, you want to move a heavy barbell or dumbbell, you want to do a chin up with the maximal force, that's when you can employ the opposite, which would be to grip the bar or dumbbell, et cetera, very tightly. And you want to contract your core or even fill your body with air as a, say, plug all the leaks, et cetera. So this gets into kind of form and movement, which is an extensive near infinite landscape of discussion, again, that we don't have time to go into. I just want to mention those two nervous system related tips because I suppose as a neuroscientist, they appeal to me because they're grounded in fundamental principles of how the nervous system innervates muscle. And I know that they will benefit you the first time you use them and every time. Speaking of grip and nervous system and fitness and longevity, Dr. Peter Attia, who is a medical doctor, was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast and provided an enormous wealth of information on that podcast episode. I really encourage you to check it out when you have time. And of course has his own spectacular podcast, The Drive with Peter Attia. Peter, Dr. Attia, I should say, often talks about certain movements or exercises that you should perform not just to improve your fitness, but also to touch into or measure how fit you are and how well you are progressing toward a long lifespan and healthspan. And one of those includes the ability to hang from a bar for a minute or longer. And there are a number of different expectations that one can have of how long they should be able to hang from a bar depending on their age and their fitness level, et cetera. Please check out Dr. Attia's podcast and his various social media sites to get more information on that. But what I can tell you is that if you're going to hang from a bar and you want to hang from that bar as long as possible, which turns out to be a interesting and important metric of your health, then gripping the bar very tightly will actually help. Earlier we talked about whether or not to train if you're sleep deprived and how to recover from what I would say is moderate sleep deprivation by doing NSDR as opposed to total sleep deprivation like being up all night or having a truly miserable night, which case, I think you should just skip training the next day and slide it forward. Now, a similar issue comes up from time to time where people wonder whether or not they should train or not if they're sick. And here there's all sorts of crazy gym lore and sport specific lore. For instance, I used to hear this, when I ran cross country, there was this adage that if the symptoms were from the neck up, you could still train. That is if you were really congested and you had a headache, you could still run. Whereas if it was in your chest and in your lungs you couldn't run. I don't think there's any data whatsoever to support whether or not that's true or whether it's not true. For myself, and because my general goal is to be training and fit over time, but also to include general health in the fitness equation, that is to not be sick or chronically sick and certainly not to get other people sick. If I have a little tiny sniffle, like I think I might be getting sick, even then, I'm a little cautious in the sense that I'm not going to do my typical workout. I might stop at about 15 minutes earlier. And I would do that not by neglecting any body parts or anything of that sort. If it's a weight training workout, by simply reducing the total number of sets, I probably wouldn't do any sets to failure, if I did, I might reduce the total number or percentage of sets to failure from about 30% of sets to maybe closer to 10% of sets, something like that. And if it was endurance work, I might throttle back by 10 or 20%. And I will shorten the total duration of the workout. And I often find that because of the known, yes, peer reviewed known immune system enhancing effects of exercise, sometimes that alone will allow me to avoid getting sick. But of course I'm also careful to get home, take a hot shower, not stress myself out, if I can avoid getting myself stressed out and focus on sleep, NSDR, other forms of recovery, good nutrition, et cetera. If however, I have a real sniffle, a cold, I'm not feeling well or I think I might be coming down with a flu, I absolutely do not train and I don't get back into training of any kind until I'm completely recovered. So what I'm basically saying is that, no, I don't believe you should train if you're sick. And perhaps equally importantly, when you come back from a layoff of any kind, whether or not because of illness or for whatever reason, I do believe that because your body is a bit untrained, it's not ideal to jump right back into maximal training and to take one, maybe two weeks of ramping up to the full duration and intensity of workouts that then I would continue on going for however many cycles I can complete before I hit another sickness or I hit another gap in my schedule due to family obligations or other obligations, et cetera. So we've covered a lot of tools and protocols and variables related to fitness, but we have by no means covered all the available tools and protocols and variables. Before we wrap up, I do want to emphasize one tool. It's a very easy, in fact, zero cost, very low time commitment tool. And this was one that was provided, again, by Dr. Andy Galpin when he was on the Huberman Lab podcast. And it's a tool that there is excellent research to support the effectiveness of, and that I do believe should come at the end of every training session. And that's to do three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing. It sounds so simple, three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing. So this could be while you're in the shower or when you arrive at your car, you might sit in your car quietly and do that if you have time or maybe even while you're driving back to, or onto your next destination, just to really slow down your breathing, to really look at the recovery period that has to follow each training session. And of course, during which the adaptations, the changes that make you more fit than you were going into the exercise occur. And that three to five minutes of deliberately slowed breathing has been shown in Andy's group and in related experiments, not exactly the same, but related experiments in our laboratory, in other laboratories, to really so-called downshift the nervous system and really set you up for maximal recovery, rapid recovery, and allow you to lean into the next training session with full intensity when that training session eventually arrives. So it's a very simple tool, but a very potent tool for your overall fitness. So thank you for joining me for this discussion of what I'm calling a foundational, or yes, we could even get bold and call it an optimal fitness protocol. Although the word optimal is a tricky one. There's no real optimal fitness protocol. And today what I've really tried to focus on is this foundational protocol because it does allow you to check off most, if not all the boxes related to strength, endurance, hypertrophy, speed, power, flexibility. It will also teach you how to regulate your nervous system up and down. That is to ramp up and focus, mind muscle link, et cetera, and then quickly calm down, physiological sighs, three to five minute decompress breathing at the end of training, et cetera. Really, even though I talked about the protocol that I follow, and again, that we will provide as a newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you want to look at it in more detail, even though we talked about it in the context of what I do, again, I really want to emphasize that this protocol and the description of this protocol and all its variables is really for you and for you to tailor to your specific needs. So please, take the protocol into consideration, but do not treat it as holy, treat it as a starting point from which you can adapt it to your specific fitness needs. If you're learning from and or enjoying the Huberman Lab podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the information we've covered or suggestions about future guests, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support the Huberman Lab podcast. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous Supplements. If you like to see the supplements of the Huberman Lab podcast has partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman. And there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast. I should just mention that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab podcast has now launched a premium channel. That premium channel will feature monthly AMAs or ask me anythings where I answer your questions in depth as well as other premium resources. If you'd like to subscribe to the premium channel, you can simply go to hubermanlab.com/premium. I should mentioned that the proceeds from the premium channel go to support the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which will continue to be released every Monday per usual, as well as supporting various research projects done on humans to create the sorts of tools for mental health, physical health and performance that you hear about on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab.com/premium to subscribe, it's $10 a month or $100 per year. If you haven't already subscribed to our zero cost newsletter, we have what is called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter. Those newsletters include summaries of podcast episodes, lists of tools from the Huberman Lab podcast. And if you'd like to see previous newsletters we've released, you can also just go to hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in the menu, and you'll see various downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, we just ask for your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And again, it's completely zero cost. If you're not already following me on social media, it's hubermanlab on Twitter, on Facebook, and on Instagram. And at all three of those places, I cover topics and subject matter that are sometimes overlapping with the information covered on the Huberman Lab podcast, but that's often distinct from information on the Huberman Lab podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab on all social media channels. So thank you for joining me today for our discussion about building your optimal toolkit for fitness. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 252 ---
Video ID: X4QE6t-MkYE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4QE6t-MkYE
Title: Dr. Nolan Williams: Psychedelics & Neurostimulation for Brain Rewiring | Huberman Lab Podcast #93
Published: 2022-10-10 12:00:18 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Nolan Williams, M.D., a triple board-certified psychiatrist, neurologist and professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Stanford School of Medicine. He is also the Director of the Stanford Brain Stimulation Lab. We discuss clinical applications for brain stimulation, behavioral protocols and novel drug treatments to halt and reverse mental health disorders, including depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). We first discuss the neural circuits for self-identity and mood and stress control. We discuss Dr. Williams’ work using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to depression, trauma, PTSD, and other mood disorders. We then dive deep into the history, biology, modern use, and safety margins of the various psychedelics, including MDMA, LSD, ketamine, ibogaine, ayahuasca, and psilocybin, as well as cannabis and the use of SSRIs in both adults and children. Finally, we discuss behavioral treatments for mental health disorders, including sleep and sleep deprivation, light exposure, exercise, and training to control the brain-heart-rate pathways. Regardless of age, all those interested in mental health should benefit from the incredible breadth and depth of Dr. Williams’ knowledge and the clarity with which he conveys that information.

#HubermanLab #Science

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Nolan Williams
Stanford Profile: https://profiles.stanford.edu/nolan-williams
Brain Stimulation Lab: https://bsl.stanford.edu
Publications: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=i4WyrcYAAAAJ&hl=en
Twitter: https://twitter.com/nolanrywilliams
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/nolan-williams-0802a324

Articles
Adjunctive triple chronotherapy (combined total sleep deprivation, sleep phase advance, and bright light therapy) rapidly improves mood and suicidality in suicidal depressed inpatients: An open label pilot study: https://bit.ly/3CJCWiv
Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs of potential misuse: https://bit.ly/3fJPjSI

Books
Breaking Open the Head: https://amzn.to/3fVqbIG

Other Resources
Brain Stimulation Lab – Ongoing & Upcoming Studies: https://bsl.stanford.edu/clinical-trials
Magnus Medical: https://www.magnusmed.com 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Nolan Williams, Brain Stimulation & Depression Treatment
00:03:31 Huberman Lab Premium 
00:04:42 InsideTracker, Eight Sleep, ROKA
00:08:37 Momentous Supplements 
00:09:16 Depression, Risk Factors, Emergency Psychiatric Treatments
00:15:11 The Brain-Heart Connection, Vagus Nerve, Prefrontal Cortex
00:17:51 Right vs. Left Brain Hemispheres & Mood Balance, Connectome
00:22:34 Heart Rate & Depression, Behavioral Interventions, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS)
00:33:02 Prefrontal Cortex & Cognitive Control, TMS
00:37:46 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:39:00 Belief/Identity “Rules”, Re-scripting, TMS & Talk Therapy
00:45:49 Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex, TMS & Depression Treatment
00:48:36 Cingulate Cortex & Emotion, Dissociation & Catatonia 
00:54:27 Ketamine, the Opioid System & Depression; Psychedelic Experience or Biology?
01:03:42 SSRIs, Serotonin & Depression; Childhood, Chemical Imbalance or Circuit?
01:13:58 Memories & “Rule” Creation; Psilocybin & “Rule” Resolution 
01:21:00 MDMA & Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Treatment, Psilocybin & Depression Treatment
01:24:12 Is MDMA Neurotoxic?, Drug Purity, Dopamine Surges, Post-MDMA Prolactin
01:30:38 Psilocybin, Brain Connectivity & Depression Treatment
01:34:53 Exposure Response Prevention: “Letting Go” & Depression Treatment
01:41:23 Normal Spectrums for Mental Health Disorders
01:45:35 Ibogaine & “Life Review”; PTSD, Depression & Clinical Trials
01:57:16 Clinical Use of Psychedelics 
02:01:59 Ayahuasca, Brazilian Prisoner Study
02:06:55 Cannabis: THC, CBD & Psychosis, Clinical Uses
02:14:52 Personal Relative Drug Risk & Alcohol
02:20:42 Circadian Reset for Depression, Sleep Deprivation, Light 
02:28:43 Stanford Neuromodulation Therapy (SNT) Study
02:34:25 Space Learning Theory & TMS Stimulation
02:45:35 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Huberman Lab Premium, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Nolan Williams. Dr. Williams is a medical doctor and professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Stanford University School of Medicine. His laboratory and clinic focus on depression and other mood disorders. They focus specifically on the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation, which is a brain stimulation technique that can either activate or quiet specific brain circuits, as well as circuits within the body, in order to treat depression and other mood disorders. Other laboratories and clinics use TMS. What sets apart the work of Nolan Williams and colleagues is that they combine TMS with other treatments, and some of those treatments are among the more cutting edge that you've probably heard about these days, including ibogaine, psilocybin, MDMA, cannabis, DMT, and other drugs that at this point in time are experimental in terms of clinical trials, but that at least the preliminary data show hold great promise for the treatment of depression and other mood disorders. In the course of my discussion with Dr. Williams, we covered things such as the history of each of these drugs, how they came to be, and their current status in terms of their clinical use and legality. We also talk about their safety profiles both in children and in adults, and we talk about what the future of psychedelic research and clinical use really looks like. For instance, we discuss how a number of laboratories and clinics are modifying psychedelics to remove some of their hallucinogenic properties while maintaining some of their antidepressant or anti trauma properties. You'll also learn about some fascinating research in Dr. Williams' laboratory focused on ketamine, which is a drug that is increasingly being used to treat depression. And contrary to common belief, the effects of ketamine in terms of relieving depression may not actually arise from its dissociative effects. One thing that you'll find extraordinary about Dr. Williams is that not only does he have vast knowledge of the various treatments for depression, but that he and his laboratory are really combining these treatments in the most potent way. That is, combining psychedelic treatments with brain-machine interface, or combining brain-machine interface with particular learning protocols. That is, neuroplasticity protocols, which can directly change the brain in specific ways. So today you're going to learn a tremendous amount about the neural circuitry underlying depression, as well as positive moods. You'll also learn about all the various drugs that I described, and you're really going to learn about the current status and future of the treatment of mood disorders. Today, you'll also learn about a number of ongoing studies in Dr. Williams' laboratory. I should mention that they are recruiting subjects for these studies. If you go to BSL, which stands for Brain Stimulation Laboratory, so that's bsl.stanford.edu, you have the opportunity to apply for one of these clinical trials for the treatment of depression and other mood disorders. I confess that the conversation with Dr. Williams was, for me, one of the more stimulating and informative conversations I've ever had about psychedelics, which is simply to say that his breadth and depth of knowledge on that topic is incredible, and his breadth and depth of knowledge in terms of the underlying brain science and how it can all be combined with clinical applications is also extraordinary. I'm sure that by the end of today's episode, you're going to come away with a tremendous amount of knowledge about the clinical and non-clinical uses of those substances, and you're going to understand a lot more about how the healthy and diseased brain work. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast has now launched a premium channel. I want to be very clear that the Huberman Lab Podcast will continue to be released every Monday at zero cost to consumer and there will be no change in the format of these podcasts. The premium channel is a response to the many questions we get about specific topics, and it will allow me to really drill deep into specific answers related to those topics. So once a month, I'm going to host an ask me anything, so called AMA, where you can ask me anything about specific topics covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and I will answer those questions. Those of course will be recorded. There will also be other premium content available to premium subscribers, such as transcripts and short videos of new tools and unique tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you want to check out the premium channel, you can go to hubermanlab.com/premium. There is a $10 a month charge or $100 per year, and I should mention that a large portion of the proceeds from the Huberman Lab premium channel will go to support scientific research that develops the very sorts of tools that we talk about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. The rest of the support for the Huberman Lab Podcast premium channel will go to supporting the regular Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed with a quality blood test. One problem with a lot of DNA tests and blood tests, however, is you get data back about levels of metabolic factors, levels of hormones, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes interpreting your data and knowing what to do about it exceedingly easy. They have a personalized platform where you can go and you can see those levels of hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, and they point to specific nutritional tools, behavioral tools, supplement based tools, et cetera, that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover a few months ago, and it is simply incredible. In fact, I don't even like traveling anymore because they don't have Eight Sleep mattress covers in hotels and Airbnbs. One of the reasons I love my Eight Sleep mattress cover so much is that, as you may have heard before on this podcast or elsewhere, in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, you need your body temperature to drop by about one to three degrees. And I tend to run warm at night, which makes it hard to sleep and sometimes wakes me up in the middle of the night. When you sleep on an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can program the temperature of that mattress cover for specific times in the early, middle, and late part of your night so that the mattress stays cool. And as a consequence, you sleep very, very deeply. It also tracks your sleep, so it's paying attention to how many times you're moving, how deep your sleep is. It gives you a sleep score, all wonderful data to help you enhance your sleep. And of course, sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance, which makes an Eight Sleep a terrific tool for enhancing not just your sleep, but all aspects of your life really. If you're interested in trying a Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go to EightSleep.com/Huberman to check out the Pod 3 cover, and you can save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, to Canada, the UK, and select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's EightSleep.com/Huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with some pretty significant challenges in order to be able to see clearly as you move from one area to the next. For instance, when you go from a shady area to a bright area. ROKA understands this and have designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses accordingly so you always see with crystal clarity. In addition, because they were initially designed for performance, things like running and biking, they're extremely lightweight, but they have a terrific aesthetic. So unlike a lot of eyeglasses and sunglasses that were designed for sports and make you look like a cyborg, they have styles that make you look like a cyborg if you like those, but they also have styles that you'd be perfectly comfortable wearing to work or out to dinner, et cetera. They're really terrific glasses. I love mine because I can wear them anywhere and I also use them when running and going out hiking, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's ROKA.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, ROKA.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. On many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. Things like enhancing sleep and the depth of sleep, or for enhancing focus and cognitive ability, or for enhancing energy or adjusting hormone levels to optimal range for you. The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. To find the supplements we discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman. And I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. And now for my discussion with Dr. Nolan Williams. Thanks for joining today. I'm really excited to have this conversation. It's been a long time coming and I have a lot of questions about different compounds, psychedelics in particular. - Yeah. - But before we get into that discussion, I want to ask you about depression, broadly speaking. Intractable depression. How common depression is or isn't. I heard you say in a wonderful talk that you gave, that depression is perhaps the most debilitating condition worldwide. And yet, in contrast to other medical conditions like cancer, we actually have a fairly limited number of tools to approach depression. And yet number of tools and the potency of those tools is growing. So if you could educate us on depression, I would really appreciate it. - Yeah, absolutely. So depression is a condition that, it has a lot of manifestations, you know. So you can have kind of a depression that's primarily loss of interest. You can have folks who feel very anxious and they're kind of overactive. You can have people who don't have any anxiety at all, and they're very underactive and they have low motivation to do anything. You know, so you have this huge range of symptoms that are in that umbrella of depression. And some of our work is to actually work with folks like Conor Liston and Cornell, and try to actually get biotypes based off of neuroimaging to see if we can kind of parse out the different depression kind of presentations, and see that clinically, and also see that in the brain. Depression is the most disabling condition worldwide. What's interesting about depression is it's both a risk factor for other illnesses, and it makes other medical and psychiatric illnesses worse, right? So recently the American Heart Association added depression as the fourth major risk factor for coronary artery disease, right? So alongside the risk factors that we know, hypertension, high blood pressure, hyperlipidemia, high cholesterol, and diabetes, you know, high blood sugar, those three have been on the list for a long time and depression ended up being added to the list as the fourth one. And you know, really interesting, right? So in addition to taking medications to address those other three risk factors, we really have to be thinking about how do you treat folks with depression to reduce the risk of having a heart attack in the future? And, you know, there's some of that's being worked on now, but we don't have a complete solution to thinking about that at this time. And then the other thing that's interesting is once you have a heart attack, in the individuals that end up having a heart attack, the risk of having depression after the heart attack is higher than the normal population, right? And so a lot of what we're doing in the lab actually is measuring kind of brain heart connections. And we can actually, with transcranial magnetic stimulation, a form of brain stimulation, we can actually decelerate the heart rate and capture that heart rate deceleration over the mood regulatory regions. And so actually a direct probe of that connection. So it's interesting. And so, you know, as you said a second ago, you know, it's a very disabling condition. Moderate depression's about as disabling as having a heart attack, acutely having a heart attack. Severe depression is disabling, is having cancer without treatment, you know, and dying from a cancer without treatment. And so, you know, it's kind of underappreciated just how disabling depression is in that way. And I think important as stigma is consistently kind of being reduced over the years for mental illnesses, then the idea that we can start really putting more funding and putting more focus at the federal level, you know, private foundation level, whatever it is, at a given university to thinking about developing treatments. We've been very interested in a very particular clinical set of problems around the most severe and the most high acuity settings that folks with depression end up being in. And that's in, you know, emergency settings where they go into inpatient units. And you know, in the rest of medicine, if it's talking about heart attacks, if I start having chest pain right now and you bring me to a primary care doctor's office, they're going to have a certain number of tests and treatments, right? But very limited cuz it's an outpatient facility. If you bring me to the emergency room after that, there are more tests and more treatments. If you put me in the ICU or in the cath lab where they do invasive procedures to the heart, there are more tests and more treatments. In psychiatry, as we elevate the acuity of an individual, you go from being just depressed to being depressed and now thinking about ending your life, the number of treatments actually go down on average. I mean, in some scenarios, they go up, but on average they go down and there are no tests, right? And so we've been very focused on that particular problem. Somebody that maybe was doing, you know, fairly okay with a pretty moderate depression and then their depression gets worse and then they end up in an emergency setting. And the field really hasn't developed a way of consistently being able to treat that problem and folks end up getting the same standard oral antidepressants that they've been getting outpatient. And I came to this because I, you know, dual trained as a neurologist and psychiatrist, went back and forth between neurology and psychiatry, saw that in neurology we have all of these ways of treating acute brain based problems and really wanted to emulate that in psychiatry and find ways to develop and engineer new, you know, brain based solutions. - There's a lot to unpack there. One thing that you said is, I'd like to focus on a bit more because I think we hear that the brain and the heart are connected, but you described, I believe, a direct relationship between areas of the brain associated with emotion and heart rate. - [Nolan] Yes. - And that makes perfect logical sense to me. But I think at the same time, many people out there probably think of the relationship between the heart and the mind as kind of woo or kind of a soft biology. But here you're talking about an actual physical connection. - [Nolan] Yep. - Between, what area of the brain is it? - The first place where the stimulation goes is called the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. It's kind of the sense of control, kind of governor of the brain. And then what we know is that when you use a magnet, use kind of what we call Faraday's Law, this idea of using a magnetic pulse to induce an electrical current and electrically conducting substances. So in this case, brain tissue, but not skull or scalp or any of that, or hair. You avoid all that, just the brain tissue. Then you have a direct depolarization of cortical neurons, you know, the surface of the brain's neurons, in this dorsolateral prefrontal. And if you do that in the actual scanner, which we can do, you can see that that distributes down into the anterior cingulate and the insula and the amygdala. And ultimately the tract goes into something called the nucleus tractus solitarius and ultimately into the vagus nerve into the heart. So the heart very consistently seems to be the end organ of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. If you measure heart rate in standard ways that cardiologists measure heart rate and you stimulate over this left dorsolateral, you get a deceleration of the heart rate and it's very time locked to the stimulation. So it's a two second train of stimulation. At one second, you see the deceleration, it goes down about 10 beats per minute, and then it'll drift back up and there's a break for eight seconds on the stimulation. Drifts back up and the stimulation goes back in and then the heart rate goes back down. And so you see the heart rate just do this, 10 beats per minute every train. And so we know, and if you do that over visual cortex, you don't get that, or motor cortex, you don't get any of those findings. It's really specific to this kind of control region of the brain. And so, yeah, it seems to, you know, it's our work, other folks' work. Martin Arens in Europe, the Netherlands, work showing the same connections. I think it's been replicated like four or five times. - So you mentioned left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Anytime I hear about lateralization of function, I get particularly curious because obviously we have two mirror symmetric sides of the brain. There are, you know, rare exceptions to this, like the pineal and things of that sort that there is only one pineal. What is special about the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex? Does this have anything to do with handedness, right hand or left hand? Because we know right-hand and left-handedness has a lot to do with lateralization of function for language, a topic for another time. But why do you think that left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex would be connected to the heart in this way? - Yeah. Yeah, I think, so left dorsolateral is thought to be the side that when you excite it, when you kind of do excitatory stimulation, potentiating sort of stimulation, that you can reduce depressive symptoms. And a guy by the name of Mike Fox at Harvard demonstrated that if you have strokes in the brain that cause depression and you put them on the human connectome, a hundred, you know, thousand patient map, and you ask the question what they're all functionally connected to? Left dorsolateral. If you take lesions that cause mania in individuals and you put those all on the human connectome map and ask what the one common area they're all connected to, it's the right dorsolateral. And so there seems to be a hemispheric, you know, balancing of mood between these two brain regions. And we know this from an experimental standpoint too, because you can take individuals with depression and you can excite the left or you can inhibit the right and they're both antidepressant. You can excite the right and that's anti-manic in some studies. And so this idea that there is this hemispheric balancing of mood is quite interesting, right? - It's incredibly interesting. And just so people know, if you're curious what the connectome is, connectome is a term that was built out of this notion of genomes being large collections of sequencing and mapping of genes. They're proteomes of proteins, of connectomes is so-called connectomics, of connections between neurons. So the Human Connectome Project is ongoing and I find that incredible that within the Connectome Project, they can identify these regularities of right versus left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Especially since I've looked at a fair number of brains from humans, certainly not as many as you have. And if you look at the architecture, the layers, the cell types, and even the neurochemicals of which cells are expressing, say, dopamine or serotonin or receiving input from areas that make dopamine or serotonin, they don't look that different on the right and left side. And yet here we're talking about a kind of an accelerator and a brake, if you will, on depression and mania using what, at least by my eye and I think other people's eye look to be basically the same set of of bits. The same parts list, more or less. So what gives these properties to the right and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex? Is it the inputs they receive? Is this something that we learn during development or do you think that we come into the world with these hemispheric biases? - Yeah, it's a great question. And you know, it hasn't been worked out, which your original question was around, in a left handed individual, which as you know, 25% of those folks end up having a right brain dominance or 1% of right-handed people have a right brain dominance if it's flipped, right? And unfortunately that study still hasn't been done at the level, 'cause that would be probably pretty helpful for teasing some of this out. But, you know, it's still being sorted out, right? We know enough to know this phenomenon exists because we can use TMS as a probe and do these sorts of manipulations. But to my knowledge, there hasn't been anybody that's gotten so interested in it that they've been able to get a mechanism of why that is. But, you know, it's kind of empirically true in the sense that you can push and pull on those systems, or in the case of strokes that folks have, and then you kind of get their brains and their brain images and look at where the strokes landed, those kind of causal bits of information point to this asymmetry. - Interesting. Well, in that case, going with what we do know, that stimulation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex slows the heart rate down, transiently, but it slows it down, and seems to alleviate at least some symptoms of depression, leads me to the question of why would that be the case? Does it tell us anything fundamental about depression that anxiety is inherent to depression? I think a faster heart rate is, you know, part and parcel with anxiety. In my laboratory, we've studied fear a bit in animals and in humans, and we often observe bradycardia where somebody or an animal is afraid of something and rather than the heart rate speeding up, it actually slows down, something that most people don't think about or recognize. But given that stimulation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex slows the heart rate down and can alleviate depressive symptoms and that there are other ways to slow the heart down, I have two questions. What do you think this tells us about the basic architecture of depression and its physiology at the level of the heart? And does the circuit run in the opposite direction too? If one were to have or find other ways to slow the heart rate down, say with a beta blocker, does that help alleviate depression? - Yeah, no, that's a great question. So I'll answer the second question first. So we know that in the ongoing trials of this, if you stimulate in the vagus nerve, in an implanted vagus nerve stimulator, you can actually, you know, have this, the afferent parts of the vagus project ultimately up to the DLPFC through the cingulate through these anterior insula, so that same, that obviously the same tract, right? And you can stimulate there and alleviate depression, which seems very unusual, right? You're stimulating a cranial nerve down on the neck. But if you can get up into the brain, you actually can improve depressive symptoms. And so, you know, more evidence that this is a kind of a whole track and system. And if you stimulate in part of that system, it appears that you can improve mood. - And what if I were somebody who did not have a stimulating electrode in my vagus nerve and I was dealing with minor depression and I decided I wanted to take some other approach to slow my heart rate down by the vagus? For instance, exhale emphasized breathing or deliberately slow cadence breathing, things of that sort. Is there any evidence that behavioral interventions of those kinds can alleviate depression or some symptoms of depression? And is there any evidence that it does indeed feed back to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to achieve some of that alleviation? - Absolutely, yeah. So there's a number of studies implicating the dorsolateral in, say, you know, meditation, mindfulness, that sort of thing. And they're small studies, but pretty well designed studies suggesting that behavioral interventions in mild depression actually work quite well. There seems to be a volitional threshold for depression where at some point you start losing, you go from being completely in total volition to having kind of semi-volition. You have thoughts that you really have a hard time controlling and that sort of thing. And when you go through that threshold, at some point it gets harder and harder for those sorts of things to kind of kick in and work. And the extreme form of that is catatonia, right? Where people in a very severe form of depression get kind of stuck motorically, right? And they obviously can't, they have no control or very limited control. And so, you know, I think there's a threshold in which these sorts of interventions will work. Exercise seems to really be a good treatment for mild depression and it may work through the mechanism you're describing, right? As we all know, you know, athletes hold a lower resting heart rate than folks that aren't, you know, if you were an athlete, you had a lower resting heart rate, you stopped exercising, and a couple years later your resting heart rate in many cases goes up, right? And so maybe that's part of the process. I'm not aware of any studies specifically looking at dorsolateral prefrontal physiology pre-post exercise, but it would be a great study. I think that would be really helpful to understanding this, especially if you had a correlation of changes in kind of lowering of, say, heart rate with mood improvements. There's been a lot of work with heart rate variability and depression and, you know, studies kind of point towards it. Not every study is positive for this, but quite a few studies say basically that lower heart rate variability is associated with, you know, moderate to severe depression. And that may be part of that mechanism of that heart brain risk. - So I'm both intrigued and a little bit perplexed by this relationship between heart rate and depression. On the face of it, I would think of depression as depressed. So lower heart rate might make somebody more depressed. You even mentioned catatonia or somebody that just doesn't seem motivated or excited to do anything. I think of mania as elevated heart rate and being excited. On the other hand, I realize that anxiety, which you know, brings about ideas as elevated heart rate is also built into depression. Which brings me back to what you said earlier, which is that when we say depression, are we really talking about four or five different? - Yeah, that's right. - Disorders, for lack of a better word. And for what percentage of people that have depression does some approach to reducing heart rate work? Whether or not it's stimulation of the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex by way of transcranial magnetic stimulation or by taking a beta blocker or by stimulating the vagus. Can we throw out a number, a rough number? Does that help, 30%, 50%? How long lasting is that relief? - Yeah, and to be clear, the deceleration of the heart rate is in the moment when the stimulation is happening, but it's not something that's necessarily maintained chronically. It's more of an indicator that you're in the right network more than it appears to be itself, you know, central to the mechanism. The heart rate variability piece may be, and there's some studies that link the two, but the actual deceleration seems to be much more of a marker that you're in the right system. But you know, it very well could be that the heart rate system and the mood system just sit next to each other and the stimulation hits both. If you look at how much of the variance in the mood is explained by the heart rate deceleration, it's not a huge amount, right? So it only explains a small percentage. And so it's unlikely that simply reducing the heart rate. And in fact, you know, for many years, propranolol and these sorts of drugs actually were implicating causing depression. And so that's been kind of debunked, but it's unlikely that simply decelerating the heart rate's going to improve depression. But what it does tell you is that if you're in that area that is the mood regulatory area, there's some parasympathetic cortical kind of process that's going on that gets in and causes this to happen. And it's, you know, it's independent of mood. You can take a normal healthy individual and you can do this and they're going to decelerate their heart rate. - I'm so glad you mentioned the parasympathetic nervous system, which of course is the, most people think of as the rest and digest or the kind of calming side of the autonomic nervous system. As I'm hearing you say all of this, and in particular what you just told me, which is that it's not as if having a lower heart rate protects you against depression or a higher heart rate is associated with depression, although at the extremes that might be true, but rather it's something about the regulatory network, the ability to control your own nervous system to some extent. And when I think about the autonomic nervous system, I like to think about it as a seesaw of, you know, alertness and calmness, and when you're asleep it's a lot of calmness, and when you're panicking it's a lot of alertness to the... But that, and I don't think this has ever been defined, and when I teach the medical students at Stanford neuroanatomy, my wish is that someday I'll be able to explain what the hinge in that process would be, right? Not the ends of the seesaw. We know what the sympathetic nervous system is and it's to wake us up and make us panic or make us feel nicely alert and calm. We know what puts someone into sleep or a coma or makes them feel relaxed. But what shifts from one side of the seesaw to the other and the tightness of that hinge seems to be what you're describing, that depression is sort of a lack of control over inner state so that when I'm stressed, I can't get myself out of it. But when I'm feeling completely collapsed with exhaustion, I can't get out of bed and be motivated to do the very things that would help me get out of depression, like a workout or social connection or eat a quality meal, these kinds of things. So this is perhaps the first time that I've ever heard about a potential circuit for the hinge, as I'm referring to it. Does that make any sense at all? - [Nolan] Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. - Okay, I just want to make sure that I'm framing this correctly in my mind. - Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And in some studies, if you do the same identical stimulation on the right dorsolateral, you can get an acceleration. You know, just kind of further confirming this idea of lateralization, right? That it appears that even the prefrontal cortex, you know, cortical areas seem to be lateralized in this way. And, you know, it's less, the right finding is more variable depending upon the study. The left's very consistent in this way. So... - So we've talked about transcranial magnetic stimulation for getting into these networks and I also just want to take a brief tangent and say, 'cause I've heard you say this before, I think it's so vital what you're saying, that it's really not about stimulation of areas or any specific brain area or vagus nerve being important per se. It's really about a network, a connection, a series of connections. I think that's really important for people to understand and is kind of a new emerging theme really. The other thing that to me seems extremely important for us to consider is what are these lateral prefrontal cortices doing? Are they involved, for instance, in sensation, sensing the heart rate? Are they involved in thinking and planning? And this gets down to a very simple question that I know a lot of people have, which is, can we talk ourselves out of depression? If it's mild. Can we talk ourselves into a manic state or an excited state, a positively excited state that doesn't qualify as mania? You know, other areas of the brain, I think of is responsible for perception or for motor control. But here we are in this mysterious frontal cortex area, which people say executive function, planning, et cetera. Are we talking about thoughts? Are we talking about structured thoughts or are we talking about dreamlike thoughts? What in the world is going on in the prefrontal cortex? And here I spend my career in neuroscience and I still can't really understand what it's doing and maybe it's doing 50 things. - Yeah, no, it's a great question. So, you know, to... So one of the studies that we've been working on in addition to the depression work is actually trying to change trait hypnotizability. So David Spiegel and I have been working on this and you know, he's found and published this 10 years ago that a different part of the left dorsolateral is functionally connected with the dorsal anterior cingulate with a lot of functional connectivity in high hypnotizables and not much in low hypnotizables. And that's kind of a different sub-region within this bigger brain region we call left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex than the part that seems to be important for regulating mood. And so the left dorsolateral seems to have connections that are location specific within the overall kind of named brain region that connect to various parts of the cingulate and seem to regulate it. Right? And so if you knock out the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and you have people do the Stroop task, for instance, which is a task where you have, it's a simple task, you probably know this. You have people name the color of words. And so if I look at one of the cards that they'll show you, it'll have the word red in red and that's very easy and that's called a congruent. And then the incongruent is red in the color blue and you have to name, you have to say the word, you don't name the color. - So you have to suppress a response. - Yeah, yeah, exactly. And so, I'm sorry, you name the color and you see the word written in a different way. And so basically if you stimulate in a way that inhibits the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex or either one, you can actually knock out the ability to do that well and it'll take longer for people on the incongruent cards to be able to name it. And so they have a kind of a time delay that's greater than they had before they got stimulated. So that's a part of the prefrontal cortex that's different than the part of the prefrontal cortex that's involved in mood regulation. The nice thing about TMS is that you can go through and you can find these areas that are functionally defined through brain imaging and you can perturb them and answer the question you're talking about. How do I understand this part of the prefrontal cortex and its function, this part? And so we were able to stimulate in an inhibitory way within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that's involved with this sort of cognitive control area. And we were able to knock that area out and increase trait hypnotizability, so people had greater hypnotizability after they got active stimulation versus when they got sham. And so it suggests that that brain circuit is involved in the process of what therapeutic hypnosis ends up being. But it's a very different region within the left dorsolateral than, say, we do when we do these very intensive stimulation approaches to treat severe depression and we're able to get people out of depression. You know, with the part of the dorsolateral that seems to be lower in the, you know, kind of more lateral and inferior on the DLPFC and connected with this subgenual anterior cingulate, so the part of the anterior cingulate that processes emotion. - I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or usually twice a day is that it gets to me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health. And those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins, and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to AthleticGreens.com/huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Again, that's AthleticGreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3K2. Based on what you told us about the Stroop task and the role of the prefrontal cortex in the Stroop task, to me the Stroop task is a rule switching game. You're saying in one moment, the rule is you read whatever the word says and then you switch and then you say, the rule now is you tell me what color the word is written in and you suppress whatever it is the word says, okay? - [Nolan] That's right. - Okay, a rule in some sense is, like that, is a transiently adopted belief system. So I could imagine that in depression, which has all sorts of backstory to it, that of course the psychiatrist or psychologist or friend can pull on that thread. Like for instance, somebody might believe that they are bad or that they don't deserve love. I'm trying to bring this into the typical language that they would talk about. Or that they will never succeed. Or that even if they keep succeeding, it's just going to get harder and harder and it will never feel good. These are sort of rules like the Stroop task. At some level. There are rules that are more pervasive over time, unfortunately. But I could imagine that if the PFC is also contains some sort of maps or algorithms related to rules of emotionality or self representation or things that we've heard, I think there must be data out there saying that, you know, whatever we heard in middle school when someone made fun of us, we can remember that. 'Cause I can remember things that people said about a jacket I wore one day or something in the fourth grade, crazy, I didn't even like the jacket. Now I think it was kind of cool, but anyway. The point being that we have an intense memory for these things to set up a sort of rule or a question. Like maybe I don't really know how to dress, for instance. Maybe that's why I always wear the same black shirt. But in all seriousness, it seems like the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is in this amazing position to access rules which are beliefs and beliefs are rules, and then for moments or longer, to switch those rules. And so for somebody who's depressed to just simply look themselves in the mirror and say, "You are great, you are fantastic," it feels like a lie if you feel like garbage to say that. It doesn't fit with the rule. It's like saying that card is not red, that card is green, when your eyes tell you that it's red. And it seems like there's something about prefrontal cortex that in principle gives flexibility to rules based on what we know about the Stroop task. So given its connectivity, can we assume that the talk therapy that occurs in the psychiatrist office or with a friend or through journaling out something, because we do know that reporting things about trauma or difficult circumstances or the rules that we contain and tend to hide inside of us about how we feel miserable about ourselves or anything really, that in rescripting that, that somehow it allows us to do a sort of Stroop task on our beliefs. Is that a tremendous leap? I'm just really trying to frame this in the context of what I and most people think of as depression. - [Nolan] Yeah, totally. - Because the network components are vitally important, but I guess what I'm trying to figure out is like what are the algorithms that govern prefrontal cortex? - Yeah, absolutely. So in a kind of standard cognitive behavioral therapy session, right, what the therapist is trying to do is identify those beliefs and you know, kind of determine how fixed they are, you know, if they're flexible as you're saying, and then help folks to find another explanation for them and to kind of reintegrate that potential other explanation into their memory system, right? Where I think TMS is really interesting, actually, we had a lot of patients who've told me, like my therapist told me that I wasn't trying hard enough in therapy, and you know, and I really am trying hard, but these are, you know, moderate, pretty severe depressed patients. And as soon as we get them well with the TMS approaches, you know, kind of rapid five day approach and the next week we come in and see them and they'll say, "You know what I did all weekend is I looked at my therapy books and now I can understand it." And so, you know, I actually see TMS as a way of having kind of exogenous sorts of cognitive functions that in milder forms of depression we can pull off with psychotherapy. You know, this idea of being able to kind of turn that prefrontal cortex on and have it govern these deeper regions. In depression, the deeper regions govern the prefrontal cortex. They precede the prefrontal cortex timing-wise. And we've got some data in review now where we're seeing that in depressed individuals that are responsive to our rapid TMS approach, what we call Stanford Accelerated Intelligent Neuromodulation Therapy, or SNT, or SAINT, if you look at the brain before people get this, they will have a temporal delay where the cingulate is in front of the DLPFC. And in people that are normal healthy controls, no depression, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is temporally in front of the anterior cingulate. With effective treatment, we can flip the timing of things so the dorsolateral is in front of the anterior cingulate, just like in a normal person. - So you're not talking about obviously physically moving these structures, you're talking about in time, their activation. So in one case, it's like the coach telling the player what to do. And the other is like a player telling the coach what to do. And you restore order to the game. - You restore order to the game. And what it looks like is depression, to your point, is a bunch of kind of spontaneous content that's semi-volitional that's being kind of generated out of this conflict detection system. The cingulate seems to sense conflict and kind of feed that information, gets overactive in depression. And then in depression, it looks like the left dorsolateral does not sufficiently clamp down on it. And what therapy appears to do is to kind of restore that. What we see with TMS over that region is that we just exogenously do the same sort of thing. We restore the governance of the left dorsolateral over the cingulate area, and that is correlated with treatment improvement. So the degree in which you can re-time, re-regulate in time the left dorsolateral over the cingulate, the more of an antidepressant effect you have. - Can we therefore say in crude terms that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex really is the governor of how we interpret physiological signals and spontaneous thoughts? - It places a lens that the rest of the brain sees things through. And you can do these experiments where you can put a normal healthy control person in the scanner and you can make them feel like they have a loss of control and then you can see that region come offline, right? So you can experimentally manipulate the system, and so kind of buffing it up, it's like TMS is almost like exercise for the brain, right? You're kind of exercising this region over and over again with a physiologically relevant signal and kind of turning that system on. And what's interesting, I think really interesting for this show is to, you know, we had a couple of folks, you know, probably five or six folks that have actually told me this, where if they remit early enough in the week, we have this very dense stimulation approach where we can stimulate people really rapidly over a five day block. We don't discriminate when they get better to when they stop. So if they get better on day one, we still give them the other four days because it's in the protocol to do that. And we can't, we're getting to a point where we can tell how long it's going to take, but we're not there yet. And so, you know, every time somebody gets better at day one or two, at the beginning when we first started doing this, we'd say, you know, we're not sure, you know, we think this is safe to keep going, but you know, what do you want to do? And everybody was like, no, I want to keep going. And so, you know, by Wednesday, they're like totally zeroed out on the depression scales, you know, even better than most people walking around. Like really no anxiety, no depression or anything. By Thursday, the first guy that told me this, he came in and he said, "You know, I was driving back to my hotel and I decided to go to the beach and I just sat there and I was totally present in the present moment for an hour." And he's like, "I read about this in my mindfulness books, but I experienced it last night and I've never experienced anything like this before." And I was like, hmm, that's interesting, but kind of wasn't sure. And then I didn't tell obviously any more patients about that, and then about five over the last couple of years, when they remit early in the week, by the end of the week they're like going to the beach and they're like totally having what people describe as a pretty mindful present moment sort of experience, which is really interesting, you know, what that is. I mean, I don't have full on scientific data to tell you, but it's just an interesting anecdote, right? That folks, when you push them through this point of feeling kind of clinically well that some people end up reporting this additional set of features. - You mentioned the cingulate and the anterior cingulate in particular. Because now I feel like for the first time in my career, I have some sense of what prefrontal cortex might actually be doing besides providing a bumper for the rest of the brain. The cingulate, it seems, is a more primitive structure in the sense that ideally it's under the regulation of this top down control from prefrontal cortex, but what's mapped in the cingulate? And for the non neuroscientist out there, when I say mapped, if we were to put someone in a scanner and focus in on cingulate or put an electrode in there, what makes the neurons in there fire? What sorts of things in the body and in the mind and out in the world light up, for lack of a better phrase, the cingulate? What does the cingulate like? - Yeah, yeah, so that Stroop task, those incongruent word color associations, the dorsal part of that. For obsessive compulsive disorder patients, certain kind of triggers. You'll see some of the neural imaging studies will point to anterior cingulate. In the kind of very crude psychosurgery world 50 years ago, the anterior cingulotomy was a way of treating obsessive compulsive disorder, right? 'Cause that area seems to be overactive in people who are experiencing obsessive compulsive disorder. You can kind of walk, the cingulate wraps around, you know, this white matter track like bundles, it wraps around that. And so there's a part that's above that, around that, and below that, and depending upon how much of the conflict task has an emotional component, the more ventral and subgenual that activation is. So the dorsal part of the anterior cingulate seems to be kind of more of a pure cognitive, maybe obsessive compulsive disorder sort of area. Whereas when you start getting into mood sorts of triggers, like facial expression conflicts where you're supposed to, you know, there's an emotional Stroop task where you show the word happy and then you have a face of a person that looks mad, then that's another way of having the same sort of Stroop conflict. That seems to be more perigenual, subgenual areas, right? So you can kind of, you can trigger the cingulate based off the level of emotional valence from none down to a lot. And that seems to be how it's distributed. There are, you know, heart rate kind of components to it and autonomic components in there too. There's something called akinetic mutism, you know, I'm a board certified neuropsychiatrist, behavioral neurologist, and I've seen, you know, a lot of these what we call zebra cases in neurology where people have, you know, these unusual neurological presentations and one of them is akinetic mutism. So if you have a glioma sitting in the inner hemispheric fissure and kind of having pressure on the cingulate, people can get into an almost catatonic looking state where they kind of get stuck and they don't speak. And so that tells you something about how the cingulate works as well, right? It's like if it's not functioning, then people have a hard time kind of connecting with reality. It seems to need to be constantly online to be able to interact with the exterior world. - Is it involved in some of the dissociative states that sometimes people who are very stressed or depressed experience? You said catatonia being an extreme one, but I know someone for instance, that when they get really stressed, and it can even be if someone yells at them or even if someone's angry with them or they perceive someone's angry with them, there's a developmental backstory to why they likely feel this way, they sort of just kind of can't... This is a high functioning individual normally, and they just sort of can't function. They can't complete simple things like email or groceries or things for a short while. It's almost like a catatonia and they refer to it as a dissociative state. Do you see that in depression? And I mean, we're speculating here as to whether or not that involves a cingulate, but what you're saying holds a lot of salience for me in thinking about this example. - Yeah, yeah. There's, so you see catatonia as an extreme outcome of depression and sometimes schizophrenia and other illnesses. Dissociation is an extreme outcome, or even in some cases, a less extreme outcome of PTSD and trauma. And you know, and it's also a phenomenon that happens naturally in some people that are highly hypnotizable. And so if you ask David Spiegel, he'd say that, you know, some of the work that he's been working on is around posterior cingulate in the capacity to disassociate. But yeah, you know, with our stimulation approach to DLPFC, dorsal anterior cingulate, one of the subscales that moved the most was the dissociative subscale for hypnotizability. So even in a normal individual, you know, you see that change in that kind of experience of dissociation. - I am highly hypnotizable. David's hypnotized me a number of times. In fact, we have a clip of that on our Huberman Live clips channel. I've always, well, always. Starting at my early teens, I started exploring hypnosis. I'm extremely hypnotizable. And self hypnosis or assisted hypnosis. I don't know that I ever go into dissociative states. I'll try and avoid forcing you into running a clinical session right now, but to assess anything like that. But this brings about something really interesting, I think, which is I'm aware that some of the more popular emerging treatments for depression include things like ketamine, which is a dissociative anesthetic. Is that right? - Yep. - And my assumption is that as a dissociative anesthetic, that it leads to dissociative states where people can sort of third person themselves and feel somewhat distanced from their emotions. I've also been hearing that there are emerging treatments, psilocybin being one of them, but some other treatments, MDMA, et cetera, that we'll parse each of these in detail, that lead to the exact opposite state during the effect of the drug, which is a highly engaged emotionality and heart rate and sense of self. And can also lead to relief of depression. Now, whether or not this, again, reflects that depression is many conditions as opposed to just one, or whether or not somehow tickling or in some cases pushing really hard on the opposite ends of the scale really matter, I am absolutely fascinated, and again, also perplexed by this. Why would it be that a drug that induces dissociative states and a drug taken separately that induces hyper-associative states would lead to relief of the same condition? - Yeah, no, that's a great question. Yeah, so for ketamine, you know, the level of dissociation appears to be correlated with the therapeutic effect. It appears to be necessary but not sufficient to produce an antidepressant effect. And so folks that don't have any psychological change from the ketamine or don't experience any dissociation typically tend to have less potent antidepressant effects from ketamine. We did a study a couple of years ago, it was really interesting. So we gave folks naltrexone, which is an opiate antagonist, mu and kappa opiate receptor antagonist. And we gave folk, the same individuals, a pill of that or a pill of placebo, and they had no idea which one they were getting. - Was this low dose naltrexone? - [Nolan] 50 milligrams, so it's pretty high dose. - Okay. - Yeah, and so we gave a typical ketamine therapeutic dose, and then we gave 50 milligrams of naltrexone or placebo. And then in the same individuals, we gave two infusions, one with each of those conditions. And if they had an antidepressant effect, we waited until they relapsed and then we gave 'em the other condition. And then we looked to see what effect of blocking the opioid receptor, what effect would you see on the antidepressant effect of blocking the opioid receptor with the idea that if ketamine works the way that a lot of researchers at the time thought that it, you know, completely worked in, which is the glutamate system, then you would have no effect of naltrexone. 'Cause naltrexone just interacts with the opioid system. It doesn't do anything with any other systems. Ketamine has a lot of effects over, you know, it has clear opioid effects in mice in various ways of looking at that, and an MDA receptor antagonism and glutamate effects. And so if it's just that the glutamate part is the part driving the antidepressant effect, you shouldn't have any difference in the antidepressant effect between the two conditions. If, however, the antidepressant effect is primarily is the opioid properties of ketamine are necessary for the antidepressant effect, then you should have a loss of antidepressant effect during the ketamine plus naltrexone condition that you observed in the ketamine plus placebo condition. And what we saw was that there was a dramatic blockade of the antidepressant effect when naltrexone was present. Yeah, in the people that had an antidepressant effect with ketamine plus placebo alone. And then some friends of mine did a TMS study with pain and they stimulated over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and they gave IV naloxone, which works basically the same way as naltrexone, and they were able to block the anti-pain effects of TMS with a opiate blocker. So this idea that another kind of convergent point, right? This idea that the opioid receptor may have a role in mood regulation. What's also interesting is if you look at people that are getting a total knee operation, very painful operation, right? You know, total knee replacement and you age, sex, you know, everything match the individuals that are going through that. But you have a group of people that don't have depression and a group of people that do have depression. The presence of depression triples the oral opioid dose by day four, right? - That's required. - That's required to cover the pain but what may be happening is it's not just treating physical pain, may be treating emotional pain as well, right? At least transiently, it seems to have an antidepressant effect. Chronically, it seems to have a very pro-depressant effect. It can make people treatment resistant. But, you know, it's an interesting phenomenon. But yeah, the opioid system seems to be pretty involved. But what's interesting there with the ketamine trial is that we didn't see any effect on the dissociation. And so the dissociation was the same each time. So the psychological effect of what we call the trip or the kind of dissociative effect where people are having a psychological phenomenon from ketamine, that was identical both times. And so it kind of, it also challenged this idea that the psychological experience of the psychedelic effect may be all that's necessary to produce an effect and that the pharmacology doesn't matter as long as you can achieve that state. And so, you know, we think we pretty clearly debunked that idea that the underlying pharmacology and the state, you know, seem to be important. We don't know for sure if you can, a lot of people are working on this, if you can take out, you know, essentially the psychological effect and still have a drug that works to treat the illness that you're trying to target. And there was a mouse study out this week where they had an LSD analog and they were able to see some animal level data to suggest that could be true. But until we figure that out in humans, it's kind of to be determined. But it is curious, right? Being able to kind of use experimental manipulations to try to separate, you know, some of these phenomenon apart and really understand what's doing what. - It's so critical and it's so critical to the other conversation that we'll surely get to, which is the progression of psychedelics from illicit illegal drugs to clinically validated, and presumably at some point, either decriminalized or legal drugs, which has not yet happened, at least not in the US. But just to make sure that people are getting this and how crucial this is. What we're really talking about here is the fact that, you know, if somebody takes a multi gram dose of psilocybin or somebody takes MDMA or they take ketamine and they experience relief from their trauma, their depression, their addiction, or any number of the other things that indeed those compounds have be shown to be useful for in certain contexts, clinically supported, et cetera. There's this like gravitational pull to the idea that, oh, it was the hallucinations. It was the dissociative state. It was the feeling of connectedness. And what we're really saying is that while that certainly could be true, it may be the case that a major source of the positive shift that occurs after the effect of the drug is some underlying biology, like shifts in the mu opioid receptor, a la your experiments with naltrexone, or a change in the underlying neuromodulation that had anywhere from nothing to something to do with the real shift. And I know there's a group up at UC Davis that published a paper in nature about a year ago also looking at this is a chemistry lab essentially, modifying psychedelics to remove the hallucinogenic properties, the mood altering properties, and actually seeing some pretty impressive effects and shifts in mood after the drug wears off. And I know this gets people upset when they hear it. This gets a lot of people upset really. Because people think, oh no, it's the intense experience that matters. But in fact, that may not be the case at all. In fact, it's so powerful for people that sometimes I liken it in my mind to, you know, it's like the birth of a new child and it's such an incredible experience and then people feel so much connection. And then they sort of connect the experience of the actual birth to the connection, when in fact they're, that's true it turns out, but there are a bunch of other things happening too. That's simply the reflection of the fact that you're holding a child and the pheromonal effects et cetera. So anyway, I think it's very important that these different variables be figured out. Along those lines, I want to make sure that before we dive a bit deeper into ketamine and psilocybin, that we do touch on really important topic that has been in the press a lot lately, which is SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. 'Cause we can't really have a discussion about depression without talking about SSRIs. And then I want to circle back to ketamine and psilocybin. It seems that there are now data that essentially state that there's no direct link between serotonin levels and depression. Although my understanding is that the SSRIs are powerfully effective for certain forms of obsessive compulsive disorder and may also be effective for treatment of depression, but it may again be through some effect unrelated to serotonin itself. Is that right? And how should we think about SSRIs? Are they useful, are they not useful? What's going on with SSRIs in your patients and in other people as well? - Yeah, so the experiment that I described a bit ago around the naltrexone and ketamine was the first time I'm aware of where we were able to essentially eliminate an antidepressant's effect by using a second drug as a kind of a blockade. And it highlights a bigger issue, right? The issue that we haven't had a good way of really understanding how these drugs work. And so it's the difference. I think a lot of the controversy there is that it's been been difficult, I think, for folks to see that something can on one hand work and on the other hand, we don't know how it works, right? And so SSRIs clearly work. You know, many, many meta analyses kind of proving that out, right? That in a subpopulation of individuals, they achieve great benefit from depression, you know, for depression, for obsessive compulsive disorder, for generalized anxiety disorder, panic, you know, all these things, you can see an improvement in those symptoms with what we call SSRIs or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. The issue there is that these selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors end up blocking the reuptake of serotonin and leaving the serotonin, you know, in this kind of in between, between two neurons for a while and allowing for more serotonin to kind of be there. The issue is that they don't work immediately, right? So they don't work like the same day you start taking them. And that suggests that probably it's not exactly the serotonin being in there that's directly driving it, that it's much more likely that it may have some, say, brain plasticity effects, right? We know that things like brain derived neurotrophic factor get upregulated with chronic oral antidepressant use. And so that's kind of the idea is that these things work, but what's powerful, and I think with the authors of this paper, this extremely controversial paper, were in part trying to say was that there's not a deficit of serotonin. You're not born with what people call a chemical imbalance. And psychiatry's known this. This is not actually new information, anybody, you know, and it's kind of a rehashing of a bunch of information we've known for a while now, but in the lay press, it's kind of hit in a way that it didn't seem to grab attention before with previous publications. But this idea that this chemical imbalance idea is wrong. I really think that part's important because I think that, you know, for a while, I think psychiatry, you know, what I'll call psychiatry 1.0, right? This kind of idea of Freud and psychotherapy and its origins. It was a lot around, you know, your family and those experiences and psychotherapy kind of going in and correcting or helping you to figure out, and you know, you being able to see, or people hear you so that you can eventually come to the conclusion of certain cognitions that aren't helping you, right? And there's a huge importance there, but there's a history where, you know, things like the schizophrenogenic mother and all of that, you know, that was a concept at some point, right? And so we've transitioned from that to, you know, for a long time the chemical imbalance, which I'll call psychiatry 2.0. You know, this idea that there's something chemically missing and I think that the trouble there for a patient who's not a physician, who's not someone who's steeped in these sorts of ideas, who's, you know, more of kind of a person, kind of average American out there, right, is that it's sending a message of there's something missing with me, whether it be my experiences I had no control over when I was a child or a chemical in my brain. What I think is really powerful with TMS, you know, really powerful with TMS, and even powerful with the psychedelic story is it's saying something different. You know, TMS works and there's no serotonin coming in or out of the brain, right? And we're doing a rapid form of TMS that works in one to five days. There's no, it's very unlikely that there's some long term kind of upregulation of serotonin that's driving that. So our work actually kind of pushes back on this serotonin hypothesis as being kind of the center of depression because it says, look, we're not giving anybody any serotonin. We're simply turning these brain regions on and we're focused on the circuitry. And that's psychiatry 3.0. It's not just like neuromodulation. Neuromodulations are really nice, you know, use case for psychiatry 3.0 'cause it's a way to focally and directly perturb brain regions in whatever modality you're using. But you know, there are a lot of groups that are actually doing neuroimaging before and after, and they're able to see circuit level changes for something like psilocybin or ketamine long after the drug is gone, right? Suggesting in those same brain regions converge, so the subgenual default mode network connection that we see is changing with our Stanford neuromodulation therapy technique. It's that same set of brain regions that ketamine and psilocybin seem to act on, act on these connections between brain networks that seem to shift. And so it refocuses the story on something that's highly correctable. And it's basically electrophysiology and it's basically kind of recalibrating a circuit that is recalibrate-able instead of I have something missing or I have some set of experiences early in life that are going to forever trap me in these psychiatric diagnoses. And so it kind of challenges that idea. And I think that's what's so powerful about psychiatry 3.0. This idea of focusing on the circuit because it gets us into thinking about psychiatry and psychiatric illnesses as something that are recoverable. People can get better. People, you know, we've seen with our TMS techniques, we've seen with some of the psychedelic work that we've done where people are actually in normal levels of mood for sustained periods of time or- - Within five days. - Within five or less days. And in the case of the psychedelics, within a few days, right? So we can get people out of these states. They're totally well, there's no drug in their system in that point, in the case of the psychedelics. It was never a drug in their system, in the case of TMS. And it just tells us that it's fixable. It's just like the heart. It's just like an arrhythmia in the heart. It's just like, you know, these other illnesses, that it's like a broken leg. We can go in and do something and we can get somebody better. Then I think what's empowering and what a lot of patients have told me is they say, you know, some people will relapse and need more stimulation or need more psychedelics or whatever it is, but they'll tell me, I've relapsed and I'm depressed again, but I'll never think about killing myself again because I know that if I go get stimulated again, it improves, it gets better. I will be able to reachieve it and I can't. And I don't fear that I'm chronically broken. I don't fear that the chemical imbalance is still imbalanced. I don't fear that these things that I couldn't control in my childhood, you know, are going to be there and drive this problem forever. And I think that's what's so powerful about this. - [Andrew] The sense of control. - The sense of control, the sense of... They're not doing the stimulation themselves. They're not administering the drug in these trials themselves. And they probably never will. These will probably be medical treatments. But they are choosing to do it. And in that sense, they are in control. - Yeah, I have a good friend, I won't out him for reasons that'll become clear in a moment, who was quite obese and lost a lot of weight and was really proud of himself. And then I guess we could say he sort of relapsed in a sense. Not all the way, but far along. But his tone around it was very different. He knew he had accomplished what his goal once before. He was disappointed in himself, but he knew exactly why he had relapsed. It was very clear. He had essentially relapsed to the previous set of eating behaviors and lack of exercise behaviors and has now brought himself back again. And it just resonates with your story that, you know, once somebody understands they can do it because they've been there before, this idea again of considering new rules, that there's... And that brings me to this question about psychedelics and frankly the altered thinking and perception that occurs in high dose psilocybin clinical sessions. It seems that the disordered thinking, even though it could be random, right? Hearing colors and seeing sounds is always the kind of cliche statement of the Timothy Leary area. Also, you know, right there, that's a Stroop task of sorts. It's a synesthesia, it's a combining of perceptions, but it's sort of Stroop task-ish in that it's a new set of rules for the same stuff, right? And many people do report improvements in trauma related symptomology and depression, as I understand it from my read of the clinical trials, after taking psilocybin. Because during those sessions, something comes to mind spontaneously. As you and I were talking about earlier, they will report, for instance, a new way of seeing the old problem. And the old problem could be the voice that they're no good, nothing will ever work out, or could be even more subtle than that. So that raises two questions. One is about the basic functioning of the human brain, which is why do you think the brain would ever hold on to rules that don't serve us well? That's one question. And then the second question is, what is it about psilocybin and related molecules in terms of their neurochemistry, in terms of the ways they disrupt thinking and feeling, et cetera, during the session that allow this novel rule consideration phenomenon? - Yeah. So the first question, I think it's an evolutionary neurobiology answer, right? I think that at the individual person level, you know, it doesn't make a whole lot of sense that when we're really stressed out, some of us want to eat more, right? At the individual person level 'cause it's like, that's not particularly that good for my health in the long term. But if you think about it, like, you know, in some 500 years ago, 1,000 years ago, if I'm highly stressed out, it's most likely that I'm about to not have food at some point and I should eat a bunch of food that is high fat, high sugar, high carb food to put on weight for that next phase where in this stress I may be in battle and I don't have food and I have enough fuel on board, right? And so we end up being a result of probably a lot of biology that's not that useful in the modern era. And I think in the brain for, say, let's say PTSD, right? A lot of veterans come back and they experience these PTSD symptoms and they're not at all useful back home, right? You know, they hear some loud noise and all of a sudden they're behind a car or they're behind a, you know, I've heard of folks, you know, jump and run behind a trashcan or whatever in the middle of San Francisco when they hear a loud noise. But if you put them back in the battlefield. - [Andrew] Highly adaptive. - That's highly adaptive, right? And so I think what's interesting is that we, in the absence of using substances like psychedelics, end up having these very persistent memories that are attached to negatively balanced emotion, predominantly, as you were saying earlier, the jacket in elementary school, you know, I had various things like that for me too, right? You remember these things. And we hold onto those things from I think an evolutionary neurobiology standpoint, but what seems to, for whatever reason, kind of alleviate that are these substances, some new like MDMA, some that have been around for thousands of years, like psilocybin, and used as a sacrament in traditions, seem to have a therapeutic effect. It seems to be pretty long lasting for these phenomenon. And so it's just curious, right? It's curious that in the absence of that, these things will keep going on and on, but in the presence of that exposure, then all of a sudden you see a resolution of the problem. And we have some work now we're treating folks with, Navy SEALs, and the data's still being analyzed. But the anecdotes that we're getting, right, are folks are coming back and they're saying it's finally gone, right? These set of PTSD symptoms are finally gone. And so this idea that for whatever reason, going into what's probably a highly plastic state like we were talking about earlier, upregulation of brain derived neurotrophic factor in the case of ibogaine, glial derived neurotrophic factor, this highly plastic state and the ability to kind of re-experience memories. And then as you know, we always reconsolidate a memory when we bring it back up, we always reconsolidate it. But reconsolidating it in that state, for whatever reason, may drive a therapeutic effect. And, you know, the jury's still out. I would say that I'm kind of an agnostic to what tool I'm using kind of guy. Like my business is to find treatments that help people. And so I'm much more like pragmatic about it, you know. If this sort of thing, which has a lot of cultural baggage, but if this sort of thing ultimately ends up being therapeutic, if we can design trials that convince me and others that it is, then we should absolutely use it. You know? And if it doesn't, then we clearly shouldn't use it, right? And I think that's a big question the field's going to have to work out. We have a hard time blinding these trials because the placebo condition is not easy to pull off, obviously. - A placebo for a psilocybin journey is hard to imagine. - We've got, you know, we've been thinking about this and maybe that ketamine study that I was talking about earlier, if we could give people naltrexone and ketamine, maybe that's a good sort of placebo condition, right? 'Cause we know that we can block any of the actual antidepressant effects of ketamine, they still have an experience, you know. And so that's one way of doing it. But thinking about ways to do that and really kind of proving this out. And that's been, yeah, I think that's been kind of central to the way I've been thinking about this. But yeah, I think there's the work that's been done so far, the first psilocybin trial, the first MDMA trial was published in "Nature Medicine" recently. - And what do those generally say? I mean, that they are effective for a number of people after one session, two sessions? What's sort of the general contour of? And let's start with psilocybin and MDMA. - Yeah, so MDMA appears to, in one to a few MDMA sessions, have an anti PTSD effect that seems to be, you know, outside of the kind of standard assumed levels of PTSD improvement that you can observe in individuals with this level of PTSD, right? So what we call the effect size, which is essentially like a effect size, the measure that allows for you to compare different treatments to each other for different conditions that are, you know, agnostic to what the actual illness is. You know, the effect size is there, you know, approach effect size is the things that are pretty effective like antacids for heartburn, right? And you see that with MDMA treatment. - So does that mean that for people that have trauma, and again, we're talking about in a clinical setting, they take a one or two doses of MDMA. I think the standard maps dose is 150 to 175 milligrams. Again, doing this with a physician, et cetera, control clinical trial, legal. - [Nolan] Yep, exactly. - They do it once or twice. And broadly speaking, what percentage of people who had trauma report feeling significant relief from their trauma afterward? - It's about 2/3 of people had a clinically significant change in their PTSD. - That's impressive. - [Nolan] Which is impressive, right? - And how long lasting was that? I mean, these trials were ended pretty recently, so... - Yeah, it appears to last for a while. In the earlier trials where they followed people out, it seemed to last for kind of in the years range for some people. And so it's, you know, it's pretty compelling. Psilocybin, you know, and contrast that with ketamine, which only on average lasts about a week and a half for a single infusion, so it's a much shorter. - So they have to get repeated infusions of ketamine every 10 days or so? Forever? - For some people, or they end up getting like a bunch of doses for a couple of weeks. And then for some people that seems to last a while. You know, that's where I think the psilocybin story for depression and the MDMA story for PTSD seemed more interesting to me. - So for psilocybin, what is the rough percentages on, and this would be relief not from trauma, but from depression, correct? - Yeah, yeah, exactly. So it's, you know, in open label studies, it's closer to like half to 2/3 of people end up getting better depending upon their level of treatment resistance. In the blinded trials it was more like 1/3 or so of people, you know, experienced relief. And this is, you know, this is a press release of the data, you know, and so it hasn't, to my knowledge, it hasn't been published yet. And so I'm looking forward to seeing the full paper on that one. But it, you know, separated from placebo and looks pretty good as well. It looks like it's, you know, the first of two trials that need to be done to get this thing approved for treatment resistant depression. And so that stuff looks good. - In terms of MDMA, for many years it was reported in the popular press and there was a paper published in science that MDMA was neurotoxic, that it would kill serotonin neurons. This was what was always said. Then I saw another paper published in science that wasn't a retraction of the previous paper, but rather was a second paper in the same group that essentially admitted that the first time around, they had injected these monkeys with not MDMA, but with methamphetamine, which is known to be neurotoxic. So it was kind of a public admittance of oops or like really big screw up, so oops, but never a retraction and then never really a publicly acknowledged correction in the popular press. So it seems that in the appropriate dosage range, and with these one or two sessions, my assumption, and this again is an assumption, tell me if I'm right or wrong here, is that MDMA is not neurotoxic for serotonergic neurons at appropriate doses and with appropriate sourcing, et cetera. - So it was an interesting study that, I think the guy's name is Halpern, last name's Halpern. - [Andrew] Not Casey Halpern. - Not, different Halpern. I think Joshua Halpern, I'm blanking on his first name, but... - Casey Halpern was a guest on this podcast and is a former colleague of ours at Stanford, who unfortunately we lost to University of Pennsylvania and maybe someday we'll bring him back. - Yeah, that's right. So this individual, you know, received some NIH funding to actually, NIDA, you know, National Institute for Drug Abuse funding to explore individuals of the Mormon faith in Utah who partake in only MDMA. So the way this works is that MDMA happened kind of after a lot of the religious documents were developed. And so MDMA isn't on the prohibited drug list. - The banned substance list. - [Nolan] The banned substance list. - I have some good friends who are LDS. - Yeah, great people. I do as well, you know, just a kind of set of facts, you know. And so these folks only use MDMA but they don't, they're not, you know, the problem with some people using drugs, they're poly substance users, right? So you can't say it's the MDMA if they've also taken other psychedelics and they've taken opiates and they've taken cocaine, and you have this picture where you can't really tease out that problem. But with this, right, it was just individuals that were part of the Mormon faith. And so they were kind of purist in the sense they only used MDMA and he confirmed all of that. And it was a brilliant study, right? Because then he was able to go in and look at their cognitive profiles versus individuals of the same geography, the same faith, all of that, that happened to not take MDMA and found there were no neurocognitive differences. - So does that mean that it was not damaging? - It was not damaging. It's hard to know because to really do this study well, you'd have to track these folks down before they ever took MDMA and do a pre-post and compare to people that didn't. But, you know, this is about as good of a study as you can do, given the situation, to be able to check this out. Additionally, when I was back in Charleston and working in the Medical University of South Carolina, one of my mentors there, Dr. Wagner, was a neuropsychologist at MUSC and he was also the neuropsychologist for the early MDMA trials. And so he did all the neurocognitive batteries for individuals pre-post and similarly did not see any changes in neurocognitive profiles in a negative way. And so, you know, there's data from experimental patients receiving this. There's data from people that are chronic users, you know, who only take MDMA. And that combination of data suggests that there's certainly no apparent risk in the kind of one to two to three dose range. And it's probably unlikely that at least, you know, modest dose exposure over a lifetime doesn't appear to have a profound neurocognitive damaging effect, yeah. - Interesting. Yeah, I know that sourcing is key and we're here, we're talking about clinical trials where purity is assured. And you know, years ago when so-called raves were really popular, maybe they're still popular, never been to one, so wouldn't know if they're happening or not. That's how in the know I am. But it was clear that, you know, testing for purity was important because sometimes the drugs are made such that there are contaminants like methamphetamine, which we know is highly neurotoxic. I think that one reason why people think that MDMA might be neurotoxic is the reported drop in energy or sort of feeling fatigued for a few days afterward. I spoke to a physician colleague of ours who said that that very likely has something to do with the surge in prolactin that arrives subsequent to the big dopamine surge that occurs in MDMA. And I mention that because I know a number of people talk about serotonin depletion after taking MDMA. He has it in mind that while that could be true, it's likely that anytime somebody takes something or does something where there's a huge lift in dopamine, that there's very likely a huge compensatory increase in prolactin that follows and prolactin has a kind of sedative effect, numbing effect on mood and libido, et cetera, that eventually also wears off. Does that make sense to you as a physician? - Yeah, it makes sense. I mean, you know, the difference between, say, MDMA and psilocybin is that MDMA is kind of an amphetamine of sorts, right? So it has effects in dopamine and psilocybin's, you know, pretty neutral, and you know, maybe a little bit of dopamine effects, but kind of much more of a serotonergic focused drug. And so yeah, I think you're going to see kind of a different profile after. And that makes, I haven't heard that story, but that makes sense to me too. - Since you mentioned psilocybin, let's talk a little bit about the neurochemistry of psilocybin. As a serotonergic agent, my understanding is it operates on these, is it the 5HT serotonin 2C receptor? - 2A. - 2A, excuse me. 2A and receptors. And that I've seen a bunch of different reports in terms of what it's actually doing to the brain while people are under the effects of the drug. And this is important for us to segment out because there are the effects that happen while people are under the influence and then the more long lasting effects. But some of the effects I've heard about are, for instance, and tell me again if these are right or wrong, that there is increased activation of lateral connection, sort of broader areas of the brain being coactive than would normally occur. Maybe that explains some of the synesthesias, you know, seeing sounds and hearing colors and that as the trivial example, but rule breaking within the mind. But then I've also heard that perhaps it's lack of gating of sensory input. So normally if I'm looking at something, I'm not thinking about the sensation in my right toe unless it's relevant. But if I'm thinking about the sensation in my right toe, I'm generally not thinking about the truck around the corner. So we have these attentional spotlights, but that somehow it creates a more, it adds spotlights. - Yeah, degates the thalamus. - Degates the thalamus, right, through the particular thalamic structure. So what is the evidence that any of that is true? And are there other phenomena? Is there involvement of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex that we are aware of? And what I'm really headed here in a few minutes is, you know, is there a place for combining directed stimulation of the brain with psychedelics so that the effects of serotonin could be primarily within the structures that you know from your work to be relevant to depression. So, but to simplify it first, what's going on when one takes psilocybin and why is it interesting in light of depression? - Yeah, definitely. So David Nutt and Robin Carhart-Harris' work around neuroimaging psychedelics are kind of some of the first folks to do that work. And to their great surprise, they thought there was going to be an increase in activity on psychedelics and what they found is the opposite, right? There's kind of an overall decrease in the level of activity in the brain with psychedelics, but they've also looked at connectivity and there's this kind of small world, you know, large world connectivity that you think about. And so, you know, small world meaning there's kind of a much more kind of focused kind of cortical function or, you know, sub-cortical function or whatever it is. And what you see is a difference in that level of engagement of brain regions, the connectivity, kind of global connectivity, to your point, kind of increases. And so, you know, it's interesting, you know, I think to kind of have a conversion theory on this. It's still, you know, to be determined. There's still a lot of work I think that needs to be done. But it's certainly suggestive that there's pretty profound changes in brain activity and brain connectivity after. And what we've found to be really interesting is that the anti-depressant effects of psilocybin have a particular connectivity change that we also see with our TMS approaches, right? And it's this connectivity between the subgenual anterior cingulate and the default mode network. And so when we do this effective Stanford neuromodulation therapy stimulation, we see a down regulation, the connectivity between them, negatively balanced mood state in the case of depressed individuals and the self-representation of the brain. And you see that same connectivity change occur post-psilocybin, you know, suggesting there's a convergent mechanism and it makes sense, right? You've kind of got an overconnected, negatively balanced system, conflict system that's kind of attached onto the self representation and people feel stuck, right? And then when you do whatever you do that's effective, it unpairs those two systems. - I want to ask you about this phenomenon I've heard about during psilocybin journeys. I heard about this from Dr. Matthew Johnson, who's running a lot of the clinical trials at Johns Hopkins and has been a guest on this podcast. He said that there's something seems to be important about the patient who's depressed or who's under the influence of psilocybin or the patient who's trying to get over smoking or an eating disorder who's taking psilocybin and is in the clinic. That there's something important to this notion of letting go, that people will feel as if their thoughts and their feelings and maybe even their body aren't under their control, and that the clinicians' job under those circumstances is of course to make sure that they're physically safe so they don't jump out a window or try... Actually give an example of a patient who thought that, I think it was a she, could move into the painting in the wall, and obviously that wasn't true in the real world, although it was true in her mind. So they prevented her from doing that. But that letting go, that somehow untethering from the autonomic arousal that's occurring is important. Which brings us back to this idea or me back to this idea of like a seesaw where you're sort of letting go of the hinge and just sort of, your heart rate's going up, like just go with it and trust, you know? Your heart rate's going down, just go with it and trust. You're thinking about something very powerful and depressing related to your childhood, you're just supposed to go there without fear. You're thinking about what's possible in terms of what could happen. So anyway, you get the picture. Can we think of that as just the willingness to do a million different variations on the emotional Stroop task? You know, you'll entertain the full array of rules within your head and consider them. Or is there something more to it? You know, and again, we're in the outer margins of understanding here, but what are your thoughts on this notion of letting go as such a key variable for relief from depression during the psychedelic journey? - Yeah, so I'll talk a little bit about something called exposure and response prevention therapy, that's a typical kind of gold standard treatment for OCD, and I'll help this a little bit conceptually. And so what that really is, it's a letting go therapy. And so, you know, exposure response prevention, the idea is that you have to expose the individual to something that, you know, something that triggers an obsession that they then want to do whatever the compulsion is, right? And so I'll give you, you know, my first exposure and response prevention patient when I was a resident, he was very concerned about leaving the lights on his car. And so what we did is we went out and we turned the lights on in his car and locked his door. So his lights were on, and he was super worried, this is going to kill his battery. And we went and we spent an hour talking about things, and we went back out to his car and his battery was fine, and his lights were on. And he cranked the car and we did it maybe one other time, and then all of a sudden that was gone, right? And that's the idea is that, you know, you're essentially exposing. And you want to do it at levels that are, from an anxiety standpoint, tolerable, but exposing the person to something and then letting them see that that exposure ends up being fine, right? It ends up not causing the thing that they end up being worried about. And so, you know, in some sense, being in the psychedelic state, and we are all taught at a level to retain some level of control. You know, people have more or less of that, but we're all effectively retaining some level of control. We all wake up in the morning and put clothes on to go into society. We all try to say, you know, most people try to say the right things. They don't try to do things that are outside of cultural norms when they're in conversation. And so we're constantly at some level controlling the situation that we're in. And so it's, you know, it's not, it makes a lot of sense that in that state, part of the therapeutic effect that may be linked to the neural circuitry is this idea of letting go and essentially letting the system, you know, the network configuration maybe, whatever it is, assume a state that you've essentially been fighting the whole time. The same way that my OCD patient was fighting this need to click the off button on the lights of his car 50 times before he would go and do whatever he needed to do. And in some level, letting go there, meaning letting us just turn the lights on and him not do anything, or letting go meaning in the psychedelic state, you're just letting go of whatever it is you're holding onto, negatively balanced thoughts about yourself in the setting of having depression or, you know, re-experiencing a trauma memory and allowing that to just happen and seeing it again through a different light. You know, it feels the same in the sense that that's allowing for whatever's going on with these psychedelic states to do whatever they do. - It's fascinating. You said it's exposure response therapy is the traditional name? - [Nolan] Exposure response prevention therapy. - Prevention therapy. Done outside of the psychedelic journey. - It's done outside the psychedelic journey. But that idea of letting go is present in both of those. You know, psychotherapy kind of straight up, totally sober, non psychedelic, non anything psycho manualized, that psychotherapy that we know works really well for OCD. And then, you know, in that psychedelic state, and so people have done studies with psilocybin, and now there's some studies with MDMA trying to look at treating OCD, you know, with this same sort of idea of letting go, right? And how do you have an OCD patient kind of let go? Maybe even letting go of not washing their hands anymore, you know, kind of accepting the idea they're not going to get germs in their hands or whatever it is, you know? And so it's kind of part and parcel, that same sort of thinking. - When I was in college, I developed a compulsive superstition. I'm not afraid to admit this. I somehow developed a knock on wood superstition. And I was actually kind of ashamed of it because it rationally made no sense. I don't consider myself a superstitious person, never was a superstitious kid. You know, I'd step on the sidewalk cracks, I'd walk under ladders, you know, I'd probably even try to walk under a ladder, even though I don't suggest it. But somehow I picked this thing up and I used to sneak it at times. I told my girlfriend at the time that I had it in hopes that that would prevent me from doing it. And it's tricky. Sometimes it actually comes back where I think, gosh, I didn't say, you know, knock on wood, I didn't knock on wood, I hope that doesn't actually happen. And it's quote unquote crazy, right? But crazy in the sense that it makes no sense rationally why the events would be linked. And yet I think a lot of people out there do have internal superstitions. Maybe by talking about it now, it'll go away. Clearly I just need to challenge it. You know, anyway, I mention it because I consider myself, you know, generally rational person, but it's interesting how these motor patterns get activated and this notion of letting go, because I don't actually know what consequence I fear. And the fear, as I was hearing the example you gave, you know, the fear of the car battery running down, I was about to say, "Well, what if the battery actually did run out?" Then the therapy would be undermined. And yet that could also be interesting too, because it's not that big of a deal. You jump the car. But in my case, I need to think about what the ultimate fear is. - Yeah, and you know, I think a lot of people, so it's interesting if you look at, say, the OCD scale or the depression scale or whatever, we don't define normal as zero. We define normal as some number range above. So zero to, in the case of the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, one of the depression scales we use, 10, right? That's the normal range. And so people could have some sadness and still be considered normal. In the case of the OCD scale, it's about the same 10, right? Where we say it's kind of starts to be, you know, mildly abnormal or something. And I'd always tell the medical students, "Look, my friends that are surf instructors, they're more like a zero on the Y bar. People that are professionals, you know, they're non-zero, but it's still within the normal range." And especially, you know, in the case that you're talking about, it doesn't sound like it got in your way. It doesn't sound, I mean, you're obviously highly successful tenured professor at Stanford and do all the great things that you do. And so it's very much kind of within the normal range, and I think totally assumed that a lot of people have these sorts of things. And as long, I think something as a psychiatric diagnosis when it severely impairs your ability to function and that's when we kind of cross that threshold. But, you know, I think that a lot of people, and it's great that you're bringing this up. I mean, it's very anti-stigmatizing that you're bringing up, right? Because I think a lot of people hold that stuff in and they don't want to talk about it because they're worried that somebody else may think something. But the reality is, as a psychiatrist, I talk to a lot of patients, a lot of people that are, you know, family members, you know, folks that are just going through a death in the family, whatever it is. And what you figure out is like, everybody's got a little something here and there. Everybody has the knock in some way, if that makes sense. And it's just, and we're all just kind of more predisposed not to talk about it. But I think it's important to talk about it because I think that when we start all talking about it, then we realize that we're all kind of in this together in a way. And then some folks that have to knock 100 times, we call that OCD, you know, and they're worried about germs and all these other things. We call that OCD. And then in that circumstance, you know, they need treatment, right? But it is really on, just like blood sugar, just like blood pressure, it's on a range, you know, and it's not just these discreet diagnoses. You have them or you don't. - It's good to know. I actually feel some relief just hearing this, because I am slightly... I wouldn't say ashamed as sort of embarrassed by it, but I offer it as a, you know, it is what it is, as they say. And it certainly doesn't seem to hinder my life much, knock on wood. - [Nolan] [laughs] Nice. - So if we could talk a bit about ibogaine. I don't know much about ibogaine, although anytime I hear the, you know, A-I-N-E, you know, lidocaine, ibogaine, I think of an anesthetic. And going to the dentist, which is an unpleasant experience for me, generally. What is ibogaine? Does this have anything to do with the so-called toad? You know, people talk about smoking frog skin, toad skin. What is it used for clinically? Is it legal in the US as a clinical tool? Who's using it and for what purposes? If you could educate me on ibogaine, I truly know nothing about it, except I think I know how to spell it correctly. - Yeah, that's fair, yeah. So ibogaine is one of the alkaloids that you can extract from a iboga tree root bark that's typically growing in the country of Gabon, Africa. So Gabon is one of the West African countries, kind of middle of Africa and on the west coast. And Gabon has a group of folks, you know, called the Bwiti. It's a religious kind of sacramental group that sacramentally uses iboga root bark as part of the sacrament. And they've been using iboga root bark for a very long time. And it's, you know, part of the tradition. There's a whole set of kind of ceremony around it. If you're interested in this, there's a book called "Breaking Open the Head" by Daniel Pinchbeck that goes through and talks about this whole process. But essentially the Gabonese have been using this for a long time and it's a kind of an atypical psychedelic. It's not a psychedelic that we normally think about with psilocybin and LSD where there are visual perceptual changes, right? So if you take psilocybin or LSD, what you experience is you experience these kind of visual perceptual differences in the external world, right? And on enough LSD or psilocybin, an individual can actually perceive something visually in the external world that isn't there, as we talked about earlier. Ibogaine doesn't do that. Ibogaine does something different. It's kind of like, have you ever seen "Minority Report," you know, the movie with Tom Cruise, I think 15 or 20 years ago or something? So it dates us a little bit, but it was this movie where he would be able to go and see these kind of pre crimes. And he had this big screen where he could look at scenes from time and like kind of go through that scene and see it. And so what individuals taking ibogaine will say is that open eyes, they don't see anything, but closed eyes, they'll go back through and re-experience earlier life memories and they will be able to experience it from a place of empathy, not only for themselves, but from others, and kind of detached empathy and being able to see this as almost a third party, even though they were there. But they're able to see it, you know, as a third party. So Claudia Naranjo, a psychiatrist from Argentina, described this for a lot of books that he wrote, in I think the '80s and '90s around this. And so, you know, ibogaine's been around for a long time. Howard Lotsof, American guy that brought it over from Africa. He was a polysubstance user, used every drug that he could get his hands on, took ibogaine, and including a lot of other psychedelics, by the way, took ibogaine and then never did another drug again, supposedly because he had such a profound ibogaine experience. Ibogaine is in no way a recreational substance. It's not a recreational substance if you want it to be a recreational substance, because you're essentially having this, what they call life review. They also call it 10 years of psychotherapy in a night. So these are the terminology that people talk about the issue. - How long does it last? Is it truly one night? - It's usually, you know, it can go, depending upon if you get re-dosed or anything, go sometimes, depending upon how fast you metabolize it, sometimes 24, sometimes 36 hours. Sometimes it can be shorter, but it is a long time. It's a very long time. So it's definitely the longest acting psychedelic substance I know of. And so people, you will take this, and they'll have this reevaluation of a given memory. And then as we were talking about earlier, reconsolidate that memory again, and then it seems to have, you know, an effect of that reconsolidation process. And so, you know, about five, four, five years ago, I was tapped by Robert Malenka, one of the senior neuroscientists we both know in the university. And he says, "Well, there's an unnamed donor that's very interested in funding a scientific, kind of open label study of these Navy SEALs that have been going down to Mexico and taking ibogaine and also 5-MeO-DMT," which I'll talk about in a second, to treat PTSD. You know, they claim to have traumatic brain injury, depression, you know, that whole constellation of symptoms. You know, and as it was described to me by various people that had done this, by their spouses and and whatnot, you know, John, we'll just say John, John couldn't screw a light bulb into a light fixture, right? They were just so debilitated they couldn't do simple tasks, what we call activities of daily living. And they were coming back and having these really dramatic improvements in all aspects of life. And so, you know, we have over the last couple of years been able to do this first in human, kind of full neurobiological clinical neurocognitive evaluation of what ibogaine is doing. In this case, in special operations, special forces individuals, former Navy SEALs, former Army Rangers, that kind of crew of folks, and look at the pre-post changes that their experience to be able to totally quantitate all of that. And so we've been able to capture all the clinical scales, you know, depression scales, PTSD scales, all that standard stuff, neurocognitive batteries. So how does your executive function work specifically? How does your verbal memory, all of that? And then neuroimaging and EEG. So this will be the first human study of ibogaine for those. And the reason why is because ibogaine is kind of the... Both seemingly the most potent and most seemingly, to me at least, most powerful psychedelic, but the one that has the most risk too, because it has a cardiac effect. It seems to be that you can screen people out that have risk off of their electrocardiogram and reduce the risk quite a bit. And that's what we all did. But that's why people haven't really studied it as much. And it isn't as, in addition, nobody goes to a rave on ibogaine. There's no recreation at all with this. - It's not fun. - It's, people say that it's relieving, but it's hard work, right? Because yeah, you're reexamining things. And you know, and so then we see these folks after, and I'll tell you, you know, we haven't fully analyzed the data yet, but I'll tell you that, you know, from what my folks are telling me, it's pretty dramatic. You know, people come back and they're doing a lot better. They're doing a lot better. And nobody, I'll knock on wood, nobody's had any sort of cardiac issue at all in the cohort that we've studied and they look a lot better and they feel a lot better too. And they describe these experiences of being able to go back through and, you know, soldiers experienced something called moral injury, right? Where maybe they accidentally blew something up and had a kid in it or something like that. You know, if they're in Afghanistan, Iraq, maybe, you know, a child died on accident or maybe a civilian died or whatever it was, right? And they suffer these moral injuries as part of the job. And it's almost one of the kind of vocational risks. They come back and say that they've forgiven themselves, you know, which is huge, right? And part of that is being able to see themselves in a different light and having empathy finally for themselves and being able to kind of have that experience of forgiving. And so, very cool. The study, you know, what was happening was they were taking ibogaine and then taking something called 5-MeO-DMT. People call it the Toad, it's the Sonoran River Toad. I think it's like you can find these in Mexico, find 'em in Arizona. In the back of the toad produces something called 5-MeO-DMT, which is a flavor of DMT that produces a particular psychedelic effect also used as a sacrament. - Is it dimethyltryptamine? - It is a 5-MeO dimethyltryptamine. So it's a kind of a dimethyltryptamine with a kind of addition to it. The deal there is that it lasts longer than traditional DMT. You know, it's like 20 minutes to five, three, or whatever kind of thing. And so these guys were taking ibogaine and then they would take the 5-MeO-DMT after. We had to kind of divorce those two things to be able to do the study and just understand what the ibogaine was doing. And they'd go back down a month later and they'll do the 5-MeO-DMT. - So two completely separate sessions. - [Nolan] Two completely separate sessions. - And then one quick question about ibogaine before a bit more on 5-MeO-DMT. Is the ibogaine journey guided, or the person just closes their eyes and they just start falling into the back catalog of memories? - They have a bunch of preparatory sessions, and then they have a bunch of sessions after that they're able to kind of rehash things. During, there's a sitter that sits there and kind of sits with them and helps them out, but it's not, it's pretty, the phenomenon of the drug seems to drive a lot of this, right? And so a lot of it ends up being what we call supportive psychotherapy. You're just kind of being there and, you know, maybe you're holding the person's hand, maybe you're just saying "I'm here," or maybe whatever it is, but you're making sure they know you're around. But there's not really an interaction per se. And then the whole kind of goal there is just to get folks to kind go back through and reexamine these memories and ultimately look like they reconsolidate them. And you know, it's very interesting. I mean, there's this kind of, as you said earlier, Timothy Leary kind of sociocultural construct that ends up being overlaid over psychedelics. And what I think is that if you rid yourself of all of those preconceived notions of what it is and isn't, and the counterculture movement, all that stuff that neither of us were ever involved in, neither of us are ever partake in, you know, as kind of straight scientists looking at this, right? If you can kind of rid yourself of all those sociocultural constructions and then reexamine this, if we just discovered these today, we would say that these sorts of drugs are a huge breakthrough in psychiatry because they allow for us to do a lot of the sorts of things we've been thinking about with SSRIs, with psychotherapy, but kind of combined, right? Psychotherapy plus drugs in a substance that kind of allows you to reexamine these things. And so it's interesting. There's a lot to do to try to figure out if that's true, you know? And I can say that as it stands right now, we don't know if that statement is true, right? There's a lot more work that needs to happen for that statement to be proven to be true. But the hypothesis is, if it is true, then it's very likely that this will be seen as a breakthrough because it allows you to do these sorts of things that you can't do with normal waking consciousness. But also why we have to really think about this. And, you know, these drugs can't be recreational drugs. They really shouldn't be recreational drugs, right? They're really too powerful to be used in the context of recreation because they can put you into these states. And this generation of psychedelic researchers are really clear about that. You know, I think the '60s folks were not clear about that, and they felt like there was this whole kind of cultural thing that was going on there. But I think this cohort of individuals really understands that in order to really make this happen, we have to understand that if you need a prescription for an SSRI, which doesn't change your consciousness a whole lot, and we're very worried about that, and the doctor has to evaluate you for that every week, that the idea that some of these substances would go outside of very strict medical supervision is kind of preposterous actually. It's kind of a dumb moment, I think, for all of medicine to say, look, if we're going to do this right, we've got to do it such a way that's so protected, that's so safe, that we make sure people know these things are not recreational and they're really for the pure purposes of really powerfully changing cognition for a while and letting people have these what seem to be, you know, relatively therapeutic states. - I think it's great that you're doing this study. And along the lines of the sort of the early iterations of psychedelics and the counterculture of the '60s and '70s, some of which took place, like "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" I think is actually based on the Menlo Park VA, which is in our neighborhood of Stanford. And things are quite a bit different now. I know you and I have spent some time with the operators and former operators at an event, and last Veterans Day, in fact, the so-called Veteran Solutions group that's pioneering a lot of these psychedelic treatments for former special operators and current special operators. And what's interesting to me about that is in contrast to the counterculture movement of the '60s and '70s, that room was filled with people that are very much of a structure, the military. Right? So it's no longer considered left wing, right wing, anti-military, pro-military. Here this isn't just about one group of people who's exploring psychedelics as a treatment for trauma and PTSD and other things. And of course you also have other domains of society looking at this. And in fact, there were, but it was really interesting because there were both far left and far right politicians at that event up on stage together, talking about, in kind of lighter terms, heart medicine, but also talking about neurobiology and talking. It was just fascinating from the perspective of somebody who's trying to learn about this stuff, that psychedelic therapies no longer sit within the anti-establishment realm. It's independent of all that, certainly when people in the military are adopting it as a potential treatment. Again, still under exploration, but also under exploration at universities like Stanford and Johns Hopkins and UCSF and University College London and on and on. Along the lines of tree barks and toad skins, tell me about ayahuasca. And as a plant, you know, it's intriguing. And is it pro-serotonergic drug like psilocybin? And is it useful for the same sorts of conditions that we've talked about thus far? And if you could perhaps tell me a little bit also about the Brazilian prisoner study. - Yeah, yeah. Definitely. Ayahuasca is another psychedelic. It's used as a sacrament in Brazil and in Peru and Ecuador, in Columbia. So a lot of the South American countries. And what they do is they combine two plants together, where one plant of the two plant combination would effectively do nothing, but the two plant combination together is capable of producing this very profound psychedelic effect. And what's really kind of curious is that there are, as I understand it, 10 to 20,000 plant species in the Amazon. And somehow, somebody- - Someone tried 'em all. - Combined these two plants together in certain proportionality and cooked this for five, 10 hours to the point where you cook out the dimethyltryptamine out of one of the plants and cook out the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor out of the other plant in such a way that the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor prevents the GI breakdown of the dimethyltryptamine in such a way that it's then allowed to cross the blood-brain barrier and get into the brain. And if you didn't add the reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor plant derived into this combination, then it would never cross the brain. If you put people on a standard, psychiatry prescribed monoamine oxidase inhibitor that wasn't reversible, you'd throw them into serotonin syndrome, right? So this kind of like sweet spot that somehow ayahuasca practitioners have found of being able to get DMT into the brain from an oral source with this combination of a monoamine oxidase inhibitor is curious. And so that substance has been explored as an antidepressant agent, and some studies have looked at that. It also seems to be very safe. There's a psychiatrist down at UCLA Harbor who's done a lot of work with this, where he's looked at children even that have been exposed to kind of small doses of ayahuasca as kind of a sacrament within Amazonian tribes and found no neurocognitive effects, no neurocognitive effects in adults. And so it appears to be safe. It's kind of part and brought into various religions, including kind of merged with Catholicism in South America, which is kind of very interesting. And so, you know, in some sects of Catholicism in Brazil, it's used as a sacrament during religious ceremonies. And so it became interesting to Brazilian researchers as to whether or not they could affect recidivism rates for prisoners in Brazilian prisons, right? So they gave half of the prisoners, you know, some sort of inert substance and half of the prisoners an ayahuasca session. And the recidivism rate or the return to prison rate in the ayahuasca exposed individuals was statistically significantly lower than the recidivism rate in the control group, suggesting that, you know, whatever is going on there seems to have an effect on whatever drives criminal behavior, whatever criminal behavior that happened to be. And I don't have the details on the exact nature of the crime. You know, I am also in no way saying that we should just be giving psychedelics to folks in prison and all of that. I think that that is a very edgy thing to do and probably not something that anybody should try, but it does kind of bring up this curious question of what is it about that that would drive people to change those behaviors and why do people make those behavioral decisions? And a lot of times if you look at prisons in the United States, you know, people say this, what's the biggest mental health facility in the United States? It's a prison. - Yeah, there's a lot to unpack there for sure. You know, the homeless issue, the prison issue. It does lead to something that I heard recently, which is related to all this, which is cannabis. You know, we hear a lot nowadays about people will say, well, it's safer than alcohol. And we did an episode on alcohol that, at least by my read of the literature, indeed alcohol does seem to be quite bad for our health beyond... I think it's pretty clear that not drinking is better for your health than drinking at all. And here, I'm not trying to tell people what to do, but those are what the data say. And forget the studies on red wine. You'd have to drink so much red wine to get enough resveratrol. It's not even clear resveratrol does anything useful anyway, et cetera, et cetera. Nonetheless, cannabis is now available in a lot of very high potency forms. People are vaping cannabis, people are smoking cannabis. I certainly am not saying that cannabis is bad for people necessarily, although I think children, I would hope that their brain development would be completed first, you know, get to age 25. I know that sounds late for a lot of people, but the THC obviously taps into some endogenous systems and the cannabinoid systems and is powerful. And I've seen this report that was in Lancet Psychiatry this last year that said that early use of potent cannabis, meaning age 14 to 20 or so, can potentially lead to an exacerbation of psychosis later in life. And I actually put this out on social media and it sort of exploded. I didn't expect it to. And people were saying, well, that's not causal. And obviously it's not causal because people say, well, maybe people with psychotic tendencies are seeking out cannabis. Although that's sort of a weak argument in the sense that there's at least a 4X increase in these psychotic episodes for people later in life. But what are your thoughts about cannabis? Because I do want to acknowledge that it does have medical benefits for certain things, pain, chemotherapy. So by no means trying to knock on cannabis and its appropriate medicinal use. But what should we think about cannabis in terms of this finding that it can exacerbate a psychosis in certain individuals? - Yeah, so I think, you know, there's a couple of things, right? So cannabis is multiple cannibinoids, right? - Right, THC, CBD, CBN, sativas, and, you know, indicas, it gets, yeah, there's a lot there to unpack. - Yeah, there's a lot. But there are two main kind of chemicals you think about and kind of how things are essentially bred, right? And so, you know, there's a lot of cannabis that's really bred to be very high, very potent THC. And there's cannabis where the THC's bred completely out. So there's stories, you know, from Colorado, right? This strain of cannabis that's THC free, there's no THC at all, and it's all CBD, and it's called Charlotte's Web. And a bunch of kids' parents, one kid, and then kind of a string of parents after that moved to Colorado when cannabis was legalized, because CBD is antiepileptic, so CBD is also antipsychotic. And so there have been a number of studies that if you give CBD at high doses, it's antipsychotic in established schizophrenic patients. The issue is that we've bred CBD out of marijuana selectively over time. We've gotten very good at figuring out how to do that, right? Conversely, THC is pro psychotic and pro epileptic, right? And so when you talk about does cannabis cause psychosis or does cannabis treat psychosis, it appears to be more related to the proportions of CBD to THC than it does to the kind of idea of cannabis. So for me, and I have no stock in this or anything like that, but there's a company called GW Pharmaceuticals, and I haven't looked into them in a while, but they have a lot of clinical trials for something called Dravet Syndrome, which is a seizure disorder where kids seize a whole lot, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, which is a seizure disorder, kids are seizing 300 times a day. Both of these are like kids are seizing so much, they're basically in a seizure or in the postictal phase constantly. And they've failed everything. They've failed barbiturates, they've failed bromides, which we just don't use anymore except in these cases because of the side effects. And they'll give kids CBD. And I think CBD is a pretty safe drug compared to bromide, right? And so this idea that CBD in a kid is actually safe, it's a cannabinoid, but it's CBD and it's safe, right? And so that to me is totally fine. Also giving CBD as an adjunctive treatment for schizophrenia. There have been some positive trials and negative trials in that, but there seems to be no negative side effects. It seems to reduce some of the metabolic syndrome issues in folks with schizophrenia who are having side effects from the primary antipsychotic. The converse is, there's clearly cases where people that are taking very high doses of THC become psychotic, they get put into the psychiatric unit, nothing happens other than they kind of get the THC out of their system, and then they resolve their psychosis, right? And so that, and you know, a handful of people who have had seizures related to high doses of THC and syncope and all sorts of things. And so this idea that THC, high doses of THC can be pro psychotic, is also not taking a shot at people that think that cannabis overall is a good thing. It's just, it just is what it is. And the kind of pure, I think if you zoom back and you say you're a true naturalist, you're thinking about natural medicines in the world, you should think, well, probably marijuana was balanced THC CBD at some point, and then we humans messed with it, right? And that most likely, that was probably okay at some level, and then we pushed it one way or another. And what I mean by okay is in a 45 year old, it's okay, kind of thing. Now, what I think is going on with the kids, with the teenagers, is you've got prefrontal maturation, right? And then you're exposing them to a whole lot of high THC load. And while it's unclear if it's cause or effect, it's certainly in the picture. And if I were a parent, I wouldn't want my 16 year old smoking marijuana. If I were a parent and my 30 year old, otherwise healthy, totally fine, you know, whatever, banker, lawyer kid decided to try marijuana for the first time, I wouldn't scold them about it, right? So I think it's this kind of a different thing, right? I would never want my up to 25 year old, just like you're saying, before prefrontal maturation, I would never want my kid to be exposed at all. But it looks like, except in susceptible individuals that are susceptible to drug-induced psychosis, it looks like, you know, it's a relatively safe thing past prefrontal maturation. You know, again, I'm not going to comment of cause and effect, but I would say that, you know, if you're a parent, it doesn't make much sense, right? You never know what's ultimately going to hurt your kid. I mean, we were talking about this earlier, my wife's pregnant now. She kind of avoids everything, right? Rightfully so, right? This idea that we just, we want to be careful when our children's brains are developing. And I think that's really what you were saying and I think actually important. The bigger question that you asked, which is relative risks of drugs, is an interesting one. So David Nutt published in, I think it was in "The Lancet," I'll have to look it up, but I think in "The Lancet," an article about relative drug risks for the person and for society. And this was like, he was on the UK's like British Drug Policy Group, where essentially what he showed was if you look at societal risk plus personal risk, and you combine those two, you know what drug is the most dangerous drug in the world? - I'm going to guess it's alcohol. - It's alcohol, right behind heroin and cocaine and da da da da da, and somewhere in the middle is marijuana. And right on the tail end, on the exact other end of this, psilocybin. - Is caffeine, usually doesn't make the list. - It may have been on the list. If it was, it was probably pretty close to psilocybin, but somewhere in the middle was ketamine, somewhere in the middle was amphetamine, somewhere in the, you know, a little closer to psilocybin, I think was MDMA, you know. But it's this combined personal kind of world risk of these things. And so alcohol makes it, because there's a huge amount of personal risk and there's a huge amount of societal risk, right? Drunk drivers kill X amount of people in the world. - Fight, sexual assault, all that. - All that, yeah. And then all the cancer and all that stuff. And so it beats out cocaine, it beats out heroin, it beats out all of these things. And yet, we don't, as a culture, for whatever reason, we don't as a culture see it as a drug. And that's the part that really baffles me, you know? - I mean, they serve it. I mean, this is no knock on Stanford at all. Of course, I wouldn't do that. This is at every institution I've been to, they serve alcohol at the graduate student events. - [Nolan] That's right. - You know, they serve alcohol. They do a happy hour. I've never been a drinker. I can take it or leave it. - [Nolan] Yeah, same. - And I realize that some people, they really enjoy alcohol. You know, my former partner, I mean, she just was in that 10% or so of people who have a glass of wine and just feel great. And the second one, feel great. I just want to take a nap after I have a bit of alcohol, so it never does much for me. I always feel poisoned. I feel lucky in that sense. But it's unbelievable that it is so prevalent and it's just, it's baked into the medical, even medical institutions, they'll pop a bottle of champagne to celebrate the opening of a hospital. - [Nolan] That's right, that's right. - You know, that's pretty crazy. - Yeah, no, you're absolutely right. You know, I think what's going to happen, but this is me, you know, looking at the crystal ball a little bit, but I think what's going to happen is what happened with doctors and smoking. So if you look at the '50s and '60s, right? There are all these pictures of doctors smoking cigarettes, you know, with patients or, you know, psychiatrists doing psychotherapy and smoking a cigarette with the patient sitting on the couch, you know, surgeons smoking a cigarette in between cases, there are all these pictures of that, right? And now all of a sudden, smoking's totally banned. I think it's totally banned from most of Stanford campus. My suspicion is, as you're suggesting, right? You know, this is everywhere and it's all kind of ubiquitous. At some critical point, some tipping point, everybody's going to realize that, just like with smoking, we've got to rid hospital systems and universities of alcohol. And at some point in 50 years, it's my view that we'll look it back at these scenarios that you're talking about and be like, you know what, we were foolish about this. I can't believe that we gave people alcohol when they graduated from whatever, you know? And I think we'll have a different take on it, but it's going to take a longer time. I think people did a really good job tying smoking to lung cancer and it's like a very simplistic story. Smoking, lung cancer, you know? Now, as you know, alcohol increases the risk of a lot of different cancers. Not so clear which one. I mean, there's like, you know, the kind of oral, like the throat, tongue cancer, that's one of- - Breast cancer. - Yeah, breast cancer, you know? And so it's kind of just, it's a harder story to tell, you know? And I think that's why, and everybody, you know, and then there's this whole, it's, you know, my mom says this. It's like I drank my glass of wine because my doctor told me it was heart healthy. And we were talking about this, and I try to, no, no, no, but Dr. So-and-so said it's heart healthy. And so it ends up being this thing where like she's drinking alcohol because she thinks that it's good for her heart. And, you know, and it's hard. I've had those conversations with her. It's hard to untie that. And I think that, yeah, at some point we're going to hit some threshold moment. And it'll be interesting if we really look at the data and we really look at what's safe and not safe purely from this analysis, it kind of points to the right direction. - It's really interesting. And also say nothing of poor judgment under the influence of alcohol. I mean, I would venture that if we were to remove alcohol from university campuses, watch, the students are going to lobby against me if I say this. But if you were to remove alcohol from campuses, I mean, just think about what I suspect would be the improvement in good decision making. And that would occur. Or, you know, I've got stories from graduate school and... It was very different, you know, 10 years ago. There was a lot more alcohol consumption. Again, that was never my thing, but I know people who make really bad decisions. In any case, there's a whole landscape there emerging. I think you got your finger right on the pulse of it. I want to touch on something slightly different than what we've been talking about, but definitely related to depression. And this, again, is one of these intriguing but perplexing things, which is that sleep deprivation can improve symptoms of depression. And yet I'm personally very familiar with the fact that if I don't sleep well for one night or don't sleep at all, in fact, I do have an ability to function pretty well the next day. I'll do this non-sleep deep rest practice that I blab a lot about on the Huberman Lab Podcast, which for me is tremendously restorative, but I like a good night's sleep. I think everybody understands now, thanks to the great work of Matthew Walker and others that have really gotten out into the world saying, look, the foundation of mental health, physical health, and high performance, if that's your thing, being a functional human being, is to try and get enough quality deep sleep at least 80% of the nights of your life, if you can. That's something to focus on. Just like good nutrition, just like exercise and social connection, et cetera. So sleep deprivation, we know, in particular, I think rapid eye movement components of sleep deprivation can improve the symptoms of depression. And yet being sleep deprived can also really disregulate our control of the autonomic system. I notice on night two or night three of poor sleep, if I'm going through a stressful phase and that's happening, all of a sudden my heart rate is chronically elevated, my thought patterns become really disrupted. I can't then exercise, my decision making is thrown off, my emotionality is more labile. The hinge, as we were referring to it earlier, feels less in control, under my control. And maybe I wonder sometimes if I enter that state that you refer to earlier, where the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is no longer leading the cingulate, but the cingulate is now in charge. The players are in charge of the coach. Not a good situation. So I know you've done some work on sleep deprivation and light and effects. Please tell us about that and please tell us about this triple therapy. Is that? - Yeah, yeah. So friend of mine, Greg Salem, another one of the professors at Stanford, was very interested in sleep. He did a bunch of training in sleep before he went to medical school and got very interested in this idea that, as you're saying, if you sleep deprive somebody one night in just kind of an isolated single night, at the end of that sleep deprivation, they will have an antidepressant effect, but as soon as they fall asleep, they lose it. So if it's a depressed individual, you can get them to be less depressed acutely. Soon as they fall asleep, they wake up eight hours later, then they come back into the same level of depression. And so the idea is that you needed to do some sort of circadian reset. And that part of what depression is, is that it's a dysregulated circadian system. And so mentors of mine say, if you can just get the sleep better, that's half the battle of dealing with depression. 'Cause so many people have insomnia around depression and have a whole host of types of insomnia. Having a hard time falling asleep, waking up in the middle of the night, and waking up earlier, all symptoms of depression. And so what this does is it sleep deprives the individual and then there's a certain calculation of shifting their phase and simultaneously exposing them to bright lights. So that's the triple, the phase shift, the sleep deprivation, and the bright light, to try to get their circadian rhythm. Essentially the theory is reintrained. And so, you know, in the trials that we've done and other trials prior to ours and after, you know, it looked like there was a pretty profound antidepressant effect from this triple therapy that seemed to be durable, meaning durability is this term we use to say that not only can you get kind of point relief, but that the relief ends up, you know, lasting. What's important to know about this is like, you shouldn't do this at home for sure. You would need to do this with a professional, 'cause it's complicated, it's not just one thing. And sleep deprivation, while it seems to be antidepressant, it's pro anxiety. So if you take a highly anxious person that's not depressed and you sleep deprive them, they get profoundly anxious. And so that's the other thing that you have to really realize is that this is like everything else that I've talked about today, all things that you have to do under medical supervision, but curious, right? And I think, you know, the question that always comes up is why isn't this used more? And I think the reason is that there's not really a mechanism for, you know, ultimately in medicine, as sad as it is, you have to have a code to do a thing. There has to be a code associated with a treatment and it's hard to figure out how to make a code for this. And so I think that's part of it. And so if there's a way, and somebody's got to kind of take that baton on that, but if there's a way to make a code for this, you know, I think you could actually turn it into something that was more widely utilized. And, you know, probably dream up ways of how to integrate AI, passive sensing, all that stuff to really make that work. But I think that would be the idea, that would be the trajectory I'd see, so, yeah. - Yeah, having a billable to insurance code is fundamental. And a lot of listeners to this podcast, I think, have a background in engineering science. And we will put a link to that manuscript that talks about the triple therapy, because here we're talking about one night sleep deprivation, some timed light exposure to the eyes, and then shifting in the circadian clock being central to the themes of the podcast that come up often. I think for the typical person, can we say that trying to get a regular light dark cycle at sleep rhythm would be beneficial for overall mood regulation? - Yeah, I think for the typical person, you know, really kind of reregulating your sleep and trying to get, you know, a good night's sleep in which you fall asleep, stay asleep, wake up at a set time every morning is going to be pretty crucial. You know, in mild depression, I think that one has a lot of control over that. As we were talking about earlier, I think when you hit some threshold in depression where things become kind of semi-volitional and it's harder to kind of will yourself into that. There are therapies like, you know, there's a CBT for insomnia, for instance, where you can do cognitive behavioral therapy to help with insomnia. Sometimes people, and I'm no sleep expert. Kind of pass this to Greg to fully talk about this, but some of what goes on that people with kind of milder insomnia experience is like blue light out of their computer and things like that, so you can use like blue light blockers to, it tricks your brain, as you know better than me, it tricks your brain to think that it's still light outside. And so people will still have insomnia because their brain still thinks that it's light outside. And then people will, you know, the kind of strict CBT for sleep. You know, therapists will say there are only two things that you should do in your bed. And if you're under a certain age and whatnot, it's really one thing that you should do in your bed, which is to sleep and be with your partner, right? And so those are kind of the two things that you should do in a bedroom. And that's really the only things that you should do in a bedroom if you're having sleep problems. You shouldn't watch TV in a bedroom, you shouldn't eat in a bedroom, shouldn't hang out. - Keep the phone out of the bedroom. - [Nolan] Keep the phone out of the bedroom, yeah. - Yeah. We should get Greg Salem on the podcast. I'll just mention for people that want to regulate their sleep, we have a sleep toolkit that's available as a downloadable PDF at hubermanlab.com. Just go to the menu and a lot of the things in that toolkit are based on work from Stanford Sleep Laboratories, including Jamie Zeitz and others' lab, not aimed at depression specifically. Listen, Nolan, Dr. Williams, this has been an amazing voyage through the circuitry of autonomic control. This landscape of the prefrontal cortex is, I find incredibly fascinating and I just want to start off by saying please do come back again and teach us more about that and your TMS work. Before we wrap, however, I do want to give you the opportunity to talk about the SAINT study. - [Nolan] Yeah, definitely. - Is it SAINT or SAINTS plural? - Yeah, it's SAINT. So SAINT, or we're calling it SNT now. SAINT has, you know... The intent was not to kind of connect it to religion, but we may have accidentally done so. And so we abbreviated it to SNT for the subsequent trials, which was initially Stanford Accelerated Intelligent Neuromodulation Therapy, or now what we're calling Stanford Neuromodulation Therapy. But the idea there, which is a cool idea, is that TMS is a device that delivers a treatment, and the treatment is the protocol. And the protocol is the stimulation parameter set in a specific brain region for a specific condition. And so what's cool about neuromodulation, whether it be transcranial magnetic stimulation or transcranial direct current stimulation or deep brain stimulation, like what Casey Halpern talked about on another podcast, is this idea that in all of those cases, the device itself is a physical layer conduit of a stimulation protocol that's therapeutic for a given condition in a given brain region. And so in the case of depression, which we know the most about for with TMS, we've been doing TMS studies for depression for, you know, since 1995, right? And the clearance in 2000, 2008, 2009. And in that timeframe, we were able to go from really knowing very little at all about how to do something like this to getting an FDA clearance. And the way that it went down was that there were two groups studying different components at NIH. The first group was studying mood neuroanatomy on functional imaging. That was kind of the first generation of functional imaging back then, so PET scans, which are kind of metabolic scans, and then SPECT scans. And the idea there was looking at activity and metabolism and prefrontal cortex. And what they found in these kind of more crude scans is that just general hypoactivity, hypometabolism. The other group right upstairs at the National Institute for Neurological Diseases and Stroke, NINDS, they were looking at using TMS, which had been around for 10 years, and repetitively stimulating in motor cortex. And what they found was, gosh, we can get a readout in thumb muscle movement amplitude that's really reproducible across people. It's like, you know, universally reproducible. And if we do certain stimulation approaches, they are biologically active to either increase excitability, IE the thumb motion, and a set intensity goes up, the amount of amplitude goes up, or inhibitory or depotentiating, it goes down with other biological stimulation approaches. And then a third outcome, which is important, that it's inert, it doesn't do either. So you can have stimulation approaches that do one, you know, increase activity, decrease activity, or are inert. And so what they found was, oh, we can excite certain brain regions. Then my mentor, Mark George said, had this kind of aha moment where he said, "Wow, there's underactivity in prefrontal cortex in depression, and we can increase activity using this thing that we know we can increase activity in motor cortex. We just need to put it in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex." And then they combined the two and started stimulating once a day in this kind of very abbreviated fashion. And lo and behold, some of those depression patients resolved their depression. And back then, and still today, you can go and as a psychiatric patient stay at the National Institute of Mental Health and go through clinical trials to try to get treated. And there were patients who'd been there for months and they were able to be discharged. Because their mood was better, yeah. And so just very crude approach where they were using ruler measurements where DLPFC was, and they were stimulating with devices that you needed to physically dunk the coil in an ice bath. And with that, they still were able to, the kind of genius of this, Mark and others, they would still be able to create a purely engineered stimulation approach. What's cool about that is that they kind of found two things, right? They found this one stimulation protocol that does have some antidepressant effect. It's limited, it doesn't treat everybody, it does have some antidepressant effect. And this bigger concept that a neuromodulation device is kind of like a pharmaceutical company for you, right? That in a given individual, a TMS device or whatever neuromodulation device is able to generate, you can create a stimulation approach that is specific to a given condition and specific to an individual. And so the physical layer is just how you exert that, similarly to how we make pharmaceutical drugs in a pharmaceutical company. But the actual therapy itself is what you do, where you do it. And so what we learned from, you know, another 20, 30 years of this is that you can modify the stimulation protocol in such a way where you can create a whole new treatment and put it through the same TMS device or, thank god, an evolved version of it where you don't have to dunk it in ice baths and they can actually really handle much more aggressive stimulation approaches. And so in 2005, a group published in "Neuron" a paper demonstrating that if you stimulate with the hippocampal rhythms through a TMS coil, you can excite the brain with memory rhythms and it'll last an hour. So you can change cortical excitability in the thumb twitch for an hour, sending three minutes of excitatory or 40 seconds in the case of inhibitory stimulation that mimics hippocampal rhythms. So much more efficient than the original TMS approaches. And so, you know, after that group tried to do it in this kind of six week schedule, and after that, you know, and while they were doing that, we decided, gosh, you know, this problem I talked about at the beginning of the show where you have this problem that we don't have a treatment for people who are in these high acuity psychiatric emergency states, right? This idea that we are going to engineer a treatment where we can reorganize the stimulation approach in time to be much more efficient by utilizing something called space learning theory. And so you probably know about the space learning theory. So the idea for the viewers is, it's a simple psychological thing, but we've also seen it in hippocampal slice sort of physiology too, where if I'm cramming for a test, what I do is I write out 60 note cards and I read each one for a minute until I get to the first note card and again, and that's about an hour later, right? And we just intuitively do this. We all, you know, automatically do that. And we intuit that because we know that what doesn't work is writing out one note card and looking at it over and over again. Nobody ever does that, right? You know, we've all been in graduate school, medical school, and we have these big stacks of note cards. That's space learning theory. It's this idea that you need to see it about every hour to an hour and a half and that optimizes learning. If you take the same stimulation approach that I'm talking about, this data burst stimulation approach, and you take a hippocampal slice of a mouse and you stimulate, you enlarge some dendritic spines and you prime some. And then if you stimulate right after that, you don't get any change. It's called in mass stimulation. But if you wait about an hour to an hour and a half, you get more dendritic spines enlarged and more primed. Which, by the way, also is what ketamine does, it causes a dendritic spine enlargement. And so, you know, what we found was is that the old way of doing TMS, this idea of just doing it once a day, every day, five days a week for six weeks, didn't utilize the space learning theory. It's like studying for a month or two, just a little bit once a day. Like you remember some of that stuff, but it's like not as potent as that week where you're kind of cramming, right? And what we realized is that if we could reorganize the stimulation in time so that we took the whole six week course, we actually figured out a way to do it in a day. And then what we also figured out is that people were underdosing TMS because if you just keep going after six weeks out to month three, four, five, more and more people got better. So we figured out it's not just one day, we're going to give five times the normal dose. We're going to have 7 1/2 months' worth in five days using space learning theory. - So every hour? - [Nolan] Every hour for 10 hours. - For five days. - For five days. So it's a 50 hour block. It's 90 minutes of actual stimulation, but spread out through the day in the same way of learning. Which is perfect for an inpatient psychiatric unit, right? - [Andrew] Five days is manageable. - Yeah, you can get stimulation. Nobody's ever dropped out by the schedule. You know, folks that want to do this, want to do it. So they'll do their nine minutes, they'll go get breakfast, they'll do their nine minutes, they'll go see their therapist or whatever it is. And so what we found with this reorganization and time of the stimulation dose, and then the third component is we do resting state functional connectivity scans on everybody. And we have ways now in the last five to 10 years of picking out that specific subgenual DLPFC subcircuit that I was talking about earlier, that cingulate DLPFC, we can pick that out in every single one. If you want to come to the lab, we can find your DLPFC subgenual. It's even more robust than non- - Maybe we could stimulate too, just while we're in there. - Yeah, if you want to, we can move around your hypnotizability. And we can find that spot in each person. Instead of finding the same spot on the skull, we find the same spot on the brain, and we can stimulate. And we do that every hour on the hour. And what we've found is that folks will, within one to five days, you know, in more cases than not, and depending upon if you're looking at this open label or in trials, somewhere between 60 and 90% of the time, they will go into full on remission in the sense they're totally normal from a mood standpoint at the end of this. And like I said, with variable durability. So that's the part we have to figure out now about dosing and how to keep people well. But for some people, you know, we've had four years of remission, you know, year of remission. And it's really that cramming of the test. It's really that idea that you're laying in that information to the exact right spot. And the signal is a simple signal, but it's a profound one, which is turn on, stay on, remember to stay on. You know, that idea that you're sending this memory signal into the brain and you're doing it in such a way that you're telling the system, you're kind of taking it out of your own hippocampus' hand and you're sending the same signal the hippocampus normally signals out. Now you're sending that signal into the prefrontal cortex and kind of utilizing the brain's own communication style to get it to get out of the state. And what's very cool about this is that people, when they kind of exit out of that, they end up saying they don't have any side effects from it. And they feel back to normal. Like some people, you know, not everybody, but there's a subsection of people that with SSRIs where they'll say, I kind of feel numb, or I have GI side effects, or I can't, you know, I don't have the sexual interest that I used to have and that sort of thing. You know, not anything against SSRIs, as I said earlier, life saving, you know, for a subsection of people, these things really work. But with this, what you see is that people don't talk about any of that stuff. And I think it's likely because you're tapping into that core circuitry and you're reversing it and you're doing it with a magnet that, because it's a very profound electromagnet, it's the same field strength as an MRI scanner, it's able to induce a current in the brain in this focal targeted way without getting into the rest of the brain, without getting into the rest of the body at all. And just really kind of acting only on that circuitry that's involved. - Incredible. Is the SAINT study still ongoing? And if people are interested in potentially being patients or subjects in the study, can we provide them a portal link? - Absolutely, yeah. So we have, now the treatment, some of my students went over to a company called Magnus Medical, and they've been working on this, they've got an FDA clearance now. And now folks can get it through trials over the next couple of years because it's going to take some time for that company to kind of get up and running and get a device and get the whole thing set up nationally. But while that's all going on, there's still about 1,000 patients that need to be recruited across a bunch of different trials all over the country. We'll take people from anywhere in the country. We also have partners in New York and San Diego and in soon to be South Carolina and other places where we can actually kind of, you know, my lab can help to kind of let people know where to go, based off of where they're at in the US, and get them access to being able to be in a trial. And what we've tried to do is make it so that even if you get the, you know, 50 50 chance, you're going to get the real deal or you're going to get the non-real deal. But what we have figured out is a way to let everyone have access. If they got the not real deal version, the kind of sham version or the fake version, for the first part of the trial, there are other trials where they can have access to the real version. So essentially everybody eventually gets access to having the real version. And so that's been a big thing for me is I want everybody that comes through one of our trials to be able to have access. I think it's important. While the company's doing what they're doing and what the lab's doing, and kind of nationally what other partner labs are doing. - Well, I can assure you, you're going to get some interest. - [Nolan] Happy to have it, yeah. - Thank you. And listen, thank you so much for taking us on this incredible voyage through the neurocircuitry underlying certain aspects of depression, the coverage of the different types of depression, the various therapeutic compounds, how they work. We've talked about a lot of things today. You've shared so much knowledge, and even as I say that, I very much want to have you back to talk about many other things as well that we didn't have time to cover, but also just really want to thank you for the work that you do. I know we are colleagues, but you run an enormous laboratory, enormous in my book. 40 people is a big group, very big group. Plus you're in the clinic, you also have a life of your own outside of work. And to take the time to sit down with us and share all this knowledge that really is in service to mental health and human feeling better and in fact avoiding often suicidal depression. It's just incredible work and incredible generosity. And just thank you so much. - Oh, thank you, man. I mean, you know, similarly I want to thank you for what you're doing. I mean, I think that what you, you know, I've got a lot of friends, folks that are not in the medical profession, friends of mine, you know, one of my buddies who's a real estate agent who works with us, who's a big, big fan of your show. And you know, I told a couple people like that I was coming on and they were like super stoked. They're like, you know, we watch every show and, you know, super excited to watch mine. And they said something very important to me that, you know, you make this complicated neuroscience and kind of brain-body science accessible, you know, in a way that few have a gift to do. And I think that that's so important and this show is doing so much to help with science literacy. And yeah, appreciate you, so... - Well, thank you. I'm gratified and honored by your statement and I look forward to more. Thank you. - Absolutely, thank you. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Nolan Williams. I hope you found our discussion about psychedelics and other compounds, about transcranial magnetic stimulation, and about the treatments for depression in general, to be as stimulating as I did. If you'd like to learn more about the work being done in Dr. Williams' laboratory, you can go to the Brain Stimulation Laboratory website, which is bsl.stanford.edu. And there you have the opportunity to apply to be in one of the clinical trials for depression or other studies, as well, if you like, to support the work being done in Dr. Williams' laboratory for the treatment of depression and other psychiatric disorders. If you're learning from and or enjoying the Huberman Lab Podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments about the information we've covered or suggestions about future guests, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support the Huberman Lab Podcast. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that the Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman. And there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast. I should just mention that that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab Podcast has now launched a premium channel. That premium channel will feature monthly AMAs or ask me anythings where I answer your questions in depth, as well as other premium resources. If you'd like to subscribe to the premium channel, you can simply go to hubermanlab.com/premium. I should mention that the proceeds from the premium channel go to support the standard Huberman Lab Podcast, which will continue to be released every Monday per usual, as well as supporting various research projects done on humans to create the sorts of tools for mental health, physical health, and performance that you hear about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, it's hubermanlab.com/premium to subscribe. It's $10 a month or $100 per year. If you haven't already subscribed to our zero cost newsletter, we have what is called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can subscribe by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, and click on newsletter. Those newsletters include summaries of podcast episodes, lists of tools from the Huberman Lab Podcast. And if you'd like to see previous newsletters we've released, you can also just go to hubermanlab.com, click on newsletter in the menu, and you'll see various downloadable PDFs. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, we just ask for your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And again, it's completely zero cost. If you're not already following me on social media, it's Huberman Lab, on Twitter, on Facebook, and on Instagram. And at all three of those places, I cover topics and subject matter that are sometimes overlapping with the information covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, but that's often distinct from information on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on all social media channels. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 253 ---
Video ID: gXvuJu1kt48
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXvuJu1kt48
Title: The Effects of Cannabis (Marijuana) on the Brain & Body | Huberman Lab Podcast #92
Published: 2022-10-03 12:00:25 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss cannabis (aka marijuana), including the biological mechanisms underlying its effects on the mind and body, its known medical applications, its impact on libido, creativity, hunger, hormones and more. I also cover the known adverse health consequences of chronic and even acute (one-time) use and the factors that determine if cannabis is helpful or harmful. Additionally, I detail how the various strains of cannabis: sativa, indica and hybrid strains, can produce such divergent effects depending on the strain type, THC-to-CBD ratio, total dosage, and frequency of use. I review why cannabis can impact speech patterns and one’s propensity to develop anxiety/depression during and after use and, in some individuals, paranoia. As the legal landscape for cannabis is rapidly evolving, this episode should interest a wide audience, including former/current cannabis users, those in the medical, sports, law enforcement, and educational communities and, of course, children, teenagers, and parents. 

#HubermanLab #Science #Health

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Premium
https://hubermanlab.com/premium

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Inspired by Mary Jane? Mechanisms underlying enhanced creativity in cannabis users: https://bit.ly/3UWZzqT
Adults with a history of recreational cannabis use have altered speech production: https://bit.ly/3RDBeDS
Individual prolactin reactivity modulates response of nucleus accumbens to erotic stimuli during acute cannabis intoxication: an fMRI pilot study: https://bit.ly/3y9EcZR
Bayesian causal network modeling suggests adolescent cannabis use accelerates prefrontal cortical thinning: https://go.nature.com/3CrNToT
Association of cannabis potency with mental ill health and addiction: a systematic review: https://bit.ly/3ycIwrg

Other Links and Resources
NSDR Protocol with Dr. Huberman on YouTube: https://youtu.be/AKGrmY8OSHM

Timestamps
00:00:00 Cannabis (Marijuana) 
00:04:46 New Huberman Lab Premium Membership 
00:07:03 Tool: Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR), Sleep & Anxiety
00:10:08 Levels, Thesis, InsideTracker
00:14:01 Momentous Supplements 
00:15:08 Cannabis Strains, Psychoactive Compounds: THC & CBD
00:19:34 Sativa vs. Indica, Stimulant vs. Relaxation Effects 
00:25:55 Hybrid Cannabis Strains, Type 1, 2 & 3 Strains
00:30:41 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:31:56 Naturally Occurring Receptors: Nicotinic & Cannabinoid Receptors (CB1)
00:40:35 THC, CBD vs. Endogenous Cannabinoids, Dependence 
00:43:14 Endogenous Cannabinoids, Cannabinoid Receptors & Nervous System Function
00:53:07 Biological Effects of Cannabis
00:56:29 Cannabis Sativa & Subjective Effects: Mood, Stress, Alertness, Paranoia
01:04:58 Cannabis Indica & Subjective Effects, Memory, Dosage
01:09:41 Brain Areas Affected by THC & CBD, Side Effects 
01:16:08 Creativity: Convergent vs. Divergent Thinking & Dopamine 
01:26:41 Does Cannabis Increase Creativity?
01:35:08 Chronic Cannabis Use & Changes in Speech Patterns
01:46:46 Cannabis & Libido, Dopamine & Prolactin
01:56:55 Cannabis & Hormones: Prolactin, Testosterone, Estrogen & Fertility
02:06:53 Smoking/Vaping Tobacco or Cannabis & Negative Health Consequences
02:10:06 Avoiding Cannabis During Pregnancy/Breastfeeding, Fetal Neural Development 
02:18:13 Negative Health Consequences of Cannabis, Anxiety & Depression, Tolerance 
02:25:57 Cannabis Use & Adolescence/Young Adulthood, Predisposition to Psychosis
02:34:36 Adolescent Cannabis Use: Brain Development & Mental Health Disorders 
02:41:44 Cannabis & Pain Management, Divergent Effects of Cannabis
02:44:54 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Premium Channel, Momentous Supplements, Neural Network Newsletter, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast. where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing cannabis, also referred to as marijuana. Cannabis includes many different compounds that have profound impact on the brain and body, so while many of you have probably heard of THC, there are also compounds in cannabis such as CBD, and of course there are different types or strains of cannabis, including sativa strains and indica strains and hybrid strains, and believe it or not, nowadays, there is also an entire literature, meaning a scientific and medicinal literature about type one, type two and type three strains. I'll explain what all of that is and how they work. I'll talk about some of the medicinal applications of different strains of cannabis and combinations of cannabis strains, as well as some of the potential health hazards of cannabis use. I want to emphasize that any discussion about cannabis has to be framed within the context that the legality of cannabis varies tremendously depending on where you are in the world, so depending on which country you're in and even which state you're in or which area within a country, possessing and using and certainly selling cannabis can be either highly illegal or entirely legal or decriminalized or largely overlooked. You, of course, are obligated to know what those local laws are for you, where you live and where you travel. With that said, today's discussion really will include a full picture as to where cannabis and the various and even very specific compounds within cannabis can be extremely useful in the treatment of some ailments and where certain compounds in cannabis can be extremely dangerous for certain individuals to use, in particular, individuals that have preexisting, genetic propensity for psychosis. That theme is going to come up again and again, but we are also going to talk about the role of cannabis in anxiety and depression, both positive and negative effects. We'll talk about sex differences in terms of women versus men and how they react differently to cannabis, and I would be entirely remiss if I didn't include a conversation about cannabis, meaning THC, CBD, hybrid strains, et cetera in creativity and different modes of thinking, because as many of you probably know or at least have heard about, cannabis can impact the way that we think, the types of memory systems we can access and what's called convergent and divergent thinking, which is one way of conceptualizing what is commonly referred to as creativity. So today's discussion is going to include a lot of information, but I promise to make it clear and accessible to all of you, regardless of whether or not you have a background in biology or not, and today's discussion will also be quite nuanced. You'll find me routinely reading directly from specific research papers, something that of course we always do on this podcast, but today I'm really going to dig into some of the finer points of the methodology in papers and some of the statistics that were used and the specific populations of people that were studied, because as it turns out, there are instances that we will discuss in which the use of cannabis can be immensely beneficial to one group and yet can be entirely detrimental to another group, even at equivalent dosages and depending on a number of different factors, so we will discuss what those factors are. Just to give you a brief overview of the kind of structure I'm going to put on today's episode, we will review of course, cannabis and its various forms. I'll talk about some of the biology, but we are going to really drill into how dosage, that is the concentration of THC relative to CBD, impacts whether or not cannabis is going to have one effect or another. We will also talk about the frequency of use, daily use, multiple times per day use, weekly use or monthly or occasional use. We will also talk about different professions and how some people may have a little bit more leeway in terms of whether or not they decide to use cannabis or any of its various component chemical constituents, that is CBD or THC, et cetera. And for other professions, it might be entirely inappropriate because of the particular kinds of cognitive tasks those professions demand. We will also talk about genetic predisposition, again, sex differences, hormone effects, and I will also touch on what I think is the most important variable in determining whether or not cannabis is right or wrong for you, and that is your age at which you are considering starting or continuing use or ceasing use. What I can assure you is that by the end of today's podcast, you will have a quite thorough understanding of cannabis, how it works, what it does, what its potential benefits can be, what its potential hazards are, and whether or not it's right for you and the people that you know. I'm excited to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast has now launched a premium channel. The purpose of the premium channel is severalfold. First of all, I will be hosting regular AMAs, Ask Me Anythings, where you can ask me anything, and I will provide answers in depth to your specific questions about science and science related tools for mental health, physical health and performance. Now, there is a nominal cost to the premium channel. It's $10 per month, or you can pay $100 for the entire year. I should mention, however, that a significant portion of the funds raised through the premium channel are going to support not just the "Huberman Lab Podcast," which we will continue to release every Monday on schedule of zero cost to all consumers' content on mental health, physical health and performance, but proceeds from the premium channel will also be used to fund research, in particular research done on human beings, so not animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree is a species that we are most interested in. And, we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health and performance, and those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab Podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 upfront for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to your questions, and you'll of course get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast episodes and not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium, again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Before diving into all of that, I'd like to highlight a new, what I think is a very useful and zero cost resource. This resource is what's called Non-Sleep Deep Rest or NSDR protocol. I've talked many times before on the Huberman Lab Podcast about Non-Sleep Deep Rest, AKA, NSDR. NSDR is sort of an umbrella term for a variety of different practices, so these are behavioral practices that allow you to direct your brain and body into a particular state, and most typically, that state is one of deep relaxation, but also one in which you can access your bodily and brain systems for teaching yourself how to relax in real time and how to recover some of the sleep that you may not be getting at night, and to restore levels of dopamine in particular areas of the brain that are involved in motivation and cognitive and motor control. Basically, NSDR is a wonderfully restorative tool. This has been demonstrated many times over now through quality peer-reviewed science, and there are neurochemical benefits, and there are physical benefits, and there are certainly psychological benefits. I highly recommend NSDR to anybody that has trouble falling asleep or that wakes up in the middle of the night and needs to get better at falling back asleep, as well as to anyone out there that has issues with anxiety or self-regulation of any kind. And if you don't have any of those issues, it's also immensely beneficial just as a restorative for leaning back into focused work of any kind. Now, a number of people have reached out about finding NSDR protocols, and there are a number of different good ones out there floating around. I've decided to put a zero-cost NSDR script out there on the internet for people to access, so you can find it by going to YouTube and simply put my last name, 'Huberman' and 'NSDR' into the search function. This is a YouTube channel that's hosted by Virtusan, which has a terrific app that includes NSDR and a number of other health and wellness protocols, but they've been quite generous in hosting a 10 minute NSDR, read by me. This NSDR is distinct from, although I should say, similar to yoga nidra, which some of you are familiar with. This NSDR is different than yoga nidra in the sense that it doesn't have intentions. There's no mystical component, and I describe a little bit of the science and why specific components of the NSDR are included, things like long exhale breathing, I talk about perceptual shifts and how to move from thinking and planning to pure sensation. If none of that makes sense right now, it'll make total sense after listening to the NSDR script. Again, it's a 10 minute NSDR script, read by me. You can do this first thing in the morning when you wake up, especially if you didn't get enough sleep that night, and you're feeling a little bit fatigued, and you need to lean into the day with full vigor. You could do it at any point during the day or if you wake up in the middle of the night. Again, this is a zero-cost resource for you. You can find it by going to YouTube, put my last name in and NSDR. I encourage you to try it, and if you like it or frankly, if you don't, you can just put that in the comment section there on YouTube, and I've put it there as a free resource to you, so that you can benefit from the research-backed, peer-reviewed studies that point to NSDR as a very useful practice. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important factors in your immediate and long-term health is how well you're managing your blood glucose or blood sugar. I started using Levels about a year ago as a way to see how different foods and different lifestyle factors were impacting my blood glucose levels. So for instance, it allowed me to see how different foods and particular macronutrients and combinations of macronutrients would either peak or trough my blood sugar or keep my blood sugar steady. It also allowed me to see how working out with weights or running, how that impacted my blood glucose. So for me, it was a fascinating experiment unto myself as to how my meal schedule, the specific foods I was eating, different combinations of food, as I mentioned before, and exercise were combining to regulate this thing that we call blood sugar and that's so vital to our health. I think anyone that tries Levels will find that you learn an immense amount about what you're doing and what you ought to be doing differently in order to optimize your immediate feelings of wellbeing and your health trajectory. If you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a CGM yourself, go to levels.link/huberman, that's levels.link, L-I-N-K, /huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics that are designed for your particular needs. I am not a fan of the word nootropics, because nootropics literally means smart drugs or smart drug, and frankly, as a neuroscientist, I know and every other neuroscientist knows that there is no neural circuit or chemical in the brain for being smart. There are, for instance, neural circuits and chemicals that increase your ability to focus or your ability to task switch. Thesis understands this and therefore, has designed custom nootropics that vary and are tailored to you so that, for instance, if you want to achieve focus and clarity for one particular type of work, there is a Nootropic for that. Or if you'd like to have more energy and have more focus, there's a different Nootropic for that. If you'd like to get your own personalized nootropics starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take that three minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month, and then they'll work with you and iterate to find the best formulas for you to take ongoing. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code 'huberman' at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed with a quality blood test. With a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, an issue is you get information back about lipids and hormones, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have a personalized platform that makes interpreting your data and then acting on that data very straightforward and very directed toward specific protocols. What I mean by that is you'll get information back about hormone levels and metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, and then you can look to nutritional changes, supplementation changes, exercise protocol changes and other lifestyle features that combine or work on their own to start to try and shift those numbers into the range that's appropriate for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker plans. Just use the code 'huberman' at checkout. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off and use the code 'huberman' at checkout. On many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, things like enhancing sleep and the depth of sleep, or for enhancing focus and cognitive ability, or for enhancing energy or adjusting hormone levels to optimal range for you. The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. We partnered with Momentous for a number of important reasons. First of all, the quality of their ingredients is exceptional, it's really second to none. Second of all, they ship internationally, and that was important to us, because a number of you reside outside of the United States. Third, we've worked with Momentous very closely to develop single-ingredient formulations. Now, this turns out to be very important, because if you're going to take supplements, you want to know what's working for you and what isn't. And of course, you want to optimize the cost efficiency and the biological efficiency of those supplements. To find the supplements we discuss on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous spelled O-U-S, livemomentous.com/huberman, and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Let's talk about cannabis, and when we refer to cannabis, we are indeed referring to marijuana or the marijuana plant. Now, cannabis plants come in different strains or different varieties, and those different strains are indeed different genetic strains. So just as animals and humans have different genetic backgrounds, and they can be crossed to one another to yield further genetic variation in the offspring, plants can be hybridized to one another in various ways through grafting or through the use of different types of seed combinations, et cetera, in order to generate different strains. There are also naturally occurring differences in the strains of plants, and the cannabis plant is no exception. So for instance, in the context of the discussion about cannabis and its medicinal uses and recreational uses, we need to distinguish between the sativa variety, the indica variety, a variety called ruderalis that's not often discussed, and hybrids of sativa, indica and ruderalis. Before diving into the different strains of cannabis and how they impact the brain embody, both similarly and differently, I want to emphasize that the cannabis plant contains a number of different psychoactive compounds. Now, the most powerful of those compounds is THC. The technical name for it is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. But THC, as I'll refer to it, is just one of the psychoactive and biologically active compounds within cannabis plants. There's also CBD, which is technically referred to as cannabidiol, and cannabidiol, CBD, is known to be used for things like pain management, anxiety management and other medicinal purposes. We will talk about the efficacy of CBD for those purposes, as well as some of, believe it or not, some of the dangers of CBD, depending on where it's sourced and the dosage, et cetera. So we've got THC, CBD and also CBN or cannabinol. CBN is less often discussed. You're going to hear a lot less about CBN containing products out there, CBN containing medicines, but it is relevant to today's discussion, so it will come up a bit. Now, I will be sure to provide more specificity to what I'm about to say, but very broadly speaking, THC is largely responsible for the psychoactive effects of cannabis, that is the changes in mood, the changes in bodily state and sensation, et cetera. Whereas CBD and to some extent, CBN, have profound effects on the brain and body, but they don't tend to give people the sensation of altered perception, altered mood, et cetera. Some people might say they are not the component of cannabis that, quote unquote, gets you high, although today, we will really drill into what the high itself represents in terms of chemical systems in the brain body. And what we will soon learn is that what we think of as being high actually includes a number of different changes in the brain and body, some of which can be best explained by CBD, not by THC, which runs counter to what most people out there know and believe. So broadly speaking, we have THC, CBD and CBN. But I want to point out that the cannabis plant has over 70, seven-zero, 70 different psychoactive compounds, many of which still have not been studied in isolation and in detail. So there's a big future of research for cannabis and for THC and THC-related psychoactive compounds, as well as for CBD and CBN. Today we're mainly going to focus on THC and CBD, as I mentioned before. I should also point out that the cannabis plant has over 400 biologically active compounds. So these are biologically active compounds that may or may not have psychoactive properties, that may or may not be useful for pain relief, et cetera. Again, there is a vast landscape for exploration of the cannabis plant and of hemp for what they include that could be beneficial to us or detrimental to us, so again, a lot more work to do. Today, we're going to really try and stay on target with what we already know and where there are certain exciting mysteries or intriguing mysteries about what we ought to explore more. I will certainly highlight those. Let's go back to the different strains of the cannabis plant, sativa, indica and ruderalis and explore how each of those differentially impacts the brain and body, because therein I think we can start to learn a lot about this incredible plant that is the cannabis plant. And whether or not you are a user of cannabis or whether or not you are entirely opposed to cannabis use, understanding how cannabis works in the brain and body, itself, is absolutely fascinating and can teach you a lot about how your brain and body work at a basic level and can tell you a lot about how your brain and body will react to different life events and how your mood is established and stabilized, and how your appetite is established and stabilized and so on. So we have the three major strains of cannabis, sativa, indica and ruderalis. And for sake of today's conversation, we can pretty much cross off ruderalis. It's not often consumed, and components of ruderalis are not often consumed for medicinal or recreational purposes. Let's focus on sativa and indica. People will consume the sativa variety of cannabis either by edible or by smoking cannabis, or they will consume the indica variety of cannabis, again by edible or by smoking cannabis, or sometimes they will take it in a transdermal form or a sublingual form. There are a bunch of different ways to get the cannabis into the body, but there's a clear distinction between sativa and indica that actually shows up first in the structure of the plant. At their extremes, meaning in a pure strain of sativa, it tends to be a taller plant, a longer stock, believe it or not, and actually the length of the leaves is quite a bit longer, whereas the indica plant tends to be more short and stout. And, for those aficionados out there, I'm sure you know a lot of the other specific features of sativa versus indica, but already what we're talking about is the same plant, cannabis, with two very different morphologies or shapes. You might say, "Well, why is this interesting or important "to how it affects me or affects other people "for medicinal or recreational purposes?" Well, it turns out that even though they are the same plant, these two different genetic varieties, because of the way that they grow and the way they capture sunlight and the way, believe it or not, that the different plants within that strain interact with one another, 'cause believe it or not, plants are interacting with one another, they actually bring different elements of the psychoactive compounds to different components within the leaves and the so-called buds. The takeaway is that when consumed, and when I say consumed, I want to be very clear, I don't necessarily just mean oral consumption or eating cannabis sativa by edible, I also mean smoking it, and that could be... people will, just like with tobacco, the way that they bring the psychoactive components into their bloodstream and into their brain and body is to essentially heat the dried leaves of the cannabis plant. Then the heat liberates some of the psychoactive components that when inhaled into the lungs, because the lungs include a lot of vasculature, a lot of basically blood vessels and capillaries, that the psychoactive components are actually directly absorbed from the lungs into the bloodstream, and they can cross into the bloodstream and permeate throughout the body and cross the so-called blood brain barrier. So in other words, burning the plant liberates the smoke that contains the psychoactive compounds, and those are inhaled into the lungs and then get into the brain and body and act on the brain and body. And the major effect of sativa varieties are to create a high, if you will, and I'm putting this in air quotes for those of you that are listening, but to also act as a stimulant. The sativa varieties tend to make people feel invigorated, somewhat alert. It doesn't tend to be as much of a sedative as some of the other varieties. Some people report heightened sense of focus or heightened sense of creativity. We'll talk a little bit later on as to whether or not they actually are achieving heightened levels of focus and creativity, or whether or not they just perceive themselves to have heightened levels of focus and creativity. The sativa varieties tend to make people feel a little bit less susceptible to pain and noxious stimuli, which are basically stimuli that you don't like. So the sativa varieties are often prescribed or are used in the recreational context for pain management and relief. Basically, the sativa variety is known to include a head biased effect. So here, we're talking about subjective effects, and of course these will vary from one individual to the next. Some people will smoke cannabis sativa or ingest cannabis sativa orally and will feel an entirely different array of effects, but most people, the majority of people experience a head-centered high, alertness, focus and a sense that they're more creative. Contrast that with the indica varieties of cannabis, and when people smoke or eat or ingest indica varieties, the psychoactive components of indica, and again, this is pure indica, so not hybridized with sativa at all, but just pure indica, tend to lead to more full-bodied effects. People report feeling more complete, full-body relaxation, more of a sedative effect. Indica cannabis is often prescribed and/or used recreationally in order to achieve a state of sleep or to help relieve anxiety, so less of a stimulant effect. And we will talk about why, literally, the underlying neural circuits that lead to the sativa variety causing more of a elevated mood and a head high, if you will, and the indica variety as being more full body relaxation. One of the ways to remember the distinction between the effects of cannabis sativa and cannabis indica was relayed to me by a friend who actually was a chronic, meaning every day, all day, consumer of marijuana. He basically smoked marijuana for 20 years before quitting about four or five years ago, and he said that indica is often referred to as 'in-da-couch,' meaning laid back in the couch. And that can help you remember that the indica varieties of cannabis do tend to be more sedative in their effects. Okay, so there's sativa and there's indica, and then now there are hybrid strains. So marijuana growers and people who specialize in creating novel varieties of the cannabis plant, again, I'm using the words cannabis and marijuana more or less interchangeably here, they are very good at creating new strains of plant that might be 25% sativa and 75% indica or vice versa, or 50/50 or 90/10. Essentially, what's happening nowadays is that through plant biology, plant genetics, I should say, growers are getting quite efficient at creating a variety of different strains of the marijuana plant that give rise to very nuanced and distinct effects on brain and body. In fact, so much so, that there's now a new nomenclature, a new language emerging around cannabis and the development of novel strains of cannabis for medicinal and/or recreational purposes. And while this might sound a little bit medical or a little bit clinical to some people, believe it or not, this is the nomenclature that is now typically used. People still refer to the sativa, indica and hybrid strains, but there's now also a description of so-called type one, type two and type three strains for any given sativa, indica or hybrid strain. Okay, so just to put this clearly in your mind, you've got sativa varieties, that is pure sativa varieties. You have indica varieties, again, pure indica, and then you have hybrid varieties, and beneath each of those, you have type one, type two and type three strains of indica, sativa or hybrid varieties. What are type one, type two and type three? Well, type one, type two and type three strains are strains that have varying amounts or ratios of THC to CBD. So for instance, type one strain, so for instance, you could have a pure sativa, type one, or a type one pure sativa or a type one indica. Those are going to have the greatest amount of THC relative to CBD. And I really want to emphasize this, understanding the ratio of THC to CBD can help explain a lot or even predict a lot about how a given strain of cannabis will impact somebody. For instance, because THC is largely responsible for the typical psychoactive components of cannabis, so what I mean here is, if somebody's ingesting sativa, and it routinely makes them feel more energized, elevates their mood, it gives them a heightened sense of creativity, if that's what they experience, and they're taking a type one version of that, that means that it's quite rich in THC and very little CBD. However, if they were to take a type one version of sativa, and it feels far too strong, like too much energy, or they felt like they were too much in their head, nowadays, there are strains of sativa that have been genetically engineered, and I don't mean by an engineer tinkering away with gene engineering in a CRISPR creating mutes, but literally by hybridizing, crossing different plants to one another, creating in a natural context, the same way plants in the outside world would sometimes hybridize to one another, creating a variety that's perhaps type two, which is going to have less THC and more CBD, or a type three, which is going to be very high CBD and very little THC, and the same is also true for the indica varieties. So I want to make sure that everyone understands this, because it becomes very important for understanding the biology of cannabis and predicting positive versus negative effects of cannabis. Sativa has this stimulant-like effect and tends to be more of a head high, if you will. Indica tends to be more full-body, then lead to more in-da-couch, as I refer to it before, pun intended, deep relaxation, reduce insomnia, et cetera. Now, within each of those sativa and indica, you have type one, type two and type three, and that has everything to do with how much THC, which is the dominant psychoactive compound, versus CBD, which has other effects, mainly on the body, but not so much on the brain and modes of thinking and mood, et cetera, how much THC versus CBD is present. And again, type one is THC dominant, type two, equal ratios, if you will, of THC and CBD, and type three tend to be high CBD. Okay, so already we've got some categorization here that hopefully isn't overwhelming to you, but this turns out to be extremely important if you want to understand how cannabis works and predict the effects of cannabis. I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens, now called AG1, is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens, once are usually twice a day, is that it gets to me the probiotics that I need for gut health. Our gut is very important. It's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain, the immune system, and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health, and those probiotics in Athletic Greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health. In addition, Athletic Greens contains a number of adaptogens, vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational and nutritional needs are met, and it tastes great. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera, and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Okay, so somewhat surprisingly, we're going to set aside cannabis. We're going to take what we know about sativa, indica, type one, type two, type three, CBD, et cetera, and we're just going to set that aside for a moment. Why would we do that? Well, we have to ask ourselves, why would any of these plants, why would any of these compounds, THC, CBD, sativa, indica, et cetera, why would any of that have any effect on us at all? And this discussion that we're about to have very much resembles the discussion that we had on a previous episode about nicotine, because as many of you know, nicotine is a commonly used substance. In fact, if we were to look at the three most commonly used drugs, alcohol will be at the top of the list. Many billions of people regularly use alcohol or occasionally use alcohol. Many billions of people also use nicotine. It's the second most consumed drug, so more than 1 billion and probably closer to 2 billion people consume nicotine, and then the third most consumed drug is cannabis in one form or another. And many of you are probably shouting, "What about caffeine? What about caffeine?" Well, in the context of drugs, and in particular, addictive drugs, caffeine doesn't quite rise to the list, but if we were to look at caffeine and include it in that list, caffeine would be above all of those. But the most commonly used drugs are alcohol, second after that is nicotine and then cannabis. Nicotine, as some of you may know, if you listen to the episode on nicotine, but even if you didn't, nicotine comes from the tobacco plant, and there are a few other plants that include nicotine, and typically it's brought into the brain and body by smoking tobacco, dipping tobacco, snuffing tobacco or vaping nicotine. Nicotine exists in the outside world in these plants, the tobacco plants, but the reason it has an effect on the body is that there are so-called nicotinic receptors in the body. Now, those nicotinic receptors were named after nicotine, the compound, but they existed in the brain and body, not because of the existence of a tobacco plant, but because there are other chemicals in the body that naturally occur, namely acetylcholine that bind the nicotine receptor. Those chemicals, such as acetylcholine, that bind the nicotinic receptor in your brain and body create an enhanced sense of focus, et cetera, et cetera. But, nicotine from tobacco binds that same receptor, but with much greater affinity, and therefore also creates a state of focus, but a much greater one than we can achieve without nicotine. So you can see the nicotine episode if you want to learn more about that. In a very similar way, all of our brains and bodies, from the time that we are conceived, believe it or not, very shortly after conception, if we want to be accurate, very early conception, when you were in the womb, and still now, if you're listening to this, you have what are called cannabinoid receptors, because you also have endogenous cannabinoids. What do we mean by that? You have receptors, which are like little parking spots that are present on cells in your brain and body, and what we call a ligand, which is basically just a chemical that's released, parks in that receptor and causes a number of different biological effects. Cannabis contains compounds that also bind to those receptors, but here I want to make a really clear distinction. We have what are called endogenous ligands, those just mean chemicals from within us that we make naturally, even if we never go near the cannabis plant or any other source of cannabis, we have chemicals that are created in us that park in those receptors and cause biological effects on mood, on perception, on the immune system, on hunger, et cetera, again, without ever going anywhere near cannabis, we have these endogenous cannabinoids. So endogenous cannabinoids are floating around in us, or I should say, they are released in us in particular ways, bind to these receptors and cause changes in mood, appetite, et cetera. They have many different effects on the brain and body, and we'll talk about those. But just like with nicotine, there are substances in the outside world, in this case, cannabis contains these substances, so things like THC and like CBD, that when ingested by smoking or vaping or by ingesting edibles also will park in those same receptors, the cannabinoid receptors and lead to biological effects. Now, it's a little bit misleading, because we call them cannabinoid receptors as if they were there to bind cannabis, or just like we call the nicotine receptors, nicotinic receptors, it makes it seem as if they were there in order to bind nicotine from tobacco, but that's not the way our brains and bodies evolved. Our brains and bodies evolved for these receptors to make use of chemicals that exist within us, called again, endogenous chemicals, and those endogenous chemicals lead to certain effects, as I mentioned before. The key thing here, if you haven't understood anything I've set up until now, please understand this, the key thing is that THC and CBD and the other components of cannabis bind to those receptors, those endogenous cannabinoid receptors, the ones that we naturally make, with much greater affinity and exert a vastly greater potency and effect on mood and perception, et cetera, than do our endogenous cannabinoids. Another analogy that one could take in order to understand this would be hormones, like testosterone and estrogen. Many people, I would say all people, make testosterone and estrogen to varying degrees. It's going to depend on whether or not you're male, female, your age, whether or not you've gone through puberty, et cetera, et cetera, but let's just take testosterone for example. There's testosterone circulating in your body. That's true if you're male or female, and there are receptors called androgen receptors, we could even call them testosterone receptors. And the testosterone binds to those receptors and has effects on cells. It causes hair growth, changes the voice. It can affect libido. It affects all sorts of things in the brain and body, depending on which organ and tissue you're talking about. But of course, there are people that take synthetic testosterone or derivatives of testosterone, and some of those derivatives, for instance, in the body building community and the sports community, they will take things like Dianabol. These are modified versions of testosterone that can bind to the testosterone receptor with much greater affinity, or I should say the androgen receptor with much greater affinity, and have supra physiological effects, effects that would essentially never be seen from testosterone that was endogenously, excuse me, endogenously released within the body. We could say the same thing for estrogen. There are estrogen receptors, they bind estrogen, but if someone were to take synthetic estrogen or to ingest a plant compound that contains various estrogenic compounds, and those plants certainly exist out there, they can have supra physiological effects on those receptors. Why am I telling you this? Well, many people believe that because cannabis, marijuana is a plant, and plants grow out of the ground, and they're naturally occurring, and because we have receptors in our body that are there without the need to engineer them from some external source, they're in our genome. They're program for it, and we're born with these things, and we keep these our entire life. Many people mistakenly think, ah, these plant compounds are safer for us or better for us, or are somehow appropriate for us to ingest, but that's simply not true, and here, I'm not saying that cannabis is always a bad idea for people. There are certain populations and certain people for which it can be relatively safe recreationally, that's the truth, and there are other populations for which it can be downright dangerous, recreationally or medicinally. And of course, there are medicinal purposes that are being explored, and we'll talk more about that. But this is vital to understand, because I think that when we hear, "Oh, it's from a plant, it's natural," and then you also have a receptor for these, endogenous cannabinoid receptors, and therefore, the marriage of those two, the coming together of the chemical THC or CBD or both with these receptors is somehow supposed to happen as if this was a purpose of having these receptors, but it's simply not the case. In the same way that the nicotinic receptors are not there because nicotine is good for us, they're there because there are compounds that exist within us that are good to bind to those receptors from time to time. Now, here's the key thing about, I guess today, I'm saying there are a lot of key things, but here's another key thing about understanding cannabis and the way that it works, which is that THC and CBD, when they're brought into the brain and body by smoking or edible, et cetera, they bind to those receptors, those endogenous cannabinoid receptors, and they tap into the same systems that your endogenous cannabinoids would tap into, the ones that affect mood and energy and creativity and relaxation, et cetera, but they do so with thousand fold greater potency. And as a consequence of that, your endogenous cannabinoids are outcompeted. They really get no opportunity to interact with those receptors. And understanding that, can lead to a very clear understanding of why, for instance, when people use cannabis to relieve anxiety, or they use cannabis to enter a certain brain state for creativity or to enter sleep, why a dependence on cannabis starts to emerge. Because if they don't ingest cannabis, and again, ingest could mean smoke to bring THC in, or CBD in, or ingest orally or even transdermal or tincture or one of the other varieties, if they don't do that, then what happens is not only are the receptors not stimulated to the same degree or with the same potency that they normally are, but the endogenous cannabinoids can no longer have their effect, so people experience heightened levels of anxiety, disrupted mood, disrupted brain state, and so on. Now, again, I want to be very clear that I'm not trying to paint a picture of cannabis as all bad or even partially bad. What I want to do today is give you as much information I can as to how cannabis works, how its different component parts work, how the different types of cannabis work, and point to some of the valid medicinal uses and some of the recreational uses, and then lay out the landscape for you as to who is really most at risk in terms of psychoactive components, immune components and so on and so forth, so that you can make the most informed choice for you. I am not here to tell you what to do or what not to do. As I like to say, do as you wish, I mean, don't do as you wish if it harms other people or yourself, but do as you wish, but know what you're doing, so that's really my goal here. So as we begin to dive further into the biology, I think you'll start to get a clearer picture of why cannabis is so effective in some context, but also why it can create such massive suffering in other contexts because of the way that it out-competes your own natural endogenous cannabinoid systems. So let's talk about those endogenous cannabinoid systems, what they are and how they work, because that will give us a lens into what the higher potency or maximum impact of the various cannabis plant varieties and strains in THC and CBD and so forth, how and why those work. So what are the endogenous cannabinoids, these chemical substances that everybody makes? You make them, I make them. You've been making them basically from the time that you were conceived, and you are going to make them until the time that you die. Whether or not they have the impact and the biological functions that I'm about to describe will depend a lot on whether or not you are using your own endogenous cannabinoids to park in those receptors that you also have from birth until death, or whether or not you are tickling those receptors or strongly activating those receptors using some external source like cannabis and THC, et cetera. The two main endogenous cannabinoids that we want to consider are anandamide, which we will refer to as EAE, so anandamide, and another one, which is arachidonoyl-glycerol, arachidonoyl-glycerol, which we will abbreviate 2-AG. So let's just take EAE and 2-AG, lump them together and talk about the endogenous cannabinoids, just to make it simple. But if you want to do the deep dive on anadamide versus 2-AG, please be my guest. The endogenous cannabinoids are released from neurons. What are neurons? Neurons are nerve cells. And nerve cells should be conceptualized like this. You have presynaptic neurons and postsynaptic neurons. Presynaptic neurons basically contain little vesicles, little bubbles full of neurotransmitter, which are chemicals, and when neurons are stimulated electrically, and that could be from a thought, it could be from the desire to move, it could be because of a drug, it could be because you're hungry, the relevant neurons will vomit out or will fuse, as we say, those little packets, those little bubbles of neurotransmitter into the gap between the pre and postsynaptic neuron, and we call that a synaptic cleft or the synapse. It's a little gap, a little space, and the neurotransmitter flows across that synapse, and some of it will park in the little parking spots that we call receptors on the postsynaptic neuron side. Depending on which neurotransmitter it is, and a bunch of other things not worth going into right now, the parking of that chemical and those neurotransmitter receptors will either cause that neuron on the postsynaptic side to itself, release neurotransmitter elsewhere, or it will quiet it down, so-called excitation and inhibition. That's kind of neuro transmission in a nutshell. If you don't understand it, no big deal. It's not going to prevent you from understanding today's discussion. If you understand even a small fraction of what I've just said, then it's going to allow you to understand not just today's discussion, but a lot of neuroscience with a lot more nuance and depth of understanding. The key thing to know about the endogenous cannabinoids is that unlike most neurotransmitters, they are released from the postsynaptic side. So what happens is neurotransmitter goes from presynaptic neuron to postsynaptic neuron, but under certain conditions, the postsynaptic neuron, itself, releases a chemical, and that chemical goes backward, what we call retrogradely, to the presynaptic neuron, binds to receptors there and changes the probability that the presynaptic neuron will release neurotransmitter. Put simply, endogenous cannabinoids tend to decrease the probability that a neuron will release neurotransmitter. They're a break on the system. They're a way of shutting down the communication between neurons, regulating it, not to make it completely quiet, but to adjust the levels with a lot of nuance. Now, the other thing that the endogenous cannabinoids do is a mind bender, because we're talking about cannabis, and a commonly known feature of cannabis and marijuana consumption is disruptions in short-term memory, and there is essentially zero debate as to whether or not that occurs, and we'll talk about the mechanisms a little bit later. And yet, endogenous cannabinoids, the chemicals that you naturally release from these postsynaptic neurons that travel retrogradely back to the presynaptic neuron, actually can lead to strengthening of connections between the presynaptic neuron and the postsynaptic neuron through a process called long-term potentiation, or LTP. They can also cause what's called depression of communication between a presynaptic neuron and a postsynaptic neuron. Long-term depression has nothing to do with depression as a psychological state or as a illness. Long-term potentiation and long-term depression simply refer to the probability that one neuron will be able to stimulate and activate another neuron. And, as I just told you, the endogenous cannabinoids can either turn up the dial or turn down the dial. They can either increase the probability or decrease the probability that a given connection between neurons will function more or will function less. So if you think about the communication between neurons as crosstalk, as a conversation, well, the endogenous cannabinoids can dictate whether or not that conversation is likely to occur or not to occur. Think of them as either putting someone at the top of your text chain in your phone, which would be long-term potentiation, or essentially blocking their number, which would essentially be long-term depression. So, if you're getting the impression that the endogenous cannabinoids are working in a number of different ways, and it's not very straightforward, you're right. In fact, that's the message that I'd like you to take away. The endogenous cannabinoids are sometimes increasing neuronal communication. This can lead to increases in mood or increases in the likelihood that someone will talk a certain way or behave a certain way or feel a certain way. That can also lead to decreases in synaptic transmission, that is communication between neurons, in ways that will make somebody's mood lower, or will make them less hungry or more hungry. And, here's the really key thing, there are two kinds of endogenous cannabinoid receptors, referred to as CB1 and CB2, and we can say with confidence that CB1 is highly enriched in the nervous system, and especially within the brain. It's found not everywhere, but almost everywhere in the brain and elsewhere in the nervous system, so spinal cord and other aspects of the nervous system. CB2, the cannabinoid receptor, CB2 is largely located in the tissues of the body, including the immune system, the liver, even the genitals, et cetera. So what this means is that the endogenous cannabinoids are having these sorts of effects on neurons that I talked about, but they are also having effects on immune cells, on reproductive organs, on liver, on digestion, on hunger, et cetera, through mechanisms that are divorced from the function of the nervous system of neurons. Now, in reality, no system of the brain and body is divorced from the nervous system, because the nervous system is controlling everything. It is really the master controller, and everything's feeding back to the nervous system, so it's a two way street. But the simple way to think about it is CB1 receptors are mainly in the nervous system, and CB2 receptors are mainly in the body and endogenous cannabinoids, again, EAE, anandamide, and 2-AG, arachidonoyl-glycerol, are impacting CB1 and CB2 receptors. Today we're mainly going to talk about CB1 receptors, 'cause they are the ones that are responsible for most of the familiar effects of cannabis, but the key takeaway at this point is to really understand that the major effects of your endogenous cannabinoids on these receptors in this particular CB1 are very nuanced. It depends on context, depends on which neurons. It's sometimes increasing communication between neurons, sometimes decreasing it, and then along comes cannabis, and that cannabis, again, can arrive by smoking, by vaping, by edible. And cannabis contains THC and CBD that potently bind the CB1 receptor, and now the effects of the CB1 receptor being occupied by THC or being occupied by CBD, are not very nuanced. In fact, they are very predictable and especially important is to understand that they are so strong, and they park in that receptor with such affinity, with such force and precision and stubbornness and refusal to leave that receptor that they completely outcompete the endogenous cannabinoid system. In fact, they leave the endogenous cannabinoid system essentially dysfunctional, which, in some cases, may be a good thing, but in most cases, is going to lead to problems of various kinds, and we'll talk about what sorts of problems. And again, I feel obligated to say, this is not me saying don't ingest cannabis or THC or CBD. That's not what I'm saying. What I'm saying is if you evaluate the potency that is in technical terms, it would be the affinity with which these compounds, THC and CBD and CBN, bind to these endogenous receptors, that would be like a howitzer gun, like a cannon going off, as compared to endogenous cannabinoid, whether or not it's EAE or 2-AG, which is more like a cap gun level of activation, at least in this analogy. So now you have what at least I would like to think is a fairly complete understanding of the different varieties of cannabis, at least at a broad sweep, and the different biological effects that they can have, at least in terms of the major receptors and in retrograde signaling, et cetera, et cetera. Now, let's take a step back into the real world and evaluate or think about what happens when somebody smokes cannabis or ingests cannabis by way of edible or tincture or something of that sort. Cannabis is very fast to enter the bloodstream. In fact, within 30 seconds, it's going to enter the brain and permeate throughout the brain and body. That's very, very fast. I mean, when you contrast that with something like alcohol or even nicotine, depending on how the nicotine is delivered, that is a very fast delivery of the psychoactive and biologically active compound, which in this case is THC and CBD and probably some other things as well. So within 30 seconds, it reaches the brain and bodily tissues, and within 30 to 60 minutes, it's going to reach its peak concentrations and have its peak biological effects. Those aren't always the same thing, but in the case of cannabis, again here I'm using cannabis as an umbrella term for THC and CBD, the effects are going to peak at about 30 to 60 minutes after bringing those compounds into the body in some way or another. And the effects tend to last anywhere from three to four hours, although there's some variation on that, depending on individual metabolism, whether or not somebody is familiar with the compound, believe it or not, psychologically familiar, but also biologically familiar, or whether or not it's a first time use or occasional use and so on. THC and CBD and other components of cannabis are highly what we call lipophilic. That is, they have an affinity toward, and they can actually pass through fatty tissues. Now, every cell in your body, but especially neurons, have a double layer of fat on their outside. And of course, when people hear "fat," they always think, ooh, fat's bad. Most of the world seems to want to lose fat or bodily fat. Here we're talking about the fatty membrane, the barrier around each tissue, in this case we're talking particularly about neurons. And THC and CBD and the other components of cannabis are highly lipophilic, so they can get into essentially all cells just simply by flowing into them. They will also remain in those cells for a long time. So, I know that a number of people, depending on whether or not they get tested for work or for sport or otherwise for cannabis or CBD and THC, don't take this as a strict number, but typically, if one ingests CBD or THC, smokes cannabis, ingests by orally, et cetera, doesn't matter, it's going to stay in that fatty tissue and can be detected for at least as long as 80 days after ingestion, and there's a whole industry as to how to accelerate the clearance, and I should just tell you that just losing bodily fat isn't going to eliminate it from your system, maybe partially in those fat cells, but certainly intravisceral fat and other fatty tissue that's in around the brain and body is going to harbor that THC molecule and the CBD molecule for quite a long while, at least 80 days. So, if someone smokes cannabis or they ingest cannabis, it very rapidly gets into the bloodstream, and the components that are psychoactive get into the bloodstream and are immediately able to access neurons and other cells and start having these effects of parking at those endogenous cannabinoid receptors and impacting the signaling between neurons, which leads to the subjective effects of cannabis, including THC and CBDs, so let's talk about what those different subjective effects are. Again, this is going to vary depending on whether or not people are ingesting sativa varieties of cannabis, just to remind you, those tend to be elevated mood, alertness, talkativeness. People who take sativa varieties tend to talk a lot more than they would otherwise. Again, there are exceptions to this, of course there are exceptions. I'm sure there are people out there shouting, although I guess if you're the quiet people who don't talk too much, you're probably not shouting, or if you're not, you're not doing on sativa, Joe contended, but in any event, there are exceptions, but there are also general rules. And the sativas tend to make people's mood elevated, energetic, again, this sort of head high, and indica varieties tend to do the opposite. more of a sedative, relaxant, et cetera. Why and how would they do that? Well, without going into an extensive deep dive into the different neurotransmitter systems of the brain and body, what we know for sure is that CB1 receptors are present on an enormous number of different neurons in brain structures in neural circuits, so that the sativa varieties that act as a stimulant, making people feel happy, 'cause in general, they do tend to elevate mood, at least at certain dosages, talkative, tend to make people feel like they have ideas that are interesting, that they might want to share, tend to narrow their context, so we tend to increase focus. This is something that's not often discussed about cannabis, but especially the sativa varieties can increase people's level of focus to particular things, something they're watching or something they're doing or music, it allows them to narrow their sense of focus. That's going to occur by activation of CB1 receptors in the so-called prefrontal cortex, which is just behind the forehead, and the prefrontal cortex acts as a strong modulator of so-called limbic circuitry and other circuitry that is more stress oriented. The way to think about the stress and limbic circuitry, such as the amygdala, which many people have heard about, is that they aren't really circuits for fear and stress. They are circuits that are constantly evaluating one's own internal state, heart rate, et cetera, and what's happening externally, and, sorry to say, but the default of those systems is to detect danger, so threat detection systems. And then the prefrontal cortex largely acts as a brake on those systems, so like the reins pulling back on a steed of horses that would otherwise just take off. And so, the sativa varieties tend to increase CB1 activation in the prefrontal cortex and in other circuitry that then leads to an overall reduction in stress, because of the way that prefrontal circuitry can reduce activation or the amygdala. Now that, of course, does not explain why some people become very stressed and very paranoid when they smoke sativa varieties or other varieties of cannabis or ingest other varieties of cannabis. We'll talk about the paranoid effect and why that occurs and who might predict that would occur to them in a little bit. But I just want to give you a sense of how this is working, because as I mentioned before, THC and/or CBD are going to bind that CB1 receptor, let's say in prefrontal cortex, the neurons of the prefrontal cortex, it's going to bind there, and then they'll be a retrograde signaling back to the presynaptic neuron, and in the case of prefrontal cortex, what's happening is it's increasing transmission, increasing the release of neurotransmitter in the prefrontal cortex. However, at the same time, the very same THC and CBD that was brought into the system is binding the very same type of receptors, CB1 receptors, in other brain structures, such as the amygdala and causing retrograde signaling back to the presynaptic neurons in the amygdala, but it's quieting the activation of those neurons, so this is interesting. We have the same compounds, THC and/or CBD, brought into the body and brain, binding the same receptors, in this case the CB1 receptors, but depending on where those receptors are located and which brain areas we're referring to, they are either causing heightened levels of alertness and activation of systems that are designed to make you talkative and alertness and mood, et cetera, focus, or they're causing suppression of those circuitries. So we have kind of a seesaw effect here where the same compound is increasing mood and alertness and focus in the prefrontal cortex and is decreasing stress and threat detection in the amygdala, and that's one of the reasons why, especially the sativa varieties of cannabis, allow people to enter these states of focus, some might even say flow, although I don't want to go into what flow states really are. That's for a different discussion, and it's very poorly defined as it is. And I certainly don't want to give people the impression that cannabis increases flow states, because that's not always the case, and certainly most often is not going to be the case. But the idea here is that this molecule comes into our brain and is shifting everything towards a state of focus, elevated mood of heightened sense of importance about whatever it is that we happen to be doing. And now of course, whatever we could happen to be doing could be writing a song, writing poetry, communicating with somebody, but it could also be something as trivial as watching cartoons or watching a movie, which is not trivial in its own right, but in terms of thinking about the creative aspects or the creativity stimulating aspects of cannabis, not productivity oriented. So narrowed focus, elevated mood, more relaxed and yet energetic, that's the major effects of the sativa varieties, except, and this is a really big boldface, triple underlined 'except,' except in some individuals, depending on dosage, but also depending on preexisting neural circuitry and propensity for anxiety, some people ingest or smoke sativa varieties, and regardless of whether or not it's a type one, type two or type three variety, regardless of the ratio between THC and CBD, people will experience intense anxiety and paranoia. Now, how do you predict who will experience intense anxiety and paranoia and who will experience intense relaxation, focus and sense of creativity from ingesting or smoking a type one, type two or type three sativa? Well, there is no way to predict that, and there's a lot of what I would call street lore or dorm room lore or not peer reviewed, but peer discussed among friends and people and acquaintances lore out there that what one needs to do is simply smoke more, or just ingest more. You hear that, "Oh, well listen, if it makes you paranoid, "you simply need to use more," that is absolutely categorically false. Everything we know about the way that THC and CBD work is that they tend to potentiate, that is increase the effects of these different systems at given synapses and in different areas of the brain and body. That is, if someone experiences paranoia or anxiety from a given strain of the marijuana plant or from ingesting an edible in a particular way or a particular kind of edible, that person is very likely to experience the same effect every time they ingest that strain or variety. This is part of what's led to this enormous industry. I mean, there are a number of different reasons, but this is part of what's led to this enormous industry of highly customized cannabis where people will spend some time really seeking out the different strains of cannabis and hybrids of cannabis that work best for them and work best for them in particular context. I wish I could tell you that if you are a person who is between 5' 7" and 6' tall, and you have blue eyes or brown eyes, that the sativa varieties are going to be right for you, or that sativa varieties are going to give you panic attacks, I can't do that. The only way to determine it would be to actually experience ingesting those or smoking those, which is certainly also not what I'm suggesting. That's up to you. I'm not telling you what to do or what not to do, but there are no good predictors. In fact, if you look in the literature, it is not at all clear that people who have a heightened level of anxiety when they do not smoke cannabis will experience cannabis as less paranoia inducing or more relaxing. That's simply not the case. Now, what we can say for sure is that general categories of effects, such as increased focus and reduced anxiety are largely due to activation of areas like the prefrontal cortex. Now, unlike other compounds like nicotine or alcohol or neurotransmitter systems like dopamine, when we talk about the cannabinoid system, and I say effects, biological effects, psychoactive effects, I want you to keep in mind always, please, please, please keep in mind that those effects can be varied and often opposite in direction, so let's just give an example of that. I just mentioned that when people smoke or or eat sativa, that it tends to lead to one specific set, or generally leads to one specific set of effects, heightened focus, mood, et cetera. Whereas when they ingest or smoke indica and its components, again, we're still talking about THC and CBD in varying ratios, but now indica cannabis, and you say, "Well, why would it improve the transition time to sleep?" Or at least give people the impression that it improves the transition time to sleep. We'll talk about what indica actually does for sleep in a little bit, but indica also tends to suppress activation of the amygdala and threat detection centers in the brain, again, binding the same CB1 receptors in those retrograde signaling mechanisms that I talked about before, but it also tends to shut down the hippocampus, an area of the brain associated with memory, which is why indica varieties lead to pronounced, or I should say profound defects in short-term memory and sometimes in long-term memory as well, if it's consumed over long periods of time. We'll talk about short, medium and long-term consumption, occasional consumption going forward. So what I'd like you to take away from this component of the discussion is first of all, the mechanism of action by which cannabis impacts the brain and body, but in particular the brain, is going to be through CB1 receptors, and those CB1 receptors can lead to either an acceleration or a brake on particular biological mechanisms. And there are going to be a constellation of different accelerations and braking of different neural systems in the brain and body, depending on whether or not people ingest sativa or indica or some hybrid strain. And perhaps most importantly, even if you didn't understand anything that I've said about the biology of these different strains in the receptors, please do understand that there is no way to predict what the effect of a given strain will be on an individual. There has been extensive exploration as to whether or not people who are so called mellower or more anxious or any number of different personality dimensions will respond in one way or the other, but, in fact, there is no way to tell. Layer on top of that the fact that dosing THC and CBD can be fairly straightforward in the form of edibles, because there can be, at least if it's a controlled source, a defined number of milligrams of THC, a defined number of milligrams of CBD. That's true for ingestibles. It's much harder to gauge that from the smokeable forms of cannabis, especially if those smokeable forms of cannabis are obtained through sources where there isn't a lot of clear information about the total amount of THC in that product. Now, this is all changing quite a lot nowadays because of the commercialization of of THC and CBD products and cannabis in a number of different areas, including in the United States. But still, many people are ingesting cannabis, THC, CBD through sources where they don't really know how much they're bringing into their system. And so, whether or not someone gets incredible anxiety relief, enhanced sense of mood and focus and wellbeing, pain relief, et cetera, or whether or not they have full blown panic attacks, et cetera, is very hard to predict based on dosage information alone. Now, of course, we can create broad categories, and we are going to talk about studies that create broad categories of low dose, moderate dose, and high dose. frequent use and infrequent use, but unlike alcohol, unlike nicotine, we can't really point to specificity of X amount of alcohol, grams of alcohol per week, which is safe, or X amount of alcohol, which is not safe. And so I know a lot of people out there are wondering, how often can they smoke cannabis, or how often can they eat cannabis or THC or CBD in any number of its different forms and products, safely? Well, we have to really define what 'safely' means, and we have to really acknowledge that there's a pretty loose set of controls over what one is bringing into their brain and body as they ingest THC and CBD, but even under conditions in which it's very controlled, it's very hard to predict what those effects will be. So before moving into specifics of taking cannabis or not taking cannabis, who should, who shouldn't, what the medicinal purposes are and what some of the newer, exciting data point to, I just briefly want to make a list, and I promise very briefly, I know I'm not often concise, but I do try to be thorough for your sake. I want to make a very brief list of the different brain areas that are impacted by THC and CBD and why THC and CBD have the various effects they do. When somebody smokes or ingests cannabis, doesn't matter what the THC or CBD ratio is, if they experience deficits in memory, and that's almost always present, that's going to be because of reductions in electrical activity within this brain region we call the hippocampus. Hippocampus means seahorse. It's shaped like a seahorse. Anatomists like to name things after what things look like, but hippocampus memory, memory is reduced, in particular short-term memory. That's true regardless of whether or not one is using sativa indica or some hybrid. In general, the prefrontal cortex is going to be activated by the sativa varieties, which is going to increase thinking and narrowly constrain focus to some activity, and that's more commonly associated with the sativa varieties. The indica varieties, as I mentioned before, tend to lead to a suppression of activity in prefrontal cortex, believe it or not, and turn off thinking and planning. This is why indica varieties are often used for relaxation and for promoting sleep. Regardless of whether or not sativa or indica variety, and again, regardless of the ratio of THC to CBD, there is a general suppression of neural circuits within the so-called basal ganglia and cerebellum. Basal ganglia and cerebellum are areas of the brain that are involved in action planning and withholding action, so that would be the basal ganglia, so-called go, no go circuitry, and the cerebellum, which is involved in balance, but also motor planning and motor sequencing. This is why people who smoke marijuana, regardless of the strain, will tend to be less physically mobile. Other common effects are reddening of the eyes, dryness of the mouth, that's actually caused by the same general mechanism, which is a reduction in the secretion of saliva and of tears and lubrication of the eyes from the lacrimal glands of the eyes because of the presence of largely CB2, but also CB1 receptors in the mouth and on the eyes. And there tends to be, especially with certain strains of cannabis, increase in appetite, so-called munchies, and that has everything to do with very, very high density of CB1 receptors in the hypothalamus, and in particular areas of the hypothalamus, like the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, other areas as well, of course, that have tons of CB1 receptors, bind THC and CBD and activate the neurons that strongly stimulate appetite through two mechanisms, one is a cognitive mechanism of creating a preoccupation with food in anticipation of taste, as well as the experience of taste. So the narrowing of focus to what you want to go eat. You really crave, I dunno, pizza. It seems to be high fat, high carbohydrate foods, but really crave pizza and narrowing of focus, so that you're not thinking about anything else, but also signaling from the hypothalamus to the gut to neurons within the stomach, itself, that regulate blood sugar, so there are strong effects on blood sugar of THC and CBD that generally lead to increases in appetite, so two parallel mechanisms, one within the brain, one within the body, increasing appetite, so there's an array of different effects. And as I mentioned before, CB1 receptors are present all over the nervous system in the brain, the spinal cord. In fact, the presence of CB1 receptors in the spinal cord largely explains the fact that THC and CBD, to some extent, although it's not very well studied, can provide some pain relief. I say some, because a lot of people perceive or believe that they experience more pain relief from cannabis than they actually do. It actually has a lot to do with a perceptual shift to basically focusing on other things, but there does seem to be some antinociceptive, meaning anti pain effects of cannabis, THC in particular, and that is exerted largely through effects on CB1 receptors in neurons of the spinal cord. So a broad array of effects are taking place, regardless of what strain you take and whether or not you eat the cannabis or you smoke the cannabis. And the broad array of effects can be explained by the fact that that retrograde signaling can lead to activation or suppression of activity in various neurons. So now I'd like to take a step back from the biology of cannabis and THC and CBD and all the signaling and receptors, et cetera, and really just focus on cannabis use, and wherever possible, I will point to the specific strains that have been studied and the ratios of THC to CBD, but I have to say that unfortunately, most studies of marijuana, of cannabis, while they have been very careful to detail the amount of THC, low dose, medium dose, or high dose, and actually getting very specific, right down to the number of milligrams or even how much circulating THC is present after somebody smokes a joint or ingests cannabis, most studies have not distinguished between sativa and indica strains. And that's unfortunate, because in the real world, people are distinguishing between sativa and indica strains in their patterns of use and what they prefer and what they don't prefer, or even what they prefer to smoke during the day or ingest during the day versus night. Believe it or not, there are people who are using certain strains during the day and other strains at night, but the science is yet to catch up to that, or I should say, more accurately, the general public and the themes that are emerging and the practices that are emerging around cannabis, especially in states where it's decriminalized or legalized, are occurring at such a rapid rate that there's absolutely no way that the science could keep up. This is a naturally occurring experiment, not to say that it's natural, like people should do it, but it's an experiment that's happening in real time in the real world, much faster than controlled studies within university laboratories and other laboratories can keep up. So at this point, I think it's appropriate to ask ourselves, why do people even use cannabis? What are they trying to achieve? Is it always about not feeling pain? Is it always about reducing anxiety? Well, sometimes it is, but oftentimes people are using cannabis in order to achieve a particular state. And we could use a broad brush and say, "Well, they just like being high," but while that may be true in a lot of circumstances, and I have to believe it actually is true in a lot of circumstances, there are a lot of people who use cannabis in a very directed way, or they get, quote unquote, high, in order to achieve states that to them are particularly attractive, and one such state is a state of creativity. And this brings us to a broader theme, which is, does cannabis increase creativity? And if so, is it the THC, the CBD, what's the appropriate ratio or the best ratio for accessing creativity? This is an interesting and important discussion, I believe, because creativity is one of the more sought after and more elusive states that humans can experience. And yet, if you look at human evolution, you look at our progression in terms of technology development and culture and music and poetry, et cetera, we really can look to creativity as the state that fostered so much of that evolution. So whether or not you're into technology, or you're into art or music, whether or not you're just somebody who wants to expand their understanding or their experience of life in some way, creativity is a fundamentally important state to try and access and to try and access regularly and to try and tap into, in order to eventually produce something, in order to create something of meaning that exists not just in that creative state, but to yourself after that creative state has gone away, so the painting that you paint in the creative state hopefully is a painting that still inspires and has impact after you exit that creative state and that will inspire others, and this could be true for any number of different things, not just painting. So does cannabis increase creativity? The short answer is, it depends. First of all, we need to define creativity. Here we are, thinking as scientists, if not already scientists, and there are basically two modes of thinking that are associated with creativity, and they don't completely explain creativity. But if you look in the research, the psychology research and the neuroscience research, you'll hear about convergent thinking and divergent thinking. Convergent thinking is taking loose ideas and kind of braiding them together, finding a common thread, synthesizing, and organizing those different ideas into some common or specific framework in order to get or create some specific outcome. So convergent thinking is basically the person in the room who's listening to all the ideas and taking them all in. Maybe it's a panel of, how should we get a certain product out to market? Or what are the different motifs that we should include in a piece of music? Or what should we do in terms of rearchitecting a given physical space? Taking in those different opinions, those different ideas from different people, and then synthesizing them and coming up with one or a small subset of coherent ideas that incorporate some or all of the ones that they heard, so that's convergent thinking. It doesn't have to involve a panel of people talking to you. I use that as an example of what goes on inside your own head when you are engaging in convergent thinking. You're thinking, well, so and so said this, and I think that, and you're braiding them through and trying to get some common themes, some common vector to emerge from that. Divergent thinking, on the other hand, is best described as brainstorming. It's exploring ideas and continuing to move into the variation and the vastness of ideas in hopes of eventually being able to converge on some novel idea or framework. So these are similar and related, but typically the creativity process involves first brainstorming and divergent thinking, and then in order to arrive at something, to actually create something, the verb 'create,' not just thinking about what you might create, which occurs during divergent thinking, but actually creating something, a specific painting, a specific song, a specific body of literature, a specific scientific project or experiment and so on, that usually involves convergent thinking. Now these can be explored in the laboratory, and they can be explored in the laboratories through sets of different types of questionnaires or even tasks that you can give human subjects, and this has been done extensively and across the entire body of data, and by that I mean, literally hundreds of studies that have explored the relationship between particular neuro circuits and neurochemicals, convergent and divergent thinking. We can arrive at a principle, and the principle involves a molecule that many of you have heard about before, which is dopamine. Dopamine is a neuromodulator. It's involved in motivation, and it tends to direct our attention to things outside of us, but it's also closely related to convergent thinking and divergent thinking and to the creative process. And therefore, it should come as no surprise that diseases of the nervous system, excuse me, such as bipolar disorder, which we've done in episode all about bipolar disorder or schizophrenia or mood disorders that impact the levels of dopamine, either make it way, way too high or way, way too low, strongly impact whether or not people will be creative. And I think the short takeaway that makes the most sense in terms of framing this, and we covered this on the episode on bipolar disorder, sometimes called bipolar depression, is that in professions where there's a lot of creativity required in order to succeed, so again, musicians, composers, artists, et cetera, you tend to find more manic depression, and manic depression, at least in the manic states, the hyperactive states, are correlated with elevated levels of dopamine. Likewise, it has been seen over and over throughout history that individuals that have mild forms of schizophrenia, or even full-blown schizophrenia, many famous painters for instance, or musicians, they are known to have elevated levels of dopamine, and they are quite creative. Now, that doesn't mean everybody who's creative has elevated levels of dopamine, although it's likely that their levels of dopamine are at least not diminished, and it doesn't mean that non-creative people have low levels of dopamine, so don't get carried away with the interpretation here. But the point is this, dopamine levels strongly relate to the probability that you can engage in convergent and divergent thinking, and they do so in the following way. When dopamine levels are high, divergent thinking is more likely. That is, when people have a lot of dopamine circulating in their system, they tend to be very expansive with their ideas, they tend to brainstorm a lot, they tend to be comfortable and even want to, or reflexively throw out a lot of ideas so that sometimes even seem a little disconnected. Some people might think of this as attention deficit, but it's not. It's really the idea of throwing out disparate ideas. You hear sometimes, you throw things against the wall and see what sticks, that's a obviously an analogy, but people are throwing lots of things against the wall and seeing what stick, and then seeing how the things that stick fit together, that's divergent thinking, and elevations in dopamine tend to increase divergent thinking. However, they tend to do this in an inverted U-shape way. For those of you either watching on YouTube, I'm just drawing a hump, obviously, and for those of you listening, just imagine a U, the shape of a letter U, and then just flip it upside down, so it looks like a bump. Turns out that when dopamine levels are very low, there's a low probability of divergent thinking. When dopamine levels are high, as I mentioned before, there's a high level or probability of divergent thinking. But when dopamine levels go very, very high, then there's again, a reduction in divergent thinking. In other words, there's a sweet spot of elevated dopamine for divergent thinking. And again, divergent thinking is critical for the creativity process, because creativity by definition is taking a novel set of ideas and arranging them in a particular way, or taking existing ideas and arranging them in a novel way that then you eventually converge on some new product, new idea, new song, et cetera. Now, convergent thinking follows a very different pattern. When dopamine levels are high, convergent thinking is not very likely. And when dopamine levels are low, convergent thinking is very likely. So here, using arguably a very reductionist view, we're looking at all of this thing we're calling creativity through a very neurosciencey reductionist lens, we can say this. The creative process involves going into a state where you're willing to consider a lot of options, many of which seem distantly or not even connected to one another, and dopamine facilitates that divergent thinking state in which you are perfectly happy and in fact, experience a joy, or elation, a comfort and a pleasure in organizing all these different ideas that to anyone else might seem not that related. But when your dopamine levels are elevated, these all seem like great ideas and that maybe there are connections there. You're not accepting all of them as true and valid and interesting in combining them, but there's this idea that it's worth entertaining the possibility, at least for moments. And then, as dopamine levels drop, there is the process of convergent thinking, which is taking options down off the wall saying, "No, no, that doesn't fit with that, "that doesn't fit with that, "but ah, that fits with that, and that can work. "That feels right or sounds right or looks right." That's the creativity process. And so, I think this is not just important for understanding cannabis, which we'll get back to in a moment, but it's important for understanding creativity and brain states in general. Brain states are not, as we would say, a square wave function. You don't just drop into a trench of creativity. Creativity is not an event, it's a process. And what I'm telling you is that it's a process that involves divergent thinking and consideration of a lot of different ideas. That's correlated with high but not too high dopamine. And then, one has to transition into a state of convergent thinking, which is really honing in on the ideas that seem to have validity or that could have validity and getting rid of everything else, and that's associated with low dopamine. It's more about logical implementation and consideration as opposed to thinking about and considering everything. So let's now return to the question of whether or not cannabis and its different components increase creativity. And when you look at the literature on this, you find studies that very clearly point to a yes, it increases creativity, and it's not surprising, therefore, that cannabis can increase dopamine transmission, that is dopamine levels, in certain brain areas, in particular brain areas involved in thinking and planning. So cannabis increases dopamine in these areas. Elevated dopamine increases divergent thinking, and divergent thinking is associated with creativity, and there are studies that support the idea that cannabis can increase creativity. However, there are at least as many studies that say that cannabis does not increase creativity, that cannabis increases consideration of multiple ideas, perhaps through elevation of dopamine and related systems, but that ultimately the ideas that converge from that are not truly creative ideas, at least they don't meet the criteria for creative brainstorming and extraction of ideas that are truly novel, so it doesn't increase creativity, so which one is it? Well, fortunately, there's an entirely distinct set of literature that has taken all the other literature into consideration, and here's where we arrive. So there's a really nice study that explored creativity in cannabis users, and we will provide a link to this study. First author is Emily LaFrance, and the title of the paper, somewhat amusing in its own right, which is, it starts with a question, inspired by Mary Jane, of course, Mary Jane being one of the old school versions or ways of talking about cannabis or marijuana. Nowadays, people refer to it mainly as pot, as other names too, of course, and the title of the paper is, "Inspired by Mary Jane Mechanisms Underlying "Enhanced Creativity in Cannabis Users." And I really like this study for a couple of reasons. First of all, they looked at people who did not use cannabis as well as people who used cannabis, so they had two different groups, but they did not evaluate creativity of the cannabis users while they were under the influence of cannabis. They looked at the level of creativity in these cannabis users when they were not under the influence of cannabis and asked whether or not their ability to be creative was enhanced by cannabis. Now we're going to compare this to studies in which people come into the laboratory and actually use cannabis, and then they evaluate creativity under that context. But this study has some unique takeaways that I think are really interesting. First of all, they did, yes, see evidence for enhanced creativity, and when I say enhanced creativity, I mean within the context of this divergent thinking thing that I talked about a moment ago. And when I say enhanced, I mean significantly greater than in non-users, so people that don't use cannabis. So right now I can imagine that all the cannabis users are cheering, "Yes, cannabis increases creativity, "makes people more creative than they would be otherwise." Well, this is interesting. We have to ask ourselves how that was accomplished. And it turns out that one of the major ways in which it was accomplished is that cannabis users, even if they're not under the influence of cannabis, are far more open to novel ideas, and they have a more explorative and reduced anxiety, or I should say lower anxiety mode of thinking when they explore novel ideas, which is essential for divergent thinking. So they observed both enhanced divergent and convergent creative type thinking in cannabis users. And the source of that, they conclude is, and here, I'll just quote, "Cannabis users' higher levels "of openness to experience are responsible "for their enhanced self-reported creativity "and convergent thinking test performance." So it's not necessarily that cannabis is increasing the capacity of the brain areas that are associated with creativity, but rather, cannabis appears to be increasing an openness and probably doing that in part through lowering anxiety in particular people, and that openness is leading to inclusion of more ideas during the divergent thinking process. They're willing to consider throwing up more things on the wall to see if they stick, so to speak. So in their conclusions, they have a really nice statement. Again, I'll just read from the paper, because they said it better than I ever could, quote, "While mainstream media has propagated the idea "that cannabis expands the mind and enhances creativity, "our results show the link between cannabis and creativity "is largely a spurious correlation," meaning that it's not the case that cannabis increases creativity, but, and I inserted the 'but' in this quote, but "driven by differences in personality "that are related to cannabis use. "For example, openness to experience that are related "to both cannabis use and augmented creativity." This is a real chicken/egg argument. What do I mean by that? What I mean is, this paper finds that people who are more open to experience are more likely to use cannabis, and people who use cannabis are going to be more open to new experiences, and that combination of features, openness to experience, and what that openness to new experiences brings, enhances the convergent and divergent thinking that is characteristic of the creative process. So in short, cannabis increases creativity, but through changes in personality that tap into the creative process, rather than directly impacting the neural circuits that, for instance, turn on creativity. And I have to say, this study is really important, because by exploring cannabis users, not while under the influence of cannabis, they were able to tap into this very important, what I believe to be fact. Because if you think about a study in which you would have one group using cannabis and another group not using cannabis, and then you give them some task that taps into creativity, you will see effects and very likely, you'll see effects where cannabis might even increase divergent and convergent thinking and creativity. Those results have actually been published many times before. But given the varied effects of cannabis and THC that we talked about earlier, through all of that complex signaling stuff, you can imagine that there will also be other studies, and in fact, there are, where divergent and convergent thinking and creativity is not assisted by cannabis and might even be reduced by ingesting cannabis. However, if one considers that divergent thinking is absolutely crucial to the creativity process and the range of things that one will explore will be enhanced by openness and by reduced levels of anxiety, so a willingness to explore different options, some of which might seem completely crazy, and cannabis increases the personality types and reduces the anxiety that create that sense of openness, well then it makes perfect sense why cannabis would increase creativity in certain individuals, but not directly. And this study, the one I just referred to, which I should say was published in the journal, "Consciousness and Cognition," and again, we'll provide a link to it, did a wonderful job of teasing out this impact of cannabis on personality, which then impacts creativity. So if somebody asks you, or if you're wondering, or if you feel like cannabis increases creativity, in some sense the answer is 'yes,' but the answer is 'yes' because of the ways that it shapes openness to new ideas and can, I should say 'can,' because not in everybody, but can, in some individuals, reduce anxiety. What this means is that if you are somebody who experiences anxiety or increased levels of focus from cannabis, regardless of the strain, and here I have to imagine people are exploring different strains, if they're exploring them at all, exploring different modes of delivery, smoking or ingestible, et cetera. If you're somebody who experiences anxiety, it's very likely that you won't have the increased openness to experience and divergent ideas that will facilitate creativity. However, if you are somebody who achieves heightened levels of relaxation and reduced levels of anxiety from cannabis, regardless of which strain we happen to be talking about, well then, yes, it will position you to be in a heightened state of creativity, at least as defined by convergent and divergent thinking. One of the more characteristic, or I should say stereotype qualities of people that smoke a lot of marijuana or ingest cannabis through other means is there changed patterns of speech. In fact, there's a lore in the clinical realm that you can predict or get some strong indication as to whether or not somebody is a cannabis user or pot smoker based on their voice and their particular tone of voice and their lack of inflection. There's a lot of speculation here, but fortunately, it's been studied. So I'd like to discuss now whether or not cannabis can impact patterns of speech, both acutely, meaning while under the influence of cannabis, and over time, in chronic cannabis users. And when I say 'chronic cannabis use,' I want to be very specific what I mean. Chronic cannabis use does not necessarily mean that people are smoking cannabis or ingesting cannabis every day, although certainly if they are, that qualifies as chronic use. Chronic use is regular use over time of anywhere from twice a week or more. So using cannabis once a month would not be considered chronic use, even if it's for many, many years. Using cannabis or ingesting cannabis in some way or form twice a week would be considered chronic use. Then of course, some of you out there are going to ask me to split hairs and say, "Well, what if somebody uses it twice a month?" Well, listen, the clinical literature, and the scientific literature don't get that specific. And of course, they're an infinite number of ways to arrange one's cannabis use, everything from zero, none at all, to constantly, every day, all day and everywhere in between. But think of chronic use as twice a week or more. Think of occasional use as less than that and realize that within the realm of chronic use, excuse me, that 'or more' can be anywhere from twice a week, to every day, to just in the evenings, et cetera. The effects of chronic use of cannabis, as I just defined it, on speech have been studied. Because of this characteristic, drawing out of certain syllables, a slowing of speech, and in many cases a total change or alteration in the way that people speak and use language, both when under the influence of cannabis and when not under the influence of cannabis if they're chronic users. And here we really want to distinguish between THC and CBD and just make it really simple and say that CBD is not responsible for most of the psychoactive effects of cannabis, whereas THC is, and again, the ratio of CBD to THC is going to be relevant there, but let's just think about cannabis and THC as one in the same for this portion of the discussion, realizing that, of course, they are not exactly the same thing. There's an excellent study entitled, "Adults with History of Recreational Cannabis Use "Have Altered Speech Production," and we will provide a link to that, first author, Adam Vogel, really like this paper. It was published in the journal, "Drug and Alcohol Dependence." We will provide a link to it for you if you'd like to peruse it in more detail. The title itself, "Adults with a History of Recreational "Cannabis Use Have Altered Speech Production," tells you pretty much everything you need to know, except there's some important nuance in here, because, as I mentioned earlier, people who smoke sativa varieties of cannabis oftentimes will become more talkative, much more talkative. However, whether or not people tend to rely on sativa cannabis use or indica cannabis use, there is a very consistent finding that people who are chronic users, again twice a week or more, recreational use or medicinal use, undergo pretty profound changes in the way that they speak, but in a very specific set of ways. Now, first of all, the changes in speech shouldn't surprise us at all, because both sativa varieties of cannabis and indica varieties of cannabis impact those brain centers involved in movement, the basal ganglia, remember the go, no-go circuitry, the circuitry that makes you want to do things, and the circuitry that makes you want to withhold action? And it tends to shift the body and brain toward more inaction. And cannabis impacts CB1 receptors in the cerebellum, which is involved in motor planning, execution and balance. So, regardless of whether or not people are using cannabis of the sativa or the indica variety, there are disruptions in motor circuitry. And, as you may have heard, if you listened to our episode with Rockefeller professor, Dr. Erich Jarvis, who works on speech and movement, speech is movement. The movements of the mouth, the movements of the hands, those are intimately related in terms of our speech. In fact, the centers of the brain involved in hand movements are part of the speech areas and vice versa. Erich actually pointed out that if you put your hands behind your back, provided you normally do have use of your hands, it actually will reduce your fluidity of speech, and so I'm going to put them back in front of me now. The point is, smoking marijuana or consuming marijuana by edible changes one's speech and does it in a very specific way. And in this study by Adam Vogel and colleagues, they explored a huge different variety of aspects of speech. And this can be done using spectral processing, which is fancy nerd speak for looking at how much inflection there is or looking at how long people hold vowels or consonants, et cetera, and again, these are people not under the influence of cannabis, but rather people who tend to be under the influence of cannabis when not participating in the study, in other words, chronic recreational cannabis users. So what are the two major shifts that cannabis causes on our patterns of speech? Well, the first one is a change in what's called spectral tilt. Again, that's fancy nerd speak for vocal effort and intensity. So, I'm not a pot smoker, I confess, but if I were to say the sentence, "Vocal effort and intensity "are important components of speech," that's the way I would say that sentence if I was striving to enunciate very carefully and to accent certain words and syllables. A pot smoker or somebody who uses recreational cannabis fairly often would have reduced spectral tilt, AKA, vocal effort intensity, and might say, [mumbling] "Spectral tilt is vocal effort in intensity, "and it differed between groups and appeared to change "in line with the duration of abstinence from cannabis use." That I think is not a far cry from the change in spectral tilt that they observed here. In addition, there are changes in verbal timing, that is pronunciation of words and accenting particular syllables of words in people that consume cannabis or smoke cannabis. So rather than emphasize particular words within a sentence, so again, I'll just use a sentence from the paper so that you can gain more knowledge from the paper, "Cannabis," and I'll say it the way that I would say it, since I'm not a cannabis user. "Cannabis, marijuana, is the most commonly used, "illicit drug in the world with approximately 4% of adults, "aged 15 to 64 years reporting recent use, "and the citation is from the United Nations Office "on Drugs and Crime, 2019." So that would be the way that I would typically read that sentence. And having gone into the data on this paper, and of course evaluated references therein and listened to some of the spectral analysis that they include as data, you can literally go into these papers online and hear recordings of people who are cannabis users or non-cannabis users, and I'll try and give you a a clear sense without picking an extreme example of how somebody who's a fairly consistent or even occasional cannabis user might read that very same sentence. "Cannabis, marijuana, is the most commonly used "illicit drug in the world with approximately 4% of adults "age 15 to 64 years reporting recent use, "and the citation comes from the United Nation Office "on Drugs and Crime in 2019." Now you'll notice that wasn't a dramatic difference. And, of course I could have taken the liberty to pick an extreme example of the sort that they did occasionally observe in evaluating subjects for this paper. I could have said something like, [mumbling in low tone] "Cannabis, marijuana, "is the most commonly used illicit drug," but frankly that would've been selecting an outlier example, and I don't want to do that. I don't want to skew the data as they say. Rather, if you heard the first time I read the sentence and the second time I read the sentence, what's mainly different is the difference in the amount of enunciation and accenting of particular words and symbols within a sentence. So the total content that's delivered is exactly the same, and while I wasn't measuring my pace, the overall rate of communication is essentially the same, but there's less lilting and falling of the voice and less accenting. That's the major consistent effect of cannabis use. Now of course, there are examples of people who are using a lot of cannabis, and it impacts brain centers involved in movement and speech, so much so that they really do have the really drawn out kind of, nah, and oftentimes this will be detected in the laugh. There's this stereotypical stoner laugh, as it's sometimes called. Rather than say "Ha, ha, ha" or that's a fake laugh, obviously. It's hard to make myself laugh if something's not actually funny. I'll have to think of something funny. When people say like, "Ha!" That's a bit more of the way I might laugh, like, "Ha," sort of the inspiratory laugh or the, "Ha," which is expiratory laugh. People who use cannabis chronically will often do that, "Haa," which is the back of the throat, [laughs raspingly] it's neither inspiratory nor expiratory laugh, and believe it or not, there's an entire literature on inspiratory, inhaling, versus expiratory laughs, and there's also a literature on cannabis altering the pattern of inspiratory and expiratory laughs. It almost sounds like a sarcastic laugh when, in fact, they may not be feeling sarcastic at all. And I have a very close friend and colleague who's a phenomenal neurosurgeon and neuroscientist by the name of Dr. Eddie Chang. He's the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF, and his lab and him are expert in the study of neuroscience controlling language and speech. And he often tells me that he can predict, with almost certainty, whether or not somebody is a regular cannabis user based, not just on the patterns of speech that they use, but even just by recording specific neurons in their brain that underlie the laugh reflex and certain patterns of speech. So this idea that cannabis use changes your ability to speak and enunciate clearly does appear to be true. And the stereotype that cannabis use tends to create more of a drawl or, if you will, a laziness in the laugh, and some of the reflexive enunciations that people use, does also appear to be true. And I say all that, of course, with the caveat that many people out there will know individuals or perhaps you, yourselves, are individuals that may use cannabis but that have incredible articulation, probably better than mine and better than other people out there who speak for a living, so I'm not saying that 100% of people that use cannabis regularly can't speak well or clearly. That's simply not what I'm saying, and I don't want to communicate that idea at all, but it is the case that people who are regular cannabis users are impacting the neural circuits involved in movement. Movement also controls speech, and therefore, cannabis is impacting speech. Now I'd like to turn our attention to whether or not cannabis can increase sexual activity, sexual desire, and/or sexual function, so we're going to be talking about libido, about sexual desire and about effects of cannabis on hormones. And while this might sound like a discussion that's purely oriented towards recreational use of cannabis, that is people using cannabis to heightened or increase their sense of arousal for sexual activity, it actually ventures into the clinical realm too, meaning there have been excellent peer-reviewed studies that I'll describe to you in a moment exploring the use of cannabis or THC, more specifically, for something called hypoactive sexual desire disorder, which refers to a persistent or recurrent deficiency or absence of sexual fantasies and thoughts and/or desire for, or receptivity to, sexual activity. This is a disorder that is fairly common, anywhere from 6% to 9% of people, both males and females. It used to be considered higher prevalence in females than in males, but now those numbers seem to be evening out. So basically, there are anywhere from 6% to 9% of people out there who have very diminished sexual desire. And so, a number of those people are interested in figuring out ways to increase their amount of sexual desire, and of course, there are people in the general population who may not have hyperactive sexual desire disorder who are interested in using cannabis recreationally in order to increase their desire for, or their experience of, sexual activity. Now first we have to acknowledge that sexual desire and activity is a complex set of processes, meaning it's not just one event, sex, the verb. It involves arousal, it involves sex, the verb, and it involves a whole set of mindsets and emotional states that vary tremendously between individuals. But once again, we can distill out a few basic principles, and I should emphasize, these are by no means the only chemicals and neuro circuits involved in the sexual arc, as we'll call it, desire, the act of sex, et cetera, but they are central to it, they are vital to it. They would be considered what I would call necessary but not sufficient, so there'll be other chemicals involved too, but the main chemicals in neuro circuits are those involved in dopamine, so the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway, in particular, a brain structure called nucleus accumbens, which we'll talk about more in a moment, is vital to all motivated behaviors and to the seeking out of all particular types of pleasurable experiences, and sex is no exception. So when we hear that the nucleus accumbens is activated, that almost always means that dopamine has been released in that area and other areas of the brain body, and we can consider dopamine central to the desire for, pursuit of, an act of sex. In addition to that, there are molecules like oxytocin, which are involved in pair bonding, and they're going to be neural circuit specific to the oxytocin circuitry, but in terms of sexual arousal and sexual behavior, it's really the dopamine pathway in this nucleus accumbens, which are especially vital. That allows us to address the question, does cannabis increase, decrease, or have no effect on sexual desire and/or the ability to have sex? And therein, we will find some very interesting answers, and because, once again, it will point to the fact that the effects of cannabis on different individuals can be highly divergent, meaning in one set of individuals, cannabis will make them far less anxious. And in another set of individuals, the same strain of cannabis, at the same dosage, will make them extremely anxious. The same can be said also of sexual activity. And this was beautifully illustrated in the context of sexual desire in the journal, "Psycho-pharmacology," in a paper published in 2017. The title of this paper is, "Individual Prolactin Reactivity "Modulates Response of Nucleus Accumbens to Erotic Stimuli "During Acute Cannabis Intoxication, an fMRI Pilot Study." So I'll give a little bit of definition to some of the terms in the title that will make it easier for you to understand the paper, but then I'll just march through the results, because they're very straightforward and easy to understand and very interesting. fMRI is just functional magnetic resonance imaging, so basically subjects in this experiment came into the laboratory. They were either people who had not used cannabis before or who had used cannabis before. They were placed into a brain scanner, one of these fMRI devices. It looks like a tube that people are backed up into and then they can view images in there, and their brain can be imaged without having to remove any skull or drill into the skull, no neurosurgery. The participants in this study were grouped according to whether or not they had experienced any aphrodisiac effects during the intoxication with cannabis, so that would be the first group, Group A, they literally called it group A for aphrodisiac. And then the second group, and this is the only thing I don't like about this study, is rather than call it group B, they called them 'group non A,' which just gets a little confusing. So I'll try and simplify all this. There are two groups, and one group experiences sexual arousal when under the influence of cannabis, THC specifically. The other group does not. And it turns out this is a very commonly observed divergence of effects of cannabis. Some people experience a lot of sexual arousal from cannabis and THC in particular, and some people do not, in fact, they experience suppression of sexual desire, and it's always been a little bit mysterious as to why that is. Well, in this study, they showed people in both groups erotic images, and they measured sexual arousal through a number of different measures. We won't go into all that. It was largely subjective. There have been other studies where they've actually measured things like erections in males and vaginal lubrication in females, so-called autonomic responses that people can't lie about, so to speak, and that tap into other aspects of the so-called sexual arousal process. In this study, they also took blood samples to look at the concentration of things like cannabinoids, so this is a really nice study in that they actually measured how much THC was in the bloodstream in different individuals who reacted to these erotic stimuli in different ways. And they measured hormones, namely cortisol, which is a stress hormone, which tends to negatively correlate with sexual arousal and prolactin. And the interesting takeaway from the study was that for people, and it didn't matter if it was males or females, 'cause they looked at both, for people that experienced elevated prolactin levels under cannabis intoxication, that's how they refer to it. People take cannabis, they measured prolactin. Some people had elevated prolactin and some people did not. For the people that had elevated levels of prolactin, they did not observe activation of brain areas associated with sexual arousal, in this case, the right nucleus accumbens, so you have two nucleus accumbi, I guess they would be called, one on each side of the brain, and the activation of that brain area is strongly associated with dopamine and with arousal and sexual arousal in particular in this study, and if people had elevated prolactin, they did not experience activation of nucleus accumbens, and they did not report feeling sexually aroused to those pictures, at least not to the same degree as the other group. So some people's prolactin levels go up when they ingest cannabis, and those people do not achieve elevated levels of sexual arousal when under the influence of cannabis, even if they're looking at erotic stimuli. That makes sense, because prolactin is mutually inhibitory, as we would say. It's kind of in a push-pull with dopamine. When dopamine levels are high, prolactin levels tend to be low, and when prolactin levels are high, dopamine levels tend to be low. The other group, so-called Group A, that experienced elevated levels of sexual arousal when under the influence of cannabis and viewing erotic stimuli, that group did not show elevated levels of prolactin in response to cannabis. So this, I believe, resolves a longstanding controversy in the field, which is, does cannabis increase sexual arousal? Well, it depends. If you fall into the category of person who has elevated levels of prolactin in response to cannabis, then no, actually cannabis will suppress your sexual response and desire. If, however, you are in the category of person that does not have elevated levels of prolactin in response to cannabis, well then, erotic stimuli can potentially and in fact, do increase sexual arousal in the majority of individuals. Now, many of you are probably hearing this and wondering whether or not you fall into one category of individual or another. And the key thing here to understand is that levels of prolactin heading into the study did not predict whether or not people would respond to cannabis with elevated or non elevated or even reduced levels of sexual arousal. It was whether or not people's prolactin levels went up or did not go up, that predicted whether or not their levels of arousal would go up or not. So if you are somebody who, yes, does experience elevated levels of sexual arousal and function went under the influence of cannabis, well that's very likely that cannabis does not increase your prolactin levels, at least not to a significant degree while you're taking it. And if you're somebody who does not experience increases in sexual arousal or function or even diminished sexual arousal and function when under the influence of cannabis, it's very likely that cannabis is increasing your levels of prolactin. Unfortunately, there's no way to know or predict based on some other measure. I think the outcome measure, that is increased or not increased or even reduced sexual arousal is really the litmus test by which one can figure that out. While we are on the topic of the effects of cannabis on sexual function and hormones like prolactin, it's probably worth mentioning that cannabis has been studied extensively for its impact on other hormones, and we can summarize those literature in the following way. And here I'm referring to studies only on adults. We'll talk about the developing brain and body in a little bit, but it is very clear that smoking cannabis increases prolactin levels. Very, very clear. Now, you might say, "Didn't, you just describe a study "about a set of individuals whose prolactin didn't increase "and as a consequence, "their level of sexual desire went up?" Yes, there are a subset of individuals for which that's true, but people who smoke cannabis do experience increases in prolactin, and that's especially pronounced in people that smoke cannabis more than twice a week. So this is important, prolactin, as I referred to earlier, is reciprocal or mutually inhibitory with dopamine. One way to think about this is in the context of the normal sexual arousal arc whereby dopamine is increased when people are sexually aroused, but then after orgasm, both in males and females, prolactin levels skyrocket. This is actually what creates the so-called refractory period for males during which they cannot achieve erection again for some period of time. That relates directly to how long the prolactin increase lasts. Prolactin is also increased in new parents of all species, including humans, which at least partially, explains some of the reported or typical reductions in sexual desire and activity in new parents. Now, there are other reasons for that too, sleep deprivation, but nature is smart and has arranged a set of hormones and circuits in the brain and body, such that when tending to a newborn is the most important thing, it relegates, it reduces the importance of producing more children and sexual activity in those moments and days and weeks, sometimes longer. So when prolactin levels are up, dopamine levels are down. Smoking marijuana more than twice a week significantly increases prolactin. There are fewer studies exploring whether or not edible marijuana has the same effect, although the preliminary evidence suggests that it does not. I get into this in a lot more detail in a future episode, all about hormones with Dr. Kyle Gillett, who's been on this podcast before. But he verified that, and my read of the literature is that the edible forms of marijuana, cannabis, probably again, let's put an asterisks next to this, but it appears do not have as as much of a prolactin elevating effect and therefore, not as much of a dopamine suppressive effect and therefore, not as much of a testosterone suppressing effect, and that gets to the issue of testosterone. Does cannabis, marijuana suppress testosterone? And this is a very controversial literature and here's why. Some studies say, "Yes, it suppresses testosterone "in males and females," and keep in mind that testosterone in females is vital for libido and cognitive function, cellular repair, et cetera, so it's not just important in males, of course. However, other studies say that cannabis does not decrease testosterone, and it seems to depend on whether or not the cannabis is brought into the system by way of smoking or edible. And it seems to depend on whether or not the cannabis is used chronically by an individual or acutely. And here I just want to zoom out and say that studies on cannabis or drugs of any kind in humans are really complicated. If you think about it, someone has to come into the laboratory, and let's say you want to study chronic cannabis use. Well, you can't keep them in the laboratory all the time, so you have to rely on their self-report of how often they use cannabis and in what form, and you can't really control from one individual to the next of how much cannabis and THC they're bringing into their system. One person might smoke cannabis out of a bong and take big, deep, lungs-full bong inhalations or such. Other people might smoke joints. Other people might use edibles. It becomes very complicated to know what people have done and that they're reporting it accurately, and no joke here, especially if marijuana is impacting the short-term memory systems. They might not actually remember. They might not be tracking it that well. Contrast that with studies of the acute use of cannabis and THC, where people who are not regular users come into the laboratory and now suddenly, with institutional guidelines and safety protocols, are under the influence of THC and cannabis. Well, now you're dealing with a person who may not have experience with the elevated heart rate and blood pressure that's characteristic of cannabis, 'cause it is a stimulant, at least when initially brought into the system, even if it might eventually lead to relaxation. So now you've got someone who's anxious or somebody who's not anxious, who's deeply relaxed, and you're trying to study these effects, so it's a moving target of sorts, and it's very complicated to study marijuana and cannabis in its various derivatives in this way. Now you can probably appreciate better as to why there's so little nuanced data about sativa versus indica, versus different ratios of CBD and THC. It's really difficult to do these studies in the first place. That said, the general rules are smoking marijuana increases prolactin in men and women, which will reduce dopamine and testosterone. Smoking marijuana chronically, meaning more than twice a week, does appear to reduce testosterone significantly and elevate so-called aromatase enzymes, which are the enzymes that convert testosterone into estrogen. This might partially explain the effect that occurs in about 35% of males, which is gynecomastia, which is a development of breast tissue in males, in particular young males, who have elevated levels of testosterone or who are taking exogenous testosterone for testosterone replacement therapy or if they're taking high doses, anabolic steroids, or in females, the increase in breast size, which is due to additional estrogen from testosterone converted to estrogen. So it does appear that marijuana and cannabis increase estrogen, reduce testosterone, increase prolactin, especially in chronic users. Now, I'm sure that some people out there will say, well, their testosterone levels are exceedingly high or they are fine, meaning the constellation of symptoms associated with low testosterone and elevate estrogen are not present in them. That probably means one of two things, or both. They either had elevated levels of testosterone to begin with, so their ceiling was higher, so bringing it down didn't have that much of effect, or that they have very low levels of aromatase in their system. There are some anecdotal evidence that smoking particular parts of the marijuana plant, in particular, the seeds, can increase aromatase in the conversion of testosterone to estrogen. I think in the old days, the lore was the seeds make you sterile, and I think that was related to what I just told you, this increase in conversion of testosterone to estrogen. There's a vast literature on the effects of cannabis on fertility. Yes, it does seem to alter sperm motility and sperm health and function when taken chronically, more than twice per week, in particular high doses of high potency THC. This is something we will cover in far more detail on a future episode all about fertility. And in females, there's an increase in estrogen as a consequence of smoking marijuana and increasing prolactin and estrogen in parallel. Whether or not that's detrimental isn't clear, although I point out that elevated estrogen and prolactin can be associated, again, can be associated, not necessarily, and certainly, not causative, but can be associated with elevated levels or frequency of breast cancer detection. So cannabis and its effects on hormones are not without consequence. There are effects of cannabis on cortisol in some individuals. It greatly increases cortisol due the anxiety and paranoia it can create, and in other individuals it reduces cortisol. Again, we have these divergent effects. But I want to be very clear, the effects on prolactin, meaning elevated prolactin, the effects on testosterone, meaning, at least most studies point to, reduced levels of testosterone and increased estrogen. That seems to be true for most all individuals that chronically use cannabis, whereas the effects on cortisol tend to be divergent. Cannabis increases cortisol in some individuals and decreases cortisol in others. In general, increases in cortisol that are ongoing are not healthy for us and so on. And then of course, there are other effects on hormones, and I'll just briefly summarize those, that THC in particular, not CBD, but THC in particular, is known to be strongly inhibitory for something called gonadotropin-releasing hormone. This is a hormone that's released from the brain, from the hypothalamus that then feeds onto, or I should say signals to the pituitary gland, which is also near the roof of your mouth, a lot of stuff happening near the roof of your mouth it turns out, biologically, and reduced levels of gonadotropin-releasing hormone caused by cannabis use, reduced levels of LH luteinizing hormone and FSH, which reduce levels of testosterone and sperm production in males and egg health and ovulation and menstrual function in females. Now, I'm sure there are a number of women out there who will say they have perfectly normal menstrual cycles despite using cannabis. I'm certainly not going to dispute that, but if you are somebody who's trying to maximize fertility or regulate or balance hormones, marijuana and cannabis reduces GnRH. That is the gonadotropin-release from the hypothalamus and thereby reduces luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone, which are released from the pituitary and travel in the bloodstream to support normal ovarian function and health and normal testicular function and health in females and males, respectively. Up until now I've been discussing the biological and psychological effects of cannabis. Now I'd like to shift our attention to some of the negative health effects of cannabis and shine light on some of the individuals or groups out there that need to be especially wary of and probably avoid cannabis use entirely, including ingestion of cannabis by way of edible. And I frame things that way, because I think there is an increasingly large number of people out there that appreciate that smoking tobacco or smoking cannabis, vaping tobacco, yes, vaping tobacco, or vaping cannabis, each and all have negative health consequences on the lungs and on the so-called endothelial cells of the body, the cells that make up the vasculature, the capillaries and blood vessels. If you don't already know this, I'll make it very clear, and I'll make it very brief. Whether or not you smoke or vape tobacco or cannabis, you are severely impairing the function of endothelial cells that make up the capillaries and blood vessels of your brain and body, and that is known to decrease cognitive capacity over time, increase probability of strokes, severely impact lung function, and also lead to things like peripheral neuropathies. It leads to sexual dysfunction, because of lack of blood flow to the genitals, can lead to other aspects of reproductive damage, including to the ovaries and testes. Essentially, there is no other way to state it, except that smoking and vaping have negative health consequences that are independent of the substances that people are trying to get into their bloodstream by smoking or vaping. So people smoke and vape tobacco, and people smoke and vape cannabis, and in both cases, if we just set aside the direct effects of tobacco and the direct effects of cannabis, we can confidently say that the process of smoking, of inhaling smoke into the lungs, and yes, also vaping, bringing the chemicals that transport nicotine, or in this case, cannabis, into the lungs by way of vaping are both severely detrimental to endothelial cells. I think a few years ago, when vaping wasn't as prominent, there was this question and this idea that maybe vaping was going to be far healthier or at least not as bad as smoking, but now we can see a huge number of negative health effects of vaping, some of which are distinct from the effects of smoking. So if you'd like more information on smoking versus vaping, please see the episode that I did on nicotine. We will also do an entire episode all about vaping in the future, but there's really no way to slice it and dice it or candy coat it. The fact of the matter is that smoking has clear and severe negative health consequences, regardless of whether or not you're smoking tobacco or cannabis, THC, and vaping has negative health consequences, whether or not you're using the vape to bring in nicotine or THC or some combination of THC and CBD. That's simply the way it is. With that said, now I'd like to focus our attention on the direct effects that cannabis has, either by way of THC action or by way of CBD action in terms of positive or negative health effects on the brain and body, and we're going to explore that first as a function of age. And the reason we're going to do that is related to a fact that I mentioned at the beginning of the episode, which is that the CB1 and the CB2 receptors, the two receptors for cannabis to which THC and CBD and CBN and all other psychoactive compounds of cannabis bind to to have their actions are present throughout development. Believe it or not, they are present very soon after conception, and the CB1 and CB2 receptors actually play a critical role in the development of the fetus. Now, you might wonder why that is, because of course, the developing fetus doesn't necessarily expect to see cannabis or to be exposed to cannabis and THC and CBD. But, as you recall, endogenous cannabinoids are present in the adult brain and body and endogenous cannabinoids, it turns out, are also present in the developing fetus. In fact, endogenous cannabinoids are present at much greater levels in the developing fetus than they are after a child is born, and levels of endogenous cannabinoids actually go down across development. I find this really interesting. What this means is that endogenous cannabinoids and activation of the CB1 and CB2 receptors are an integral part of neural development, and this is going to become especially relevant in considering whether or not pregnant mothers should or should not use cannabis or CBD, and it also points to some very interesting biology in terms of how the brain develops and how the body develops. Now the development of the brain and nervous system and body is a fascinating and vast literature, certainly far too vast to cover in today's episode, especially at this late hour as it were, but we will have a future episode all about brain development. In terms of the effects of cannabis, it's sufficient to say that cannabinoid receptors are present and active in the developing fetus. They're present and active in the newborn. They're present and active in adolescence. And across that time, from conception until adolescence, endogenous cannabinoids are mainly responsible for the actions of those cannabinoid receptors. During that time, the cannabinoid receptors are having very specific effects that are distinct from their effects later in life, and those effects can largely be explained in terms of neural development. Again, we don't have time for an entire lecture on this now, but during development, your body was a collection of a bunch of cells. It's actually called a blastula, which means a ball of cells, and then those cells actually have to grow out connections and duplicate themselves, and this is a very interesting process by which neurons initially are situated far apart, and then they grow out connections and make contacts with one another. They remove certain connections, depending on what kind of life events you're exposed to. If you have a wonderful event early in life or a traumatic early life, those connections change, et cetera. The important point for today's discussion is that the CB1 receptor, in particular, is expressed on every neuron in the developing brain and has been shown to be important for every aspect of neural development, from the proliferation of cells, meaning getting enough cells to create a brain, to the outgrowth of the so-called axons, the little wires that connect up neurons with one another, to the steering, the direction which those axons go in development, which is essential, and even so far as to explain the connections that form between neurons, the so-called synapses, and then how those synapses work. So the basic statement here is that endogenous cannabinoids and CB1 receptor activation are critical for every aspect of brain wiring and development. With that in mind, the statement I'm about to make is absolutely terrifying, at least to me, and frankly, it should be terrifying to you as well. And the statement is, the current statistics on cannabis use in pregnant mothers is absolutely shocking. The most recent survey of pregnant mothers in the United States show that 15%, one-five, 15% of pregnant mothers report using cannabis in some form or another, either smoking it or more likely ingestion of in edible, because they are aware of the negative effects of smoking on the developing fetus, ingestion of an edible to increase THC and/or CBD during pregnancy, which to me, I have to say, as a developmental neurobiologist is, frankly, it's scary. It's absolutely scary, because that CB1 receptor is not just a minor player in neural development. It is absolutely central to every critical aspect of brain wiring and development. Now, the long-term implications or even the short-term implications of this, 15% of mothers self-reporting the use of cannabis at some point during pregnancy are not yet known. This is, as we would say, an experiment that's ongoing. But I'd be remiss if I didn't point out these data and just implore you, please, please, please, if you are pregnant or considering getting pregnant, you're a cannabis user, whether or not you're using edibles, if you're a CBD user, please do whatever is necessary to not ingest cannabis or smoke cannabis or ingest CBD during pregnancy. Now, there may be certain clinical indications by which your physician and your OB/GYN, and the pediatrician that will eventually be the pediatrician for your child will prescribe CBD, although it's hard to imagine what those are. I contacted a number of different pediatricians and OB/GYNs and not a single one said they would ever suggest, and in fact would strongly discourage their patients from using cannabis during pregnancy. But I think that the advent of edible forms of cannabis, and the combination of THC and CBD in certain products, and the fact that most people view CBD as safer, because it does not include, or does not have, I should say, the psychoactive effects that THC does, has led to a situation where you have 15% of pregnant mothers using cannabis at some point during pregnancy and maybe even frequently throughout pregnancy, and the effects on the developing fetus are completely unknown. But recall that cannabis and THC and CBD outcompete, meaning they park in the receptor for endogenous cannabinoids and prevent endogenous cannabinoids from having their normal level and pattern of action, so this is absolutely critical. I cannot encourage you enough, or rather, I should say, I cannot discourage enough the use of cannabis and any related compounds in cannabis, edible or smoked, certainly not smoked, but even edible during pregnancy, and certainly in breastfeeding, lactating mothers, the same is also true. Recall that cannabis and THC and CBD are incredibly lipophilic. They're fat soluble, and they get into cells very readily, and they cross the blood brain barrier. They cross the blood placental barrier. So when I encountered this statistic, I had to kind of wipe my eyes a few times. I could not believe it, and yet I crosschecked that number with a few other studies. A few others have come in a little bit lower at somewhere like 13% to 14%, and a few have come in a little bit higher, but the average of 15% is both striking and shocking, so I don't know how to make the message more clear. I hope that is clear. Please do not use any cannabis, THC or related things including CBD, smoked or edible if you're pregnant, lactating, et cetera. Now we are at the point where we need to consider some of the negative health effects of cannabis that have been well documented in peer-reviewed studies. And before I do this, I want to return to a point that I made earlier, which is that nothing I am about to say relates directly to issues of legality. If we consider alcohol, for instance, alcohol is legal in most areas of the world. It's certainly legal in the US, and yet there's an age limit for its use. Typically, it's not available to people until they're 21 or older. It's not to say that certain people don't use it before age 21, but it's not legal. It is illegal to buy or possess alcohol, consume alcohol before age 21, and I think with good reason, because the brain is still developing. Likewise, we can have a informed discussion about cannabis and its various components that can fully acknowledge the reality, which is that one of the major harms of cannabis in the past has been the legal ramifications of cannabis being illegal. That's a statement that is no longer controversial, and this is not a discussion about legalization or non legalization. If you look to the scientific literature, the epidemiological literature, there are wonderful data out of Carleton University and elsewhere in Canada showing that many of the negative effects of marijuana and THC are due to the criminal justice system, itself, that is the creation of illicit drug businesses, the creation of organized crime, the creation of a number of different features related to the illegality of cannabis. And again, this isn't the topic of today's episode, but that should be acknowledged. And at the same time, we need to acknowledge that when a compound, a drug or whatever you want to call it becomes legal, there's a tendency to assume that it's safe and safe for everybody. And with respect to cannabis and THC and perhaps even CBD, but certainly for THC and cannabis that's smoked or vaped or consumed in edible form, that is simply not the case. There are clear data pointing to negative health effects of cannabis use and THC use, which again, is not to say that there are not positive effects on mood, anxiety, pain relief, et cetera. Those are out there and they exist, and we will mention some of those of course, and we've talked about some of those, creativity for instance, et cetera. But if we do not acknowledge the negative health effects that are documented in the literature, then we are overlooking some very important data, especially as it relates to the development of psychosis in certain individuals. So, with that said, there are very strong data, and I will provide links to these resources, pointing to the fact that for people who are chronic users of cannabis, that is using it twice a week or more, that over time, their levels of anxiety actually increase, and this is true even for individuals that are using strains of cannabis, that while under the influence of cannabis, reduce anxiety. Over time, meaning over the course of 12 or more months, there is a well-documented effect of the anxiety relief that cannabis and THC initially brought, being less and less potent. That is people need to smoke more of it or ingest more THC in order to achieve the same level of anxiety relief, and in some cases, a switch from anxiety relief to increase in anxiety, and again, that's increase in anxiety, not just when the drug is not being consumed, but also while under the influence of the drug. Why would that be? We have to go back to our understanding of the CB1 receptor and the potency with which THC binds to that CB1 receptor. When THC is brought into the system over and over again, meaning twice a week or more, the binding of THC, that CB1 receptor, eventually causes a habituation or attenuation of the entire process of binding the receptor and creating the psychoactive effects. So initially it creates anxiety relief, but over time, the affinity for the receptor doesn't change, meaning it can still park in that slot with a lot of affinity, a lot of strength, but there are fewer receptors available, and then the signaling that's downstream of those receptors becomes less and less robust. Now this is a topic we didn't get into in too much detail today, because I didn't want to include even more biological detail, but the CB1 receptor is a so-called G protein-coupled receptor. That's a mouthful, but a G protein-coupled receptor basically is like a bucket brigade. So while some receptors in the brain and body are such that when something, a chemical binds to them, that receptor has a direct action, like it opens and allows stuff to rush into the cell, increases the excitability of the cell, so called fast effects, these G protein-coupled receptors, and CB1 is a G protein-coupled receptor, they are more like a bucket brigade where they kick off a process through one molecule that then is handed off to another molecule that then is handed off to another molecule. It's a long chain or cascade of events. Those long chains or cascades of events have a lot of opportunity for regulation, for adjustment. Receptor systems in the brain and body, especially receptor systems like the cannabinoid system that are used to being tickled, not punched, tickled by endogenous cannabinoids, every once in a while some binds, has an effect, but certainly not bound with incredible potency and over and over again as they are when THC is coming into the system. Well those systems eventually, over time, they adjust themselves so that the body and those cells can achieve so-called homeostasis. So when people are using THC more than twice a week, what ends up happening is those G protein-coupled receptors in the downstream signaling mechanisms start to adjust themselves, and it requires more and more drug, so either higher dosages or more frequent use, and a lot of the positive effects, the so-called decrease in anxiety, increased focus, increased creativity, some of that starts to wane, it starts to dissipate, and people wonder why they have to use so much cannabis just to achieve a fraction of the effect that they used to be able to achieve with even a lower dose. So anxiety is getting worse over time, and that's anxiety during the drug use and outside of the drug use. Some people work around that or try to work around that by using varying strains of cannabis or changing the pattern of delivery from smoking to vaping or from vaping to edible and from edible to transdermal. Anyway, they go through a lot of gymnastics and writhing and seeking, but nonetheless, anxiety increases over time. Also, it's very clear that depression increases over time and especially, this is surprising to me, but especially for individuals that were not depressed at the the outset of their use. In other words, they didn't start using cannabis because they were depressed, but rather the depression starts to emerge as a consequence of the cannabis and THC use. So that's serious, in fact, we now know, based on really solid epidemiological evidence, that depression is not a strong predictor of seeking out cannabis. It doesn't drive terribly many people to seek out cannabis use, but cannabis use, itself, makes people four times likelier to develop a chronic major depression. So anxiety is increasing, depression is increasing, and this turns out to be especially relevant and important to young people. Why do I say that? Well, if you look at the data, and again, I think some of the strongest data are data to come out of the Canadian system. They've done some really beautiful controlled studies. I really hope to invite some of the people who arranged and ran those studies as guests onto the Huberman Lab Podcast. But if you look at the data out of Canada, or you look at some of the data out of Northern Europe and the US, what you find is that the probability that somebody will use cannabis and then go on to use it chronically, correlates very strongly with age. So for instance, some of the highest degree of cannabis use is among individuals 16 to 24 years old. In fact, in individuals who are 16 to 24 years old, and in particular, in students and people who are working, surprising, more than in unemployed populations, being young, 16 to 24, at least to me that's young, and being a student or working doubles the likelihood that somebody is going to use cannabis on a regular basis, twice or more per week. The typical age of initiating cannabis use nowadays is about 19 years old, so 18.7, and about 20% of people in that age bracket, of 16 to 24 years old, are using cannabis daily, either by vaping, by smoking or by edible. That's an enormous number, at least by my read. It's an enormous number, and here's why it's of really serious concern. During the ages of 16 to 24, the cannabinoid receptors are still available. They are not being as strongly driven by endogenous cannabinoids, but by ingestion of THC and/or CBD, there are downstream effects on the signaling within those cells that all the data point to creating a much, much higher likelihood of developing major depression, severe anxiety or psychosis at later ages. So to be very clear, cannabis use, between the ages of 16 to 24, in both males and females is increasing anxiety, increasing depression in the immediate years and within the one year's time or so, so much so that people are using the cannabis ongoing in an attempt to reduce that anxiety and reduce that depression, but in addition to that, the cannabis use, and because of the signaling mechanisms involved are predisposing those individuals to psychosis later in life. If you look at individuals who start using cannabis, even younger, age 14, or even as young as 12, the probability of psychosis later in life, in particular schizophrenic or schizophrenic-like episodes more than doubles, so this is of really serious concern, and this is completely aside from any so-called positive effects or beneficial effects of cannabis that people might derive from occasional use as adults, meaning people older than 25. So for the person who's older than 25, who eats an edible every once in a while, or who smokes cannabis every once in a while, and people love to make the argument, it's not as bad as alcohol, which frankly, is a terrible argument, because if you saw our episode on alcohol, [laughs] alcohol is pretty bad, but even so, it's just not a good argument. It's saying that something is good, because it's not as bad as something else is simply just not a good or valid argument, at least not biologically speaking. The use of cannabis in young populations is very strongly predisposing people to psychotic episodes, and we know the mechanism by which this occurs. This occurs by a thinning of the so-called gray matter, and it's called gray matter because with neurons, nerve cells, they have a so-called cell body, that's the part that contains the DNA and manufacturers all the neurotransmitters, et cetera. And those are shipped out to the other parts of the neuron that include the axon, the wires between axons, and those axons under the microscope, because they have a lot of fatty tissue around them, and this is healthy fatty tissue that allows electrical transmission to be fast, that fatty tissue, those portions of the cells, are called white matter, so you have gray matter and white matter. Gray matter are the so-called cell bodies where the DNA and all the stuff is manufactured. White matter or the axons or the wires through which all the key components are shipped out to the synapse, et cetera. Wonderful data and I do say wonderful, because it is part of a large scale consortium, and we will provide a link to the paper. This was published in "Translational Psychiatry" just this year, point to the fact that adolescent cannabis use accelerates the thinning of the prefrontal cortex and the gray matter in particular. So what this means is, while during normal development, the gray matter, the prefrontal cortex and all the cells there are indeed intended, it's a normal process for it to thicken and then thin a little bit as connections are adjusted and people learn and mature and grow up, this is part of the normal healthy maturation process, independent of cannabis use. When kids, 'cause these really are kids, use cannabis, and it doesn't matter the mode of cannabis delivery, whether or not it's vaping or smoking or edible, that gray matter thins at a much, much greater rate. And the reason I like this paper published in "Translational Psychiatry" this year so much is that they link the amount of cannabis use, heavy, moderate, light or no cannabis use, to the rate of prefrontal cortical thinning, and it's absolutely clear from these data that the more often young people, meaning individuals between the age of 14 and 25, the more often they consume or smoke or vape cannabis, the faster and the more extreme that cortical thinning is. And the cortical thinning is occurring in exactly the area of the brain that's involved in planning, in control over one's emotions, in reflexes, in organizing one's life in a number of different ways, anywhere from cleaning one's room, literally, knowing what goes where, to making plans that extend out through the day, through the week, through a year, essentially becoming a functional human being involves using your prefrontal cortex in a variety of different contexts and different time domains, the time domain of an hour, the time domain of a day. Making plans and being able to execute plans is fundamental to being a healthy human being, and it's absolutely clear from these data that the more cannabis one uses, the more impaired those neural circuits are. There's simply no other way to to view these data. In fact, so much so, that even small amounts of cannabis use are associated with rates of cortical thinning and degrees of cortical thinning that are really detrimental and concerning for normal cognitive processes. If you were somebody who smoked marijuana or consumed cannabis in any form or another during adolescence, does that mean that your prefrontal cortex can never be rescued, that it can't come back? Well, the short answer is, it probably can be rescued to some degree. It will depend on how much cannabis you were using and how often and what strains of cannabis, et cetera. There's really no traveling back in time, as my graduate advisor used to say. Time machines are broken. At least for now, we don't have time machines. So all you can really do is try and emphasize, first of all, quitting cannabis in any form and focusing on behaviors that emphasize endothelial cell blood flow health to the brain, so that would be cardiovascular exercise, adequate nutrition, not smoking nicotine, and there are a number of other things that one can do. We will do an entire episode all about trying to reverse the effects of cannabis and other drug use during adolescence. We don't have time to do a deep dive on that right now, but all the things that standardize and promote health, adequate sleep, good social connection, regular cardiovascular and weight training exercise, healthy nutrition, and what that represents to you, healthy metabolic function and weight, et cetera, those are all going to facilitate some recovery of brain function, in particular, prefrontal cortical function, by way of all the positive effects that those behaviors and choices have. But with that said, if you are in the age bracket that I've been referring to, this 14 to 25 year old age bracket, and you are a occasional even or chronic cannabis user, you should be very, very careful and concerned about the long-term effects that that could potentially have. That statement is bolstered by another statistic, which is that unlike a lot of other drugs, the rate of cannabis use is strongly related to how dangerous people perceive cannabis to be. Now, that might seem obvious, on the one hand, if you think something is very, very dangerous, you would expect that the probability that somebody would use it would be very, very low, and if they think something is safe, the probability would be high. But that isn't necessarily the case. If you think about it, cannabis is a unique instance in which nowadays we are hearing, yes, it's becoming legal in a number of areas, and we talked earlier about why that's probably a good thing in most circumstances, but that we aren't just hearing that cannabis is safe, or it's not just being implied that cannabis is safer, but many more people are talking about the positive effects of cannabis without a lot of discussion about the negative effects of cannabis. And I realize that saying this is going to upset some people out there, because I know that there are a number of people who fought very hard for the legalization process, and I want to acknowledge that. I also want to acknowledge the many known positive effects of cannabis in adults with very occasional use, provided it is delivered safely and in the safe context and setting and with legality. That is entirely distinct from the issue of whether or not cannabis is safe for the developing brain and body. Again, I'm not demonizing anybody for using cannabis, but I want to make the point very simply and very directly. It is far and away a different circumstance for the brain for an individual to be 25 years or older and using cannabis in whatever form, occasionally or maybe even frequently, than it is for a young person, aged 14 to 25, to be using cannabis, either by smoking or vaping or by edible or any other form, on the brain and body. It's absolutely clear that the brain continues to develop at least until age 25, and that a huge number of systems related to mood regulation, so-called executive function, the ability to organize one's thoughts, plan and execute plans, essentially to become a functional human being, that's one portion of becoming a functional human being, but certainly an essential one. All of that relies on the fine tuning of this neural circuitry that we've been talking about up until now, and it's abundantly clear that cannabis and THC in particular, dramatically disrupt those processes. So if this isn't clear enough, just from my statements, I'd like to point to a particular paper. This is one of the more impactful papers in this area in recent years. This is a paper published in "Lancet Psychiatry" in 2022. Title is "Association of Cannabis Potency "with Mental Ill Health and Addiction, A Systematic Review." There are a number of very important points in this very fine paper. "Lancet Psychiatry" is one of the premier medical journals out there, and they evaluated a huge number of studies. They actually looked at more than 4,000 studies. They selected the ones that were only the most rigorous in terms of study design and analysis and rigor of conclusions, and they looked at how early use of cannabis impacted later probability of development of psychosis and other psychiatric conditions, and the takeaways from this study are very clear. First of all, chronic cannabis use, so more than twice per week, has consistently been associated with mental health disorders. I'm pulling some phrases directly from the paper. Heavy cannabis use, meaning cannabis use more frequent than twice per week, has been associated with four times the risk of psychosis later in life, in particular, schizophrenia and bipolar-like episodes. Now, we've done an episode on bipolar disorder. It's also called bipolar depression. We have not yet done one on schizophrenia, but both bipolar disorder and schizophrenia have a very, very strong genetic component. There's a 30, three-zero, 30 times greater likelihood that you'll have bipolar disorder if you have a first relative who has bipolar disorder. And then, it's also the case that using cannabis, especially during adolescents and the teen years, and up until age 25, create a four times greater risk of psychosis for those that have a predisposition to bipolar disorder and/or schizophrenia. Now, I don't hear very much about this in the media. This paper got some attention and then it got swept away. I don't think that was an intentional sweeping way. There's just a lot of events in the world as you well know. But I think it's a particularly important set of findings, because obviously, in looking at so many studies, it distills out the strongest findings that are out there and really pulls the consistent messages that are arriving from all these different studies. And as they point out, and again, I'm paraphrasing here, this is the first systematic review of the association of cannabis potency, and all of the data point to a very clear conclusion, which is the more potent the THC concentration, the higher probability of developing psychosis or a major depressive episode or a major anxiety disorder later in life. That should be of particular concern, because we know, we are absolutely clear about the fact that with the advent of all these new strains of cannabis, and with the engineering and availability of cannabis at much higher potency, meaning THC potency, the risk of psychosis is going up and up and is likely to continue going up unless something is done to reduce the frequency of cannabis use to zero, ideally, or to very low frequency, very low potency in adolescence and teens and people age 25 or younger. I know a lot of people don't want to hear this message, because first of all, it's alarming, and second of all, as I mentioned earlier, the statistics tell us that the greatest number of people that are starting to use cannabis are in the age bracket of 16 to 24. Many of them are functional in other areas of life. They're students, they are employed, et cetera. But when you couple that with the fact that the most frequent adopters of cannabis use are in this age bracket of 16 to 24, they're twice as likely to use as other individuals or to start using cannabis as are other individuals. Plus, the general perception out there, because of the way that cannabis is discussed in the media and by sports figures and by celebrities and by politicians, et cetera, that it's not as bad as alcohol and maybe not that bad and maybe even has health benefits, then you're essentially setting up a system where young people are far more likely to adopt and continue cannabis use without realizing these serious health consequences that await them later. With all of that said, I, of course, again want to acknowledge that there have been well-demonstrated effects of cannabis for reducing pain, in particular in chemotherapy and in the context of reducing nausea in people suffering from cancer or chemotherapy. There is a well-known effect that one can generally point to as positive, using cannabis for things like glaucoma, for lowering intraocular pressure and offsetting the loss of neurons that would lead to blindness, although there are other tools, of course, that don't involve cannabis use that can accomplish that as well, so called intraocular pressure lowering drugs or drops. There is a list of probably a dozen or more psychological and bodily ailments that can be aided by cannabis use, in particular edible cannabis use of particular strains. I, of course, am going to address each and every one of those in episodes where I'm talking, for instance, about eye disease or about chronic pain. I am in no way, shape or form trying to rob the incredible efforts of the laboratories and people that have worked very hard to study and establish the valid uses of cannabis for treating various ailments and that continue to study cannabis in order to try and ameliorate the symptoms of different ailments. But today, I really wanted to emphasize the biology of cannabis, some of the often discussed effects, I guess one could call them positive effects, things like enhanced creativity and really point to the nuance and actually the divergence of people who take cannabis and some experience heightened levels of creativity and some do not. Some people experience heightened levels of sexual arousal and some people experience the exact opposite, and so on and so forth, rather than focus on all the potential positive and emerging positive data about cannabis in different medical contexts. And at the same time, I strongly feel that it's important to acknowledge the shocking, because there's really no other way to describe it, the shocking effects of cannabis use on the developing fetus and the fact that so many pregnant and lactating mothers are using cannabis. I mean, that number 15% still has me dizzy with disbelief, and yet we need to acknowledge this and address this immediately. And I think it's vital to understand that cannabis use through any delivery mechanism, smoking or vaping or edible or otherwise, is very, very concerning, in fact, dangerous to the developing brain, certainly for the fetal brain and for the baby brain, but also for the adolescent brain and for the teen and young adult brain, not just because of the effects that it can have in the immediate term, those slow creeping increases in anxiety and depression, brought on by cannabis use, but also the time release, if you will, on the development of psychosis and other types of major psychiatric disorders later in life. I acknowledge we've covered a lot of ground today, and yet there's still far more ground that we could have covered and that we will indeed cover in future episodes. Nevertheless, if you are learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions for us or comments or feedback of any kind, please put that in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. As mentioned earlier, the Huberman Lab Podcast now has a premium channel. You can subscribe to that by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. There, for $10 a month or $100 for the entire year, you can get access to all of the monthly AMAs, and you'll be supporting peer-reviewed research to develop further protocols for mental, physical health and performance. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. Not so much today, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization. The Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that the Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S, so livemomentous.com/huberman, and there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast. I should just mention that that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated. If you haven't already signed up for the Neural Network Newsletter, this is a monthly Huberman Lab Podcast newsletter in which you get some brief show note summaries as well as a lot of actionable tools in summary form. Many people find these very useful for distilling out the vast amount of information that we cover on the podcast. So for instance, if you go to hubermanlab.com, you can click on the menu, click to Neural Network Newsletter or simply newsletter, and you can sign up, just give us your email. We do not share your email with anybody. And again, it's completely zero-cost. We also have examples of previous newsletters that you can download immediately without having to sign up for anything and decide whether or not you want to sign up. Again, that's the Neural Network Newsletter at hubermanlab.com. If you're not already following us on social media, we are @hubermanlab on Instagram, on Twitter, on Facebook and on LinkedIn. And especially on Instagram and on Twitter, I cover many of the tools that are discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast, but also a lot of science and science-based tools not covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, it's @hubermanlab on all platforms. So once again, thank you for joining me for today's discussion all about cannabis. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [bright music]

========================================

--- Video 254 ---
Video ID: Nr5xb-QCBGA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nr5xb-QCBGA
Title: Dr. Casey Halpern: Biology & Treatments for Compulsive Eating & Behaviors | Huberman Lab Podcast #91
Published: 2022-09-26 12:00:25 UTC
Description:
My guest is Casey Halpern, M.D., Chief of Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery and Professor of Neurosurgery at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Halpern’s research and clinical practice focus on using deep brain stimulation to treat compulsive and movement disorders (e.g., binge eating disorders, bulimia, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and Parkinson’s disease essential tremor, dystonia). We discuss using deep brain stimulation to help patients who suffer from movement and compulsive disorders and applying this treatment to patients afflicted with binge eating. We also explore applications of this technology to other conditions such as OCD, anorexia and tremor, and the future therapeutic directions of the use of non-invasive brain stimulation approaches, including transcranial magnetic stimulation and ultrasound, for the treatment of other psychiatric illnesses and conditions. This episode will interest those curious about the biology of eating, anorexia, bulimia, compulsive thoughts and behaviors, and movement. 

#HubermanLab #Science #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Casey Halpern
Penn Medicine Profile: https://www.pennmedicine.org/providers/profile/casey-halpern 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/halpernc 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/casey-halpern-a1569749 
Responsive Neurostimulation For Loss Of Control Eating (DBSLOC) Study: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03868670

Articles
Pilot study of responsive nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation for loss-of-control eating: https://go.nature.com/3Sc1ZA1

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Casey Halpern & Disordered Eating & Brain Stimulation
00:03:18 ROKA, Eight Sleep, InsideTracker
00:07:19 Momentous Supplements 
00:08:28 Neurosurgeon’s View of the Brain, Neurosurgery Specialization 
00:13:05 Deep Brain Stimulation & Other Unexpected Positive Effects 
00:17:20 Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), Prescriptions & Cognitive Therapies 
00:25:40 Brain Areas in OCD, Risk, Rewards & Addiction
00:31:11 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:32:27 Facial and Vocal Ticks, Stimulants, Stress & Superstition
00:39:28 Nucleus Accumbens, Reward Circuits, Eating Disorders & Obesity 
00:47:18 Stimulation of Nucleus Accumbens, Continuous vs. Episodic Stimulation
00:49:49 Binge Eating Disorder & Loss of Control Eating
00:53:02 Developing Binge Eating Disorder: Predisposition, Environment, Stress 
01:02:07 Electrodes in Nucleus Accumbens, Identifying “Craving Cells”
01:11:41 Effects of Stimulation, Interrupting Craving, Intermediate Stimulation 
01:16:46 Anorexia, Obesity & Compulsions, Potential Treatments for Anorexia
01:23:14 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
01:32:27 MRI-Guided Focused Ultrasound: Tremor, Essential Tremor & Parkinson’s
01:36:40 Future of Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation, Epilepsy & Depression
01:41:51 Pre-Behavioral States in Compulsion & Awareness, Mood Provocation
01:48:02 Machine Learning/Artificial Intelligence & Compulsion Predictions
01:53:05 Neurosurgeon Hands, Resistance Training & Deadlifts 
01:59:00 “Neurosurgeon Calm,” Quality Time & Prioritization, Neurosurgeon Training 
02:09:53 Daily Habits: Sleep, Exercise, Mediation
02:11:59  Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Neural Network Newsletter, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr Casey Halpern Dr Halpern is the chief of neurosurgery at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine his laboratory focuses on bulimia binge eating disorder and other forms of obsessive-compulsive behaviors normally when we hear about eating disorders or obsessive-compulsive disorders of other kinds the conversation quickly migrates to pharmacologic interventions and serotonin or dopamine or talk therapy interventions many of which can be effective The Halpern laboratory however takes an entirely different approach while they Embrace pharmacologic and behavioral and talk therapy interventions their main focus is the development and application of engineered devices to go directly into the brain and stimulate the neurons the nerve cells that generate compulsions that cause people to want to eat more even when their stomach is full in other words they do brain surgery of various kinds sometimes removing small bits of brain sometimes stimulating small bits of brain with electrical current and even stimulating the brain through the intact skull that is without having to drill down beneath the skull in order to alleviate and indeed sometimes cure these conditions today's discussion with Dr Halpern was an absolutely fascinating one for me because it represents the Leading Edge of what's happening in modification of brain circuits and the treatment of neurologic and psychiatric disease for instance they just recently published a paper in nature medicine one of the Premier journals out there entitled pilot study of responsive nucleus succumbings deep brain stimulation for loss of control eating the nucleus that Cummins is an area of our brains that we all have in fact we have two of them one on each side of the brain that is intimately involved in the release of dopamine for particular motivated behaviors and while most often we think about dopamine for the release of behaviors that we want to engage in in this context they are using stimulation and control of neuronal activity in nucleus accumbens to control loss of control eating something that when people suffer from it despite knowing they shouldn't eat despite not even wanting to eat they find themselves eating so again this represents really the Leading Edge of where Neuroscience is going and certainly is going to be an area of Neuroscience that's going to expand in the years to come and Dr Halpern and the members of his laboratory are among a very small group of scientists in the world that are using the types approaches that I described a minute ago and that you're going to hear more about in today's episode in order to resolve some of the most difficult and debilitating human conditions during today discussion you will also learn about the use of deep brain stimulation and other approaches for the treatment of movement disorders such as essential tremor Parkinson's disease and various types of dystonias which are challenges in generating particular types of movement so whether or not you or somebody that you know suffers from an eating disorder from obsessive-compulsive disorder or from a movement disorder today's episode is sure to teach you not only about what's happening in those Arenas but also in the Arenas of Neuroscience generally in fact I would say today's episode is especially important for anyone that wants to understand how the brain works and what the future of brain modification really looks like for all of us before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Roca Roca makes eyeglasses and sunglasses they're of the absolute highest quality the company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses were created with performance in mind I've spent a lifetime working on the biology the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with a number of very important challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly for instance when you go from a sunny area to a more shaded area and then back out again it's a very complex process Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses were built that is engineered with that sort of biology in mind and as a consequence no matter where you are wearing them and where you happen to be you always see through them with Crystal Clarity the aesthetic of Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses is also worth mentioning unlike a lot of performance eyeglasses out there which only come in the kind of cyborg variety Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses come in those varieties but they also come in varieties that you would feel very comfortable wearing out to dinner or to work or to school really anywhere that you go if you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses you can go to Roka that's roka.com and enter the code huberman to save 20 off on your first order again that's Roca roka.com and enter the code huberman at checkout today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking ability I've talked many times before on this podcast about the close relationship between temperature and your ability to stay asleep and emerge from sleep the way Aid Sleep mattress covers work is that they allow you to program the temperature of your mattress so that you can fall asleep quickly get into deep sleep stay in deep sleep and emerge from that sleep feeling especially rested by dropping the temperature of that Surface by one to three degrees at the beginning of the night dropping it a little bit further into the night and then raising the temperature towards morning because waking up requires that one to three degree re- increase in body temperature I've been sleeping on an eight-sleep mattress cover for the last six months or so now and I can assert that it is the absolute biggest Game Changer in the quality and duration of my sleep in fact I don't really like traveling as much as I used to because the eight sleep doesn't go with me and they don't seem to have them yet in airbnbs and hotels so this is also a call to action airbnbs and hotels please put eight sleep mattresses on your beds and I'll be more apt to stay in those hotels and airbnbs with that said if you'd like to try an eight-sleep mattress cover you can go to eightsleep.com huberman check out the Pod 3 cover to save 150 at checkout again that's eightsleep.com huberman and please note that eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again eightsleep.com huberman to save 150 at checkout today's episode is also brought To Us by inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals now I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be assessed with a quality blood test one of the major issues with the various blood tests out there is that you get information back about lipids and hormones and metabolic factors Etc but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they make knowing what to do with the information you get about your biological health extremely easy they have this very easy to use dashboard and that dashboard tells you for instance what to change in your nutrition what supplements you may want or may not want to take as well as other behavioral and other types of interventions that can allow you to move those numbers related to metabolic hormone and other factors into the precise range that's optimal for your immediate and long-term Health if you'd like to try inside tracker you can go to inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off any of inside trackers plans again that's inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off on many episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we talk about supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everyone buddy many people derive tremendous benefit from them things like enhancing sleep and the depth of sleep or for enhancing focus and cognitive ability or for enhancing energy or adjusting hormone levels to Optimal range for you the huberman Lab podcast is now partnered with momentous supplements we partner with momentous for a number of important reasons first of all the quality of their ingredients is exceptional it's really Second To None second of all they ship internationally and that was important to us because a number of you reside outside of the United States third we've worked with momentous very closely to develop single ingredient formulations now this turns out to be very important because if you're going to take supplements you want to know what's working for you and what isn't and of course you want to optimize the cost efficiency and the biological efficiency of those supplements to find the supplements we discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous live momentous.com huberman and I should just mention that the library of those supplements is constantly expanding again that's livemomentis.com huberman and now for my discussion with Dr Casey Halpern Casey I should say Dr Halpern listening welcome thank you great to be here yeah it's been a long time coming we were colleagues at Stanford and then recently you moved of course to University of Pennsylvania also an incredible institution we're sorry to lose you so it was better sweet for me too Stanford's loss is upenn's gain but um let's talk about your work uh past and present as I've told the listeners already you're a neurosurgeon which I consider the astronauts of Neuroscience because you're in somewhat Uncharted Territory or very Uncharted Territory and yet Precision is everything right the margins of error are very very small so for those that aren't familiar with the differences between neurosurgery neurology Psychiatry you just educate us a bit what does a neurosurgeon do and what does fact that you're a nurse surgeon do for your view of the brain how do you think about and conceptualize the brain yeah the scope of neurosurgery is quite broad uh when I was in medical school I I was drawn to neurosurgery because of a procedure known as deep brain stimulation when I was at Penn as a college student I actually watched my first deep brain stimulation surgery performed by Gordon boltuck who to date is one of my career mentors deep brain stimulation is a one surgery that neurosurgeons offer but it's actually sort of a very small minority of what neurosurgery does you know we take out brain tumors we clip aneurysms in the brain we take care of patients that have had traumatic brain injury concussion spine surgeries ninety percent of what neurosurgeons do around the country uh you know taking care of herniated discs and lumbar fusions so you know the scope is the entire central nervous system include including the peripheral nervous system we take care of patients with carpal tunnel syndrome and nerve disorders now over the course of the past two decades or so there's been a a mission in the field to to sub-specialize and so historically neurosurgeons did everything in that domain but now we sub-specialize and I'm lucky to be at Penn Medicine where we can focus on one of these areas so I'm chief of stereotactic functional Neurosurgery all I do is deep brain stimulation surgery and a compliment to that is focus ultrasound or transcranial Focus ultrasound which is a non-invasive way to do an ablation in the brain recently FDA approved and it's FDA approved for Trevor at the moment uh these two procedures are for me my every day but uh still the minority of what neurosurgeons have to offer the majority of neurosurgery in my mind is is a bit more structural than it is physiology or deeply rooted in how the brain functions when we take out a brain tumor we have to find a a safe trajectory to get to the brain tumor and then we remove it and we help the patient recover in the ICU similar to a brain aneurysm often we don't have to go into the brain to clip a brain aneurysm but we go around the brain or under the brain to get there and in my mind those surgeries are a bit more structural deep brain stimulation the surgery that I do routinely is a procedure where yes there is structure involved of course we have to place a a very thin wire that's insulated deep into a part of the brain that's involved in Parkinson's disease for example uh but that's actually not the therapy the therapy is delivering electrical stimulation through the tip of that wire or one of the tips as there actually are multiple contacts at the bottom of the wire they're very small uh but that's all done out of the operating room you know this stimulation wire is connected to a a battery pack or a pulse generator that's kind of like a pacemaker and so we deliver this therapy and I always tell patients it's a bit more like I have to implant a uh a tool to deliver you a medication but that medication is going to be in the form of electricity and it's going to be delivered into a very small region of the brain and it's that procedure that's inspired me to not just become a neurosurgeon but has really defined the focus of my research laboratory as well Maybe by way of antidote you could tell us one of the more outrageous or surprising or who knows um delightful and thrilling things about the brain that you've observed as a consequence of stimulating different brain areas you know in textbooks we always hear about uh the kind of dark stuff you know stimulate one brain area somebody goes into a rage stimulate another brain area a person starts laughing uncontrollably first of all um given that some of the information let's hope not much but some of the information in textbooks is incorrect is are those sorts of statements true can one observe those in the clinic and what are some of the more interesting uh and I don't necessarily mean entertaining but um surprising things that you've seen when you've poked around in the brain deliberately of course and uh what have you seen what have you heard I have to say I I am amazed by these effects uh every day yeah I'm very privileged to be able to interact with the human brain in this way it's always in them with the goal of trying to provide somebody with a meaningful therapy but when we deliver electrical stimulation you know the these electrodes while they might be sitting in a very small region of the brain there are regions within a few millimeters of where these electrodes are that if stimulated could cause a temporary very brief side effect a moment of laughter like you said or a moment of panic and of course we can just shut that electrode off but often these side effects could be therapeutic and actually that's how we have discovered ways to use deep brain stimulation not just for movement disorders like Parkinson's disease but for example patients with Parkinson's disease that have a psychiatric uh uh comorbidity like depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder a lot of these patients are highly compulsive and impulsive sometimes these problems actually melt away and we're trying to help their Tremor but the patients also tell us that their gambling issue has gotten better or their mood has improved and why is that well you know there's probably more than one reason you know you can help somebody's Mood by making their Tremor go away of course but we see laughter in the clinic sometimes and and why is that and that's because we're stimulating parts of the brain that are not just involved in these motor circuits but they're also involved in what we call a limbic circuit or part of the brain involved in emotion and if we learn how to modulate those areas therapeutically step by step we can actually develop these therapies for other indications like depression I would say the most impressive and consistent effect we have when we have a patient with Tremor who has been tremming for the past 20 years if we can deliver stimulation through that electrode in the clinic we have immediate relief of Tremor and that is the effect that inspired me to be a neurosurgeon when I was in college I've never really wanted to do anything else X accept help develop that type of therapeutic for another another kind of symptom I'm very interested in obesity and related Eating Disorders compulsive Behavior the urge to uh to to have something that might be delicious but dangerous or unhealthy or a drug or a compulsion like we see in OCD or pests of compulsive disorder uh interestingly like we see Tremor melt away when we deliver electricity to a certain part of the brain we can see these psychiatric more psychiatric problems they're not all psychiatric disorders but let's say disorders of the brain we can see symptoms of those disorders also improve and often immediately just like we do with Tremor so I see it all the time to to pick out one uh would be would be a challenge because for me this is my my everyday the speed of the relief that you described for Tremor is really um incredible just thinking about drug therapies and there too there are side effects but they're still a lot of mysteries as to for instance why ssris even work when they work and the timing is always a challenge timing dosage yes absolutely um I'd love to learn more from you about OCD I I have several reasons for asking this first of all I'm a somewhat obsessive person I tend to be very very narrowly focused although I confess it's not a step function it takes me some time to turn off the chatter but once I'm into a thought train or a mode of being uh and thinking and work it's very hard for me to exit that that mode it's like a deep Trench adaptive in some circumstances less adaptive than others as you know the other is that when I was a kid uh I had a little bit of a grunting tick I used to I had a this intense intense desire to clear my throat um to the point where my my dad said like you need to stop that he used to squeeze my hand every time I do it and I used to hide in the back seat of the car in the closet to do it because it provided so much relief and then it eventually passed yes I wasn't medicated they never did anything about it every once in a while now if I'm very fatigued if I've been working a lot I notice it starts to come back I'll do this like kind of grunting and so it's been sort of like a pet neurological symptom for me that reminds me that these these circuits exist in all of us and that sometimes they go haywire and sometimes they just have subtle um you know over excitation or something of that sort and then the third reason is that I get thousands of questions about OCD could you perhaps just tell us what is OCD sure um what are some brain areas involved what are the current range of treatments and what's the difference between someone who is obsessive and somebody who has true OCD so a brief disclosure as a neurosurgeon I do take care of patients with severe obsessive-compulsive disorder um but my perspective on OCD may be a little bit different than a psychiatrist who who lives and breathes OCD and sees patients every single day with OCD I'd probably take care of a three to five patients a year with deep brain stimulation for obsessive-compulsive disorders so I don't see these patients as routinely but my laboratory is geared as a researcher I'm very focused on trying to improve outcomes of deep brain stimulation for for OCD so I do feel I have expertise and and a perspective to share but just a brief disclosure I I do feel that as a neurosurgeon I am obligated to better understand where the obsessions in the brain come from and how we can interrupt them to stop the compulsion that's associated with the obsession sort of the intrinsic most feature of OCD uh better than we're actually doing it for example if we were to offer a patient with Tremor deep brain stimulation surgery of course there's some risk to the procedure but the outcome is so consistent and positive that many patients are willing to take on that risk uh for obsessive compulsion compulsive disorder the surgery risk is about the same however the benefit is not quite as robust and so a lot of patients and they're referring psychiatrists are reluctant to refer these patients to us and it's completely understandable uh I've been leading an Endeavor with a number of collaborators around the country to try to better understand these circuits in the brain uh study them in humans both invasively and non-invasively that would be with an electrode-based surgery sort of like we do at epilepsy to understand where seizures come from we want to understand better where obsessions come from but we're also working with imaging experts and geneticists to understand OCD at a broader level as well uh I I consider OCD to be a a spectrum disorder in a way uh and I I apologize to those who who might feel that I'm using that term incorrectly I'm using it in a way to describe patients that have obsessions and even some related compulsions might not meet criteria for OCD it may be something Andrew that that you have and as a neurosurgeon I'm really obsessive about safety and compulsive about my surgical procedures so you know I I think that some aspect of OCD which we often joke about but we should you know consider seriously because people do suffer from this uh some aspect of it helps us there are you know famous uh CEOs that probably have some level of OCD uh surgeons and scientists alike so perhaps if it can be controlled it's an asset and uh but if it goes awry and is uncontrollable then it becomes obsessive-compulsive disorder and I tend to see the patients that are the most severe so they have failed medication and there are multiple medications that are worth trying for OCD some can actually be very helpful which neurotransmitter systems do they tend to poke at well ssris are sort of the the first line for OCD but also tricyclics can be helpful so this is still the serotonin system but as we know the serotonin system interacts with the you know neurogenergic system and the dopamine system so it's hard to be specific to one of these things and I think that's also why it's hard for us to predict how these medications are going to to work for these kinds of patients but tricyclics and ssris can be very helpful and are definitely first line and there's others exposure response prevention is uh probably the most effective option which is kind of like cognitive behavioral therapy but these are different and offered by psychologists and this is a whole field and there's a a field or I should say a whole clinic at my institution focused it was started by Edna foa at Penn who this is what they do for these patients uh is offer these types of cognitive therapies exposure to the stressor and to try to get patients to habituate to whatever it is that stresses them and causes these uh compulsions to help these patients live in every day and function these are all fabulously helpful therapies for a variety of patients but there's still about 30 of patients that still suffer from OCD and some of them have severe OCD sometimes it's moderate to severe and those are the patients that I'm really motivated to try to help um our therapies for those patients right now I would say are are worth pursuing but not optimal um and so it's it's one of those things that we have to balance as a researcher because when you see patients like this you want to do everything you can to help them and I think it's important to educate patients on the risks and benefits of them this is deep brain stimulation surgery but also capsulotomy which is more of an ablation approach a little bit like deep brain stimulation but rather than delivering stimulation through an electrode you can actually heat the tissue and even destroy it some would say this part of the brain is very safe to destroy it's kind of like an appendix um others would say it's safer to modulate I have seen patients do very well with these ablations and so you know you asked me earlier what what I find so amazing about the brain these effects that we can have sometimes the lack of effect is what's so amazing you can actually Traverse parts of the brain without having any adverse effects on patients function at least that you can test but you can also destroy small parts of the brain we're talking three or four millimeters in size these little ablations can be really helpful for patients but have no obvious side effects that we can tell perhaps after a short recovery from surgery but nonetheless despite how safe they might be these surgical procedures still are surgical procedures and patients are hesitant to perceived especially when they know that their chance of a transformative effect is quite low we can generally achieve a responder rate of about 50 percent and responders still have symptomatic OCD so I'm really uh sort of inspired to really find a way to deliver these therapies in a more disease specific or symptom-specific way but we're years away probably from from that therapy since it's all part of a research study at the moment what brain areas should I think about when I think about OCD years ago I remember opening a textbook I think it was an undergraduate still and work from Judith Rappaport at the National Institutes of mental health this would be late 80s early 90s was um had done some neuroimaging or maybe it was pet or some other Imaging technique and had identified portions of the basal ganglia sure caudi putanum type structures in OCD and maybe some differences in boys versus girls so what brain areas are there sex differences in terms of OCD and were one to come into your clinic this you know for this sort of a work of ablations or stimulation uh where would you first start to probe in the brain yeah you this is a uh a disorder of both cortex and the Sub sub cortex uh the cortical control areas areas that are involved in inhibitory control we have found to not function properly in patients with OCD so areas like the orbital frontal cortex and the prefrontal cortex if you image these areas or study them even in a a rodent model of OCD which quite honestly these models they model aspects of OCD but OCD is a human condition you can't really model this whole condition in a in a mouse or a wrap but perhaps you can model compulsive behavior in a rat sure and pulling out their hair yeah exactly you know that's that's not necessarily obsessive compulsive disorder but that is compulsive behavior and perhaps if you can ameliorate that in a rat that might be helpful for a patient with OCD but we have to approach animal modeling of OCD thoughtfully uh and and most scientists do I think uh when we study OCD in in models or in in humans with imaging and and we're trying to do it invasively with with electrodes like we do in epilepsy patients we find that areas in the cortex like the prefrontal and orbital frontal cortex are are not functioning they will the way they would in a non-oc patient they are often hyper functioning uh such that while you might say Well they're hyper functioning so aren't these patients you know functioning better that hyper focused yeah hyper focused exactly um no I I would say it's it's not so much an up or down it's more that they're just dysfunctional and we need to find a way to try to restore normal function to these areas it's not so much directional really um we tend to oversimplify brain function by thinking about it with directionality too much um unfortunately Imaging studies sometimes demonstrate activation or hypoactivation and that's where I think these kinds of things can be misconstrued but what I would call the cortical areas of OCD is that they're dysregulated and we need to find a way to try to normalize their function so uh the frontal lobe is is huge but areas of the frontal lobe that are a bit more basal like the ofc or orbital frontal cortex and the prefrontal cortex definitely consistently seem to be implicated in patients with OCD and then their projections to the subcortex this is the basal ganglia like you were saying caudi putamen or the dorsal striatum and these are interconnected with the ventral striatum this is an area of the brain that I uh focus a lot of my energy in um this is the ventralstratum which is not limited to but includes the nucleus accumbens this is an area of the brain that we know to be involved in gating reward seeking behavior when it's perturbed it seems to gait compulsive Behavior meaning a rat will pursue a reward despite punishment despite a foot shock for example and that can be uh similar to an OCD patient they will um check their home for safety until 3 A.M in the morning and not sleep that night in a way that is similar to a rat seeking out a food reward uh despite a foot shock um doing something because of the urge but despite the risk and perhaps there is some normal judgment there we all have to take risks to function in everyday Society to be successful we have to take a risk to take care of patients with surgery there's some risk there we make a judgment call and that's not a condition that that's just normal but when our judgment is consistently sort of puts us at risk that's where we have something like OCD but OCD is also you know it's one of many conditions that suffer from these kinds of problems we tend to label them because they tend to present in a consistent way so we have patients with OCD that have hyper checking Behavior or contamination Behavior where they if they feel contaminated they'll wash their hands for hours repeatedly or if they drop their toothbrush on the floor this will lead to a compulsive behavior of cleaning a toothbrush or brushing your teeth consistently very very common symptoms that we see or signs that the patients report to us or or that we observe but you know patients with eating disorders they tend to if if they have binging disorder they'll overeat if they have bulimia they might Purge despite the risk of these things and so um addiction is is similar we we tend to drug seek if we're addicted um uh we'll we'll pay off a dealer uh in order to get our fix and despite the risk and and that type of urge despite the risk is something that I I've always been really interested in and it's a common denominator to all of these problems and if you think about these problems I mean these are some of the most common conditions in our society today I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic greens athletic greens now called ag-1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that covers all of your foundational nutritional needs I've been taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast the reason I started taking athletic greens and the reason I still take athletic greens once are usually twice a day is that it gets to be in the probiotics that I need for gut health our gut is very important it's populated by gut microbiota that communicate with the brain the immune system and basically all the biological systems of our body to strongly impact our immediate and long-term health and those probiotics and athletic greens are optimal and vital for microbiotic health in addition athletic greens contains a number of adaptogens vitamins and minerals that make sure that all of my foundational nutritional needs are met and it tastes great if you'd like to try athletic greens you can go to athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens while you're on the road in the car on the plane Etc and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2 again that's athleticgreens.com huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 I really appreciate that you're building this bridge from OCD to nucleus accumbens which is of course associated with reward in various forms and we'll get to that um I'll share a personal anecdote as a as a form of question when I was in college and studying a lot I relied on caffeine as a stimulant I've never really been into drugs or alcohol I've been Lucky in that sense I don't drink and I care less if alcohol disappeared never really liked recreational drugs so I was never drawn to them however when I was in college at the time there were these little epinephrine pills that were common in a lot of sports supplements these are like pre-workout type things yes not unlike energy drinks now which I completely avoid um and I had this experience of taking one of these and drinking some coffee and of course it gave me a lift in energy these are very similar to amphetamine they were legal over the counter at the time they're now either banned or illegal I do not recommend them and I had a lot of energy but what I noticed is that my grunting tick came back and I had I made one mistake I still think of this as one mistake which was um I engage in a superstitious Behavior I knocked on wood and then somehow it felt very rewarding like it gave me some totally irrational but internally rational sense of of security around I forget what I was knocking on wood about and I found that I couldn't break that knock on wood compulsion I felt I needed to knock on wood and so then I started sneaking knock on Woods like in mid-exam and studying and pretty soon I was knocking on wood often I developed a superstition and so I'm curious about the role of superstition and compulsion in the crossover there it makes sense logically to me but I was equally shocked to learn that when I stopped taking this stimulant which I was quite happy to to stop because it did make me feel too alert couldn't sleep well Etc that the Superstition went away as well and I'm guessing this has something to do with some of the reward circuitry as it's called related to stimulants again I am not encouraging anyone to take stimulants although healthy use of caffeine or safe use of caffeine might be the one universally accepted stimulant um it was really surprising to me how quickly this came on how quickly it engaged my my thinking and my behavior the obsessions and the compulsions and how quickly it turned off when I stopped taking this Sports stimulant or whatever it was I don't even remember I think it was some form of epinephrine ephedrine sure some saw epinephrine excuse me I misspoke ephedrine um is what I described sound totally outside the bounds of of uh logic or or am I imagining at all um no it did happen I'm certain it happened yeah no I don't think you're imagining it at all I you know this the grunting that you you mentioned to me you know first of all I didn't uh comment but you know that that sort of not to put a label on it but it sounds like a tick and you know ticks in in young males extremely common and they do tend to go away linking to like since I have a good friend who actually a famous neuroscientist I won't mention who it is who's worked very hard to suppress his his blinking tits and when he gets fatigued it comes back and and um he's very high functioning yes in his personal life and his professional life but but when you're talking to him and he starts doing this so you kind of start wondering like what's going on yeah yeah and it's unfortunate you know people with these problems especially as they get more severe then you get Tourette Syndrome you know it's hard to function in our society I have some friends that have Tourette I'll tell you I I'm just so inspired because there there so um they're so confident and you know people obviously notice these problems but they they just live their life and they're very successful and that's not typical um I have I have friends that I went to Penn with undergrad that had these kinds of problems and I was always just so happy and inspired by them but what's more typical is uh you know these problems cause people to lose their confidence and and not you know uh pursue you know their profession as they may have done or um things of that nature so I I think it's all related to the fact that we our brains are very vulnerable and to get back to your question about the stimulant you know I think I think your brain was very vulnerable to it you know you you sort of may have had a predisposition to it um you mentioned that you have you're a little obsessive and with the tick there maybe you have this kind of you know on the on the mild side of the spectrum OCD um and I I probably do as well by the way so I also also have avoided drugs for that reason uh in my life I'll drink a little bit of wine here and there but that's about it um and uh but I I think most people don't avoid these things and we see these problems in relation to not just taking a stimulant but any kind of environmental exposure our own Society causes so much stress um and that's why I think we have these human conditions these are human conditions we try to model them in in animals but most animals don't have these kinds of problems you know I've heard that you can a an animal like a a monkey in the wild can have depression a monkey's version of depression but I don't think it's really typical or human depression you know and certainly it's not as prevalent as depression is in our human society I think you know we haven't evolved to manage the stresses that are in this society that we currently have and stimulants is probably one of them you know and I I suspect you are probably a little bit vulnerable um it's possible the stimulant led to an overdrive of your prefrontal and orbital frontal cortex and even brought out a little OCD Behavior related to this super uh this Superstition that you had so um no I believe that entirely and I also think you know that's why things like OCD and other kinds of psychiatric disorders tend to present themselves in college when people leave their home and they're in school and they're stressed and they're getting exposed to things that they haven't been exposed to before outside of the home and and you know their brains aren't evolved and sophisticated enough yet to help them cope with these kinds of stresses and how it manifests is in these kinds of conditions and it's I don't want to put a label on those conditions but certainly could be a psychiatric disorder but could also just be lots of anxiety it could also be the kind of problems that you had as well so um and I think the nucleus accumbens and the cortical areas that we've been discussing that that sort of send projections to these areas are are probably at least one of the main circuits involved in these kinds of things I'm relieved it's no longer present but I confess it oh I always feel it close by a long run helps so move you know being a slightly fatigued not overly fatigued but slightly fatigued seems to move out the the kind of physical compulsion but try to channel it um never taken any medication for it then here I am so I'm still still going I may call you for a referral at some point but sure at this point I'm uh I'm feeling okay um let's talk about nucleus accumbens and reward circuitry and the relationship between OCD reward addiction uh and to just give you a sense of where I'm headed with this is into the realm of a food related and eating related uh behaviors and disorders because I know you're doing some very important work there what is nucleus accumbens I know we all have one or two um one on each side of the brain what is it what roles does it play um in healthy brain behavior and in pathology yeah the nucleus accumbens is a part of the brain part of our reward circuits The Hub of the reward circuits that I've always been most fascinated in um there are scientists around the world some of the leading arguably some of the leading scientists in the world the father of addiction Neuroscience I call him um although he tells me I'm nuts Rob malenka who has studied the nucleus accumbens since the beginning of his career and who I worked with when I was at Stanford um fabulous scientist and Mentor taught me so much um taught the world so much incredible person scientist and phys and Physicians yes MD PhD and uh brilliant in both ways and um very fatherly in a lot of way in terms of teaching people how to how to do science and and be good citizens as well um but uh the nucleus accumbens is an area that is also very complicated because it has a lot of functions uh it it interconnects with many parts of the brain um but there are some things about the nucleus accumbens that are very consistent uh so when I started getting interested in reward and what a what I could do as a surgeon to try to improve how we manage Rewards and what I mean by that specifically is if you have an urge for a reward that that's a normal phenomenon that's not something we're trying to stop the issue is if you have an urge for a reward that either puts you or somebody else at risk it's probably a reward we shouldn't have I suppose you could say well it depends on the size of the reward and the size of the risk and how that fits into your societal Norms um but for example if you're obese and you have a doctor who is advising that you lose weight and try to control your eating habits uh you know perhaps better food choices is an important way for you to be healthier and and not pursuing those better food choices that's an urge that we probably need to treat uh if you're a drug addict and you use heroin or opiate considering the opiate crisis right now or cocaine which is untreatable at the moment uh you know that that cocaine might make you feel like you have some more energy that day to deal with your work or that opiate might make you feel better because life is stressful but the risk of doing those things is really high in fact potentially lethal uh so that's an urge that's treatable if you have OCD and you can't sleep at night because you're so nervous that you didn't lock the door and you've checked 30 times that's a reality for some people with severe OCD um that's an urge we got to treat eating disorder is the same eating eating disorders and obesity are obviously linked because of the relationship of a patient with food but they're also quite distinct not everybody with obesity has an eating disorder and obviously not everybody with an eating disorder has obesity I'm particularly interested in patients that have binge eating disorder as well as obesity because they're so heavily linked but not everybody with binging disorder has obesity but on average most are overweight um we are doing a deep brain stimulation trial at Penn where we're trying to modulate the nucleus accumbens and understand it better in patients that have failed gastric bypass surgery the most aggressive form of treatment for obesity and we and we believe they failed gastric bypass surgery because of binge eating disorder meaning they just can't control how much they eat so their obesity is either related or even due to overeating not some predisposition to um that body habitus you know obesity is a phenotype something that we can see not everybody is obese because of the same thing so it's very important I was taught this by a close mentor and friend Tom wadden when he was the director of the Obesity Center at Penn or the center for weight eating disorders and and he said to me you know Casey uh you know be careful with obesity you're interested in addiction and I understand you're interested in the addictive Tendencies of certain patients with obesity uh uh and and their relationship with food but not everybody with obesity has that problem and and in fact it's it's probably present about 20 of patients with obesity but now taking a step back twenty percent of patients with obesity is still a massive problem of epidemic proportions and perhaps some of these patients have either some form of binging disorder or or I should say some degree of bingeing disorder uh or at least loss of control eating which is common to both um so that's a feature that I think eating disorder experts obesity experts neurosurgeons obesity obesity medicine experts would agree is common to eating disorders and obesity and I also believe would is common to addicts and perhaps patients with OCD is sort of a loss of control disorder um it's actually not a disorder known by like the DSM-5 some diagnostic manual but a feature I should say of these conditions that's common and that common denominator I believe can be restored or at least this problem can be ameliorated or improved upon by a better understanding and a tailored treatment to the nucleus accumbens specifically we've learned in mice that if you expose a mouse now this is just a model if you expose a mouse to high fat food not food that they would normally eat food that is like 60 fat high fat it's like butter um we've learned that if you expose them to food like that within two weeks their nucleus accumbens is not functioning like a mouse that was never exposed to that high fat food there's aspects of it that are hyperactive I could say and there's aspects of it that are hypoactive or decreased activity but either way it's it's not functioning properly and most likely that function is predisposing continued behavior and then probably eventually leads to things like a habit that gets developed and that's a whole nother area of these kinds of problems that is very complicated and poorly understood but in any case if we just focus on the behavior at hand it seems that repeated exposure to something like high fat food a drug of abuse or any type of reward that is a really strong reward in a way it can hijack normal functioning of the nucleus accumbens so the goal of our invasive trial is to try to restore normal functioning to that nucleus accumbens uh in mice there seems to be a signal that predicts when they're going to lose control and we can use that signal to deliver a sort of a real-time therapy in the form of deep brain stimulation just a brief amount of stimulation and that actually blocks the behavior and what's interesting is over time that signal actually decreases in frequency which suggests some level of restoring normal function to that circuit in the mouse and we're trying to do that now in a human trial fascinating where is the stimulation provided because I would imagine if one were to stimulate nucleus accumbens you would see a reinforcement of whatever Behavior coincided or preceded the stimulation so the stimulation it's a a brief delivery of stimulation anywhere between 5 and 10 seconds that is intended to just disrupt the perturbed signaling that's happening in the nucleus accumbens there are disorders like depression let's say that I I would describe as a bit more of a state disorder and this is obviously oversimplified because we know that there's fluctuations in mood and depression as well so don't let me oversimplify it too much um but um but but for now let's forgive the oversimplification if we if we accept that depression is a state disorder or maybe Parkinson's disease is a state disorder recognizing that they do fluctuate uh these types of problems most likely not but not definitely most likely need a continuous therapy of some form a therapy that's consistent uh perhaps a therapy that fluctuates with the condition but nevertheless still consistent um binge eating disorder or OCD or addiction um and binging disorder in the context of obesity a lot of these patients are functioning quite normally every single day it's just that intermittently throughout the day there's brief interruptions in their normal functions such that they have thoughts about food or the drug of abuse that they're really longing to have and so we want to deliver a episodic therapy delivered at the right time and only at the right time to try to interrupt the circuit aberration or the the problem at hand that is going to lead to that dangerous behavior and to kind of get the patient back on track to what they're doing um I don't necessarily think that it leads to a reinforcement it's possible we have to study that more but rather the goal is to just disrupt perhaps what is kind of Habitual um or or at least this kind of recurring problem that is happening you know people that have bingeing disorder at least at a severe level they tend to about once a day but they don't binge all day long of course they have a moment perhaps when they get home from work and they're stressed where they might have a bout of binge what constitutes a binge and I also want to know does binge eating disorder come on suddenly meaning as an entire disorder one day people wake up Suddenly they have binging disorder or is this you know a few too many buffets and I'm being entirely serious here you know kind of unlimited food and a circuit gets flipped or kind of starts moving into the high RPMs so to speak um so how does it come on and um I mean I'm actually surprised to hear that it's once a day I would think just hearing binging disorder I assume it's like OCD which it probably fluctuates across the day as well but I would have thought anytime people around food they just simply can't control their intake of food yes so so what does this look like in terms of the onset of the disorder and then what do you think underlies this once a day type of phenomena that's pretty interesting yeah so severe binging disorder these patients will binge about once a day it could be a couple times a day but in general it's not more than that moderate is about three to four times a week for example the reason I think that that seems surprising to you and if you think about it it is surprising but but um and I agree with you but the reason for that is is actually just in the definitions of the word and as a neurosurgeon in full disclosure as I as I mentioned you know I don't see these patients clinically I see them for research trial purposes and I try to understand the literature around eating disorders and I obviously collaborate with fabulous Eating Disorders uh uh in in these problems that are that are highly Innovative people uh but the word binge is a definition there's a definition to that word and you can't necessarily binge all day because our stomachs are not big enough um and so uh there's a limit to how much one can eat and to meet criteria for a binge you have to have a sense of loss of control you have to eat an enormous amount of food in a brief period of time and yes generally that doesn't happen more than about once a day in a patient with severe binge eating disorder uh however they can lose control quite often and in fact perhaps even at every meal they might meet criteria for about a loss of control where they yes they may have lost control but they might not have eaten enough to constitute what we would Define as a binge um and that would be a there's no specific number to that by the way it's it's really just compared to their normal meal you know perhaps it's uh 50 of their daily calories in that one brief moment um so uh that's that's why I think it seems surprising that binders aren't happening more often than that what I would say is if we replace the term binge with loss of control eating loss of control eating Could Happen dozens of times a week um and in fact you know the patients that we're studying you know we've we've seen patients that lose control 20 30 times a week and that's probably the the term you have in mind when you're saying you're surprised that it's just one time a day and it's specifically related to the fact that these patients have to eat such a large amount of food in such a brief period of time um so it's hard to do that more than once a day I see um you mentioned that some pre-existing anxiety might bias somebody to have a binge I'm also fascinated by something I've observed before which was when I was in college my my girlfriend had a roommate who we were aware was bulimic and would binge and then Purge and often uh when she ingested alcohol that would lead to a binge sure which is kind of the opposite of anxiety when I think about alcohol as something that slightly reduces prefrontal activity somewhat of a sedative or certainly a set of higher dosages so this brings to something that you said I'm just gonna I won't say it as eloquently as you did that it seems like it's not neither the case that anxiety leads to binging nor that hypo reduced activation of the forebrain and lower anxiety leads to binging it's this dysregulation of circuitry that the the Seesaw could go either way and it can throw things off it's off balance in both cases yes uh it's uh and that seems to be a that seems to pose a problem it seems like it's a particularly tricky problem and kind of explains to me in my non-clinical awareness why medication might be really hard to use as a way to treat this but that being able to poke around in the brain and assay in real time you know how do you feel do you feel like binging now or do you feel um further from the binge impulse is that what you do with these patients are they awake while you're stimulating the brain because it's one thing to say I stimulate a brain area and the binging goes away or partial relief or complete relief but how do you know are they in there with a donut um and you're tempting them so how do you actually know if it's ablating a brain area is going to lead to uh relief or exacerbation or no impact on on this disorder yeah so uh there's a lot to unpack there um I'll try to go one step at a time and if I miss something please remember no and I tend to ask these three-part questions specifically of neurosurgeons because I like to challenge you guys because again you are the astronauts of Neuroscience also I'm just going to take a moment to poke at neurosurgery because I have a couple close friends um who are neurosurgeons and I consider Casey Randy I don't know if he considers me a friend but of course I am a friend I'm teasing there too which is first of all they all have incredible hands right they have I'm not they all guard their hands with the kind of um uh protection that you would guard the the tools of the most important tools of your trade so they're very careful with their hands you're not going to see them doing heavy deadlifts you're not because of the way that impacts the motor neurons it's all about fine control yes um so if your neurosurgeon does heavy deadlifts you might want to consider getting a different neurosurgery I hope I didn't put anyone out of work there and then the other the other thing is that um you all are tend to be very calm people at least on the exterior we'll return to this later okay um but I do throw three or four questions out at once so so elevated autonomic arousal and alertness as well as decrease autonomic arousal and alertness both seem to be able to lead to binging and then there's this question of how do you know whether or not to stimulate or to ablate or whether or not to leave a structure alone in other words what does one of these experiments look like in the laboratory yeah sort of a clinic excuse me yeah of course yeah these are questions I think about all the time um and um I do want to come back to the deadlifting comment but I um regarding and you and you referred to this earlier as well and I don't know if I've addressed it sufficiently either is is sort of like what what comes first here or how does this develop um I I think first of all I I like to understand these kinds of problems in in sort of the the construct of what I I consider to be a bit of a two-hit hypothesis um so you sort of need like in the concussion literature you need the second hit is can be devastating so if you have a concussion you know you want to only return to play when your symptoms are gone uh and cleared by a physician um so uh in the context of Eating Disorders or let's say binge eating disorder first of all I I didn't mention earlier but this is the most common eating disorder affects anywhere between three and five percent of the population wow um and it's probably under-diagnosed in obesity by the way and if obesity affects 35 of our population most likely binging disorder affects more than three to five percent but that's that's the current uh literature uh estimate on on the prevalence so um how do we develop a gene disorder and is it related to this anxiety question um you know I think that there is a predisposition that's the first hit um I actually think all humans have this predisposition just some have it more than others um I don't think that we've evolved to live in a society where foods are so readily available and enormously delicious and have so much sugar and fat in them not that there's any particular problem with either of these macronutrients it's just the excess of it and how they're refined uh that I think is the problem um you know those high fructose corn syrup in almost everything we eat we it's in bread I don't even know why it's in bread sometimes it's just kind of crazy so so I don't I don't think we're evolved to live in a society um that that has food that's so readily available like that um and cheap by the way in fact the cheaper the foods are sort of the the more refined and palatable and I would argue dangerous to eat I think they change our reward circuits for the worse um and put us at risk for wanting more um I tend to get a headache when I eat food like that and and perhaps that's uh evolutionary Advantage because I don't want to eat those Foods because they actually do make me sick um so um in a lot of ways I kind of wish that headache on everybody because perhaps we wouldn't have all these problems uh or at least some of them would go away so I think that's the first issue is a predisposition to uh or a vulnerability to these types of foods um which we undoubtedly all have to a certain extent but some more than others and then and then and that's so that's the first hit is this predisposition in the context of this sort of food focused Society and then the second hit is probably a stressful event or a stressful life um and probably a recurring stressful event I'm not sure this is published I've never sat down with like a eating disorder expert and and had this question about how this develops and I'm not sure it's actually well well known um but in a lot of ways I think that that answer anybody would agree with that we need sort of a predisposition in the exposure the environmental exposure and the genetic predisposition um but also a stressor and that stressor is probably one that's recurring and you know it's obvious in our society these stressors are everywhere and how we can manage them is is often poor and you know I think we can all relate with that and then there's something else in the background that I think is really important to mention is that patients with these kinds of problems are embarrassed because our society doesn't think fondly of these kinds of patients you know binging disorder patients they do tend to be overweight that's obviously a stigma obese obesity is another stigma then there's the opposite in a way it's an opposite by the way for a phenotype standpoint is that anorexia I mean that's another stigma and you know gosh you know not to make this about one sex over another but when when girls are told they're pretty because they're thin it just reinforces this problem and of course you want to complement people and make them feel good about themselves but the problem is that in this vulnerable society that that can lead to problems because people start thinking oh I should be thin or thinner um so I I think that it's a little bit of a societal understanding that our brains are very vulnerable and I think that will really help changing Society is hard and most of society is not you know ill meaning uh it's all done by accident um but that is the society that we live in so if we can try to improve that stigma uh and and be kinder to people in that way I think a lot of these problems would get better people that are obese that feel embarrassed by their obesity it doesn't help it only makes it worse because they give up same thing might be true for anorexics so I really think it's important to consider all of these things and that's why it's so complicated and it would be so hard to do a well-controlled study to understand it better because there's so many of these variables to control for that you really can't control for you might be able to control for them in a mouse's home cage but not not in the society that we live in so so that that's kind of my brief uh sort of summary of how I would answer your first question then I think you know your second question I I sort of take that as well how do you study such a complicated problem in the operating room and and in the clinic because I mentioned the operating room because that's sort of the first step here first we want to we have uh just to clarify we have a nih-funded uh trial approved by the FDA for for research to do this first in human study um we've treated two patients we have four more to come at Penn in um and in this study uh it's something I've been working towards my entire career what we don't know is where in the nucleus accumbens will we identify cells or regions that seem to be uh involved in this sort of reward seeking Behavior I would call it a peditive it's kind of like appetite but the word repetitive is I think a a good word to use what part of the nucleus Cummins is repetitive is the whole thing repetitive probably not it's huge in my world it's huge as a neurosurgeon you know I Target parts of the brain that are three or four millimeters in size the nucleus accumbens is almost a centimeter in size wow I didn't realize it was that large yeah it sort of like reminds me of discussions around the amygdala everyone thinks amygdala fear but Miguel has got a lot of different sub-regions and stimulation of certain areas of the megdala makes people feel great that's right another stimulation of other errors makes them feel terribly afraid exactly and that shouldn't surprise us because you know when we treat patients with Parkinson's disease for Tremor you know if we're in one part of the subthalamic nucleus will help their Tremor if we're in another part of the subthalamic nucleus the neurologist is looking at me like why isn't this working and that shouldn't surprise us we already know that you know two or three millimeters deviation or two or three millimeters away from where we want to be and you might not have the result you want and that's probably also true for these more limbic structures like the amygdala and the nucleus accumbens uh so you know regarding the nucleus accumbens we Traverse some of the nucleus accumbens not all of it in order to place the electrode that we want to use to detect when Cravings are happening for example and to try to block the Cravings from leading to the behavior related to the the reward seeking which is the overeating in this case uh so what we decided to do in the operating room was to actually try to leverage a tool that we use all the time when we take care of patients with Parkinson's so with Parkinson's these a lot of these patients not all have Tremor and so when we place an electrode into this motor structure to try to improve their movement disorder we often can hear Trevor cells and they sound we convert their electrical signal to an audible signal so we can actually hear it um and it sounds kind of like the Tremor looks like the frequency of the signal is the same as the handshaking exactly and so the the patient with Parkinson's is is Trump trembling Yep they're awake and you're poking around in a in a dedicated careful way of course one poke at a time one poke at a time with a very fine wire a set of wires listening to the electrical activity until you you encounter some cells that are sending out electrical activity that's right at a similar frequency exactly and then you can stimulate them or quiet them and see if the Tremor goes away so we we are very confident that when we stimulate that area of in this case the subcollamic nucleus uh we will make that Tremor we will disrupt that Tremor circuit and that Tremor will dissolve and it does that's why Parkinson's is so beautiful and inspiring and uh from us retractable yeah exactly but what is the it makes us feel we understand the brain right at least in that limited way so what is the um analog to Tremor in terms of appetite and desire to binge craving so craving is a term that you know there's probably other terms we could use by the way but that that's the term we've chosen to use for a number of reasons one because people relate with that term people that have binge eating disorder or obesity they if you ask them if they crave the answer will often be yes um if you ask them if they lose control or binge they might not know what you mean or they might not actually feel out of control even when they are um so uh but the word craving is relatable and so we set out to see if we could identify craving cells um in a patient with OCD which is related in fact we target a very similar part of the brain we tried to identify cells related to obsessions and we believe we did do that it was a single case study uh where we tried to optimize where our electrode was placed so we had some proof of concept that we would be able to elicit a sort of disease-specific symptom in the operating room assuming the patient could tolerate being awake not everybody needs to be awake for this procedure but at least for these first and human trials where um we're trying we're trying to establish where in the brain we need to be uh I think this type of approach is really critical and you know by the way none of this has been published uh but I think it's so important for people to know this so I I am willing to share some aspects of what we're trying to do um but uh but that's that's really the first goal of this trial is to identify where the nucleus accumbens we can detect these craving cells so we have to provoke food craving in the operating room that's the first thing how do you do that ah well um there are some uh somewhat validated ways to do that so for example we asked patients to provide pictures of food that they rate very highly as something that they would typically crave and you know depending on the patient it might be something that's very salty it could be very sweet like a donut um oh that's very good I love donuts right Donuts are great you should you should try the Cronut when you're here in New York City I just might I try not to eat that sort of thing for all the reasons just try to stop yourself after that one so if I were one of these patients given the fact that uh the binges come on pretty seldom once a day do you you I imagine you have them come to the the operating room fasted or semi-fasted they're faster okay they're fasted which probably they're probably surgical reasons for wanting that too they kind of have to be right and then you they've you've done the craniotomy removed a patch of skull yes you've lowered the wire into the nucleus accumbens and then they are viewing pictures of food that they crave and thinking of about it do they have olfactory cues smells of cronuts yeah I would love to do the olfactory because we haven't implemented that but that is a great uh thank you for and I'll give you full credit when we do review the grant but it sounds I'm so glad this work is funded because I mean this is what I I'll make this time it's not a joke when I refer to you all uh you neurosurgeons uh as the astronauts of the brain you know this is out on the extreme edge of what we don't know about how the brain functions and this is so far and away different than giving a mouse access to a high high fat food not that I'm not being disparaging in the mouse work but so the person says well I'm the patient in this case so I might say you know I'm hungry a donut sounds really good right now but craving to me is like I you know I'll cross the street cross town be late for my meeting eat three of these yes maybe even hide that from somebody that cares about me that doesn't want me doing this this kind of thing hide it from myself yes these kinds of behaviors I'm projecting and I'm fortunate that um I I have cravings for things in life but uh Donuts are not among the more extreme of them so um so this is all happening in real time and you're listening to the cells the same way you would listen to it and search for Tremor cells exactly same exact tools and you're doing that by um recording from a small population of cells in the area yeah in fact we do get multi-unit activity which is multiple cells uh but we really try to find one a single unit to listen to one neuron yeah because it's just um much easier to understand what that one neuron is doing versus trying to listen to and we also measure local field potential recordings but those are analyzed which is more of a population response thousands of cells kind of a porous of cells exactly um that we measure offline um the device that we use to um sort of treat these patients or intervene uh that we're studying it can't do single unit recordings it's only doing these more population responses so we correlate what we see in the operating room at the single unit level to the population response but we do that all offline um I can explain that in a moment uh but yes so we we try to identify these craving cells and uh because this is a feasibility study um and we can't you know be in the operating I'm searching for hours and hours and hours we do have some sort of we have guidelines that we've set for ourselves that we've uh developed with the NIH or the FDA to make sure that what we're doing is feasible and safe as well um so we we will spend a limited time trying to identify these uh craving cells but another uh sort of um strategy that we think is really important is um the effect of the stimulation so a lot of patients and this gets to sort of your question earlier about what kind of what comes first um you know a lot of people when they when they binge or they lose control over food um or seek drugs that moment of vulnerability is preceded by what we call a a moment of sort of pre-meal negative effect which basically means right before they binge they're feeling down or they feel stressed or anxious and they compensate for that momentary symptom by binging or losing control over food not everybody needs criteria for a binge so I try to specify that we are we are looking at loss of control eating specifically just because the Criterion of a binge is not as critical for us um so um so what we want to be able to do is trigger stimulation when this craving is detected by the device uh but we trigger it only when the craving is there and we believe that if we can sort of temporarily Elevate their mood ever so briefly again this is about five to ten seconds of stimulation only that perhaps that elevation in mood could actually sort of disrupt the craving to binge cycle maybe that's a habit maybe it's not but if you crave and then you binge if we can interrupt that with this moment of feeling good that might be a really good therapy for a patient and in fact when we do deep brain stimulation for obsessive-compulsive disorder we can fairly reliably induce a positive affect the problem is that it's not sustained and the reason it's likely not sustained is because with obsessive-compulsive disorder we treat that condition with continuous stimulation and it's not surprising that over time the effect kind of goes away so when they're in the clinic and we turn the device on our patients feel great and we feel like we've solved the problem but they call us the next day and they're like you know my my depression came back or my OCD hasn't gotten better and my moods back to where it was can you can you get it back to where it was yesterday because that felt great the brain loves homeostatic regulation it does and it does not like to shift patterns regression to the norm right um and I think there's sort of a tolerance effect there um that uh is is limiting the effect of continuous stimulation and actually in a mouse if you do continuous stimulation um the the sort of blockade of binge eating goes away so actually in a mouse we've actually demonstrated um we published this not too long ago in pnas that if you deliver stimulation intermittently and only when sort of a craving signal is detected so to speak um that that X that effect will be the most robust and durable um but if you deliver it continuously actually the benefit goes away over time so I've always encouraged my colleagues to consider more of an episodic stimulation approach rather than continuous deep brain stimulation but of course that that's for these more episodic conditions whereas these more quote unquote State disorders uh as I oversimplified earlier they might need more of a continuous therapy so that's definitely subject for a lot of research in the future um so in any case um the goal in the operating room was to identify a craving cell um deliver stimulation safely but also to capture a moment of elevated mood we were able uh to do that as we we are in our OCD patients as well and also to get an interoperative CAT scan we have devices now in the operating room that allow us to get Imaging in real time they're fabulous tools that we didn't have 10 years ago so we can confirm accuracy um you know where the you can see where the electrode is exactly precisely exactly um you know with 0.5 millimeters of air so super precise uh or as precise as we think we need to be um and we use connectomics so there's a tool in brain Imaging called tractography where we can actually measure circuit connections it's it's an indirect assay but we believe it's powerful it has its uh assumptions but um like anything in in science but we could actually map out where the nucleus accumbens connects to the prefrontal cortex sort of the cortical control inhibitory control pathway and where that pathway intersects with the nucleus accumbens and we can Target that area um structurally so those three goals of the surgery we we aim to set up to accomplish and we believed if we achieved two of those three that we would have a successful result in our in our early trial amazing given that at least to me the non-clination that anorexia is the mirror image of binge eating disorder and at least from what I learned one of the more deadly psychiatric conditions yeah um but also quite common yes um is it possible that nucleus accumbens this so-called reward circuit is also involved in anorexia but somehow it is the resistance to eating the craving of the fasted state or something like that that's being reinforced and and I asked this for two reasons one because I'm genuinely curious about anorexia of observed anorexia in a number of people that I know and it's a striking thing to see somebody just resist food despite all better knowledge of the fact that they're getting quite ill maybe even at risk of death but the other reason is that if in fact nucleus accumbens is the site which can Harbor cells to promote craving and craving of fasted States so to speak then that I think might tell us something fundamental about how the brain works which is that structures don't control functions per se structures control dynamics of interactions sort of like a Orchestra conductor has a certain number of operations that they perform but really their main function is to coordinate the actions of a lot of things not to make sure that the violins always play in a certain way alongside the oboes you can tell I'm not a musician here I actually have an appreciation for the openings yes those usually get left out what's that the obos yeah they usually get ignored my partner plays the elbows oh yeah so yeah I think it's a great analogy by the way um you know I I make this statement it's a little controversial but I actually think people would understand where it's where I'm coming from um across all of these sort of sub-specialties of medicine uh but I actually think especially with obesity remember it's a phenotype that's reflective uh often but not always of a behavior um but if you consider patients that have obesity and they they exhibit some sort of compulsion towards food so they they overeat despite the risk of it I think those kinds of patients are more similar to anorexics than they are different um anorexia and obesity are both phenotypes that are at least in this specific case of obesity and in anorexia a result of a compulsion to either over or under eat despite the risk these types of compulsions are driven by societal pressures brain vulnerabilities that are probably more similar than they are different they just happen to manifest differently why they manifest differently is probably related to each predisposition or perhaps preference that's hard to know like you I have a personal connection to these Eating Disorders anorexia included and uh yeah I think it's um it's very scary and it's a condition that often instills fear in psychiatrists because I think you know not not everybody by the way I mean I have some phenomenal psychiatrists that I work with both at Stanford and at Penn they're also involved in my obesity study that take care of these patients I mean these are heroes but there's a lot of psychiatrists that are not in this domain that find anorexia scared for the reason you said it has the highest mortality of all psychiatric conditions that includes depression because not only can these patients die of suicide but they die of metabolic complications of being underweight um so it's a uh it is it is a scary condition I I relate with that I am trying over time to bridge what I'm doing in obesity and binging disorder to atorexia for two reasons one because I think these problems are more similar than they are different and two because of the need um and I think we're well positioned to sort of tackle anorexia um using similar approaches not identical but but similar approaches um the nucleus accumbens has been studied in patients with anorexia in China actually my postdoc my first postdoc who I had the honor to train uh when I was at Stanford as a neurosurgeon in China when before he came to me actually was involved in a trial of anorexia that had some benefits um and uh there's studies in Europe um and elsewhere that have examined preliminarily uh the effects of deep brain stimulation targeting the nucleus accumbens uh for anorexia colleagues of mine in Canada Andres lozado is a wonderful neurosurgeon scientist has been studying the effects of going after Area 25 which is directly connected to the nucleus accumbens by um you know it's a monosynaptic connection so in a lot of ways you know perhaps delivering stimulation there could could be very similar to delivering stimulation with nucleus accumbens it's all part of one critical inhibitory control circuit he's seen benefits as well um so I I definitely think there's some evidence that this is an area that we need to be studying um I think our more episodic approach with response to stimulation going after sort of a signal in the nucleus accumbens that seems to be related to the compulsion to withhold from eating I think is what we will be trying to accomplish uh in our study it's a right now just being conceived though uh yeah these studies they move so slowly because you have to get a grant that Grant gets reviewed by the NIH six months after you submit it often gets rejected because it's too Innovative and too high risk so then you have to edit it and decrease the risk so it takes by obesity so it took two years to get funded and I worry about that time frame because that's a lot of time for patients with anorexia to suffer that I might be able to help at least in a small sample of patients so um but that that is the nature of how these things go you also have to get FDA approval to do these kinds of things we try to do all of this in parallel it's an enormous undertaking and in a lot of ways we're starting from scratch but in some ways we have some preliminary data to go after this so my hope is in about a year we'll have a similar trial for anorexia at Penn so so more to come on that um and and we're not the only lab that's trying to go after because of the the clear need so what is the status of non-invasive brain stimulation ablation and blocking activity in the brain I get a lot of questions about transcranial magnetic stimulation yeah I've actually had that done as a research subject sure when I was at Berkeley Rich Ivory's lab put a coil on my head I was tapping my finger in concert to a uh a drum beat and then all of a sudden uh because of the stimulation it was impossible for me to keep time yes with the drum beat that's cool cool it's a pretty wild experience to not have motor control and uh than to have motor control returned at the flip of a switch when someone else is controlling the switch it makes it especially Eerie um so my understanding is that transcranial magnetic stimulation is being used to treat depression and a number of other brain syndromes non-invasively so no no drilling through the skull the surgeons don't like that surgeons love to cut and drill with purpose but they do um but uh my understanding is that the spatial Precision isn't that great um ultrasound is something I hear a lot about these days um and my understanding is that ultrasound can allow researchers and clinicians to stimulate specific brain areas perhaps with more Precision um maybe you could just give us a coverage of what those are being used for what are your thoughts on on um uh these forms of non-invasive meaning no no flipping open of a piece of the skull type brain stimulation and blockade of brain activity sure yeah I wanted to clarify also these these surgeries generally don't um by the way require a full craniotomy it's usually just a small opening about the size of a dime in the bone so just just to clarify but that's painless too right uh well usually without pain yeah there's a little bit of scalp numbing we give a scalp block and the patients are getting IV sedations so they in general don't feel anything and if they do they tell me and we give them more local anesthetic but that's they're usually asleep during that part so it's minimally invasive but you know in a lot of ways there's no such thing as a minimally invasive procedure in the brain you know it's a it's kind of so glad to hear you say that oh no I you know I'm I'm not one of those neurosurgeons that you've probably encountered and we have mutual friends that uh and you know these mutual friends are some of my favorite people in neurosurgery and they probably actually think more like me than than not but there are neurosurgeons that you're absolutely right and this is true for all surgeries they really in a lot of ways they think what they do is sort of the ground truth or is it closer to the ground truth and I I get that um uh you know probing with purpose I I actually really like that I'm going to use that if you don't mind um just it's just describing what you do so yeah but I I actually have I've always said this I've said it publicly I've said it to my boss I've said this to my team um we need to embrace non-invasive approaches um some of them are a little fluffy um fluffy in that we don't understand how they work we don't necessarily understand how deep brains too much works by the way so um but because we don't know exactly how they work they're not as precise as we would like them to be so we have work to do there and I actually think that work is doable and actually underway um you know at Stanford we have great collaborators that that I think are doing this people like Nolan Williams and Connor Liston at Cornell and others um so we uh I think that TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation it is FDA approved for depression by the way it's also FDA approved for OCD and for nicotine addiction where do they put the coil for those three or more or less yeah so they put it over was always on the scalp and uh over the frontal lobe and there's different parts of the frontal lobe that have been demonstrated to be a little better or a little bit worse um but what the FDA has approved for depression I believe is uh similar to what's been approved for uh OCD but for addiction I believe it is a different Target but we'd have to ask our our TMS experts on that can they direct the transcranial magnetic stimulation deep below the cortex they try uh and we're we're actually studying this in OCD patients now um I as a part of our invasive trial uh where we are trying to pull patients from a TMS trial that's in parallel to what we're doing um all funded by the foundation for OCD research where we believe we can use TMs to to define a circuit that if modulated improves OCD albeit temporarily and in those patients if it's temporary they would be appropriate for an invasive study so something we're actively working on I've always believed that neurosurgeons need to be part of the discussion with these non-invasive approaches we don't need to do them but I think we can help make them more precise and to probe non-invasively with purpose rather than this more kind of I don't know a non-invasive blast effect kind of you know I I just can't imagine how that is going to be as effective as probing with purpose but you can do that not invasively as well and I think we need to do better uh in that way I do believe that's possible and I think people are actively trying to do it um getting deep in the brain with TMS I think will always be hard but you can get there indirectly by using connectivity assays and targeting superficial structures that have High connectivity to deep structures so for example um perhaps one day there will be a TMS Target for anorexia and obesity if we are scratching the surface with invasive approaches to these problems we we're even doing less with the brain stimulation um so we have so much work to do there eating disorders and TMS have been so um sort of scarcely studied or or there have been so such little research done in that in that space and so it is an area that we need to to work on um for the obvious reason for example in a patient with anorexia just thinking practically you know placing a device in a patient who is significantly underweight might not be the best approach you know wound erosion and issues like that could come up so developing a non-invasive approach I think is critical the problem is where do we target and so the only way to answer that I think reliably is to accept that we have to get into the Brain before we're out of the brain and with these kinds of conditions we're only just starting to get into the brain you know so I I worry that we're a long way away from a non-invasive approach that really works consistently um sorry to interrupt um I want to make sure we touch on ultrasound because yes um but um his historically it seemed that there was a bit more permission for people to probe around in the human brain I I've um sometimes refer the podcast to some of these papers that were done uh allowing patients to self-stimulate in the brain these are work done in the in the 60s and now his name Escapes Me Robert um anyway there's a couple papers published in science allowing patients to stimulate a couple different brain areas asking which ones they preferred and I was always shocked and slightly intrigued by the fact that the the brain area that all three of these patients who I don't think had any syndromes I think they volunteered for these experiments I don't think you could do this anymore yes um regulatory yeah yeah I think uh was not the same as it is now things have changed um fortunately but they um all three of them seem to like some midline thalamic structure which for those listening it's just area kind of in the in the dead center of the brain um more or less that evoked a sense of kind of frustration and anger which surprised me because I would have thought oh it's Robert Heath his experiments rather than patients preferring to stimulate areas that evoke laughter or Joy or a feeling of drunkenness or Delight it also explains a lot of what I observe in social media this sort of um kind of people repeatedly engaging in battles um that are kind of trivial it seems like frustration and anger might have its own reward circuitry anyway I don't want to go too far down that rabbit hole but it um it's a deep one it's a deep one and and kind of gets to our nature yeah you know as humans and what we find interesting or rewarding but you know the ability the inability to probe around the brain in a safe way without the need for somebody to be very sick would be I think would be enormously powerful and at least in my mind if I were in charge which I'm not um would offer the opportunity to really come to an understanding about how the human brain works without all these issues of how to translate from Mouse studies and again there's huge value to animal studies as we both agree but um so many of the things that we want to know about the human brain involve asking the person hey do you what do you feel when that set of neurons is stimulated and what don't you feel uh and a mouse we can ask and ask but they're not going to tell us something they do tell us they're not going to tell us in English so um how do we overcome this challenge but first ultrasound or if you prefer after ultrasound what is ultrasound going to be really useful towards solving these clinical issues and these basic issues yeah so I think um let's start with ultrasound then we'll come back to it um so ultrasound right now transcranial magnetic magnetic resonance guided Focus ultrasound so um uh this this is an FDA approved method to deliver an ablation to the brain non-invasively there are researchers myself included that are trying to use transcranial magnetic guided magnetic resonance guided Focus ultrasound or MRI guided Focus ultrasound to use it in a modulatory way not just as an ablation but to drive neuronal activity or inhibit it perhaps we're still learning how to do that um there are trials that are trying to understand if you can use ultrasound to open the blood-brain barrier so you can deliver a medication to that specific area uh perhaps for a brain tumor or something like that so um it's a very exciting field um and it is FDA approved for Tremor right now and so I actually do it routinely um for patients with Tremor with Parkinson's or a central Tremor and so um I I love doing it it's uh often just kind of a miracle because there's no incision I don't have to place an electrode into the brain to achieve a similar result how early into the pathology of Parkinson's can someone think about approaching this so for instance if somebody has a parent or a sibling and they're developing some resting Tremor yeah obviously they should talk to a neurologist but a neurosurgeon but this non-invasive approach could be incredible for them as opposed to just take only taking drugs to increase dopamine levels yeah so um depending on the reason you have Tremor would dictate the kind of medication you would use it could be Parkinson's but if it's not it might be a central Trevor by the way essential tremors 10 times as common as Parkinson's really essential tremor is the most common neurologic condition in patients over the age of 70. we often aren't aware of that people with essential Trevor feel they have their forgotten disease because there's no Michael J fox for a central Tremor I sent a letter sorry is it essential tremor or or essential um I actually sent a letter to Bill Clinton I I've observed uh Tremor in him and I think he's actually disclosed that he has it and I hoped he'd become a champion for for patients with a central Tremor um Sandra Day O'Connor does as well she's also public about it but I I was not able to get them eager to become the champion for this condition but like Michael J fox these patients need a champion like that um but unfortunately it's a bit of a forgotten disease nevertheless because of the FDA approval of focus ultrasound for Tremor um another's trying to get some attention for sure and uh it's fabulously effective for these patients it treats patients on one side usually their dominant hand or their worst hand and it um it really speaks to the fact that wow you can deliver non-invasively an ablation to the brain in a hypothesized zone that we think is related to the problem at hand and at least with Tremor it works really well could this be effective for psychiatric disease obesity Eating Disorders uh well um perhaps uh actually that would be the ideal the problem is we don't know where to do the ablation um there is a trial that we would like to do for OCD where we would deliver an ablation to the same area of the brain that we've been delivering ablations to for years for patients with OCD and it helps a bit that's called a capsulotomy um but really the outcome is probably going to be about the same it's a nice method because it's non-invasive but we need to find a new Target for these for these conditions and because of the common denominator of the urge despite the risk sort of that compulsion um yeah perhaps it could be the same Target I don't know um but I would argue we need to do these modulatory experiments either with a device or with uh invasive recordings uh to better understand where these problems are coming from to Define where we should do an ultrasound treatment so um you're right historically without much regulation we've we've probed the brain um the problem we can't learn a lot from those experiments now uh well in this way at least we don't know exactly where those electrodes were we didn't have MRI scanning or high quality cat scanning to to know where those electrodes were with certainty where and we know two or three millimeters matters and we also didn't have the tools to place electrodes in a precise way back then so unfortunately we can't learn a lot from those experiments right now so we're sort of redesigning them and there is a way to do it now um patients with epilepsy benefit from this all the time there has been a revolution in America it was in Europe before it was in America where we would do stereo encephalography which is basically like doing an EEG of patients with epilepsy but with invasive electrodes and we would Place tiny little wires less than a millimeter in diameter all throughout the brain into parts of the brain that we believe are involved in seizures and we would admit the patients to the hospital and figure out where the seizures were starting and propagating and then um you know we could stimulate these electrodes to see if there was a symptom that was important and I try to identify a region that we thought we could either remove surgically ablate with a laser or put a stimulator in it perhaps that's commonplace now for epilepsy um and it works extremely well and it's very safe of course it's still a brain procedure but the uh the complication rate is surprisingly low quite honestly for the amount of electors that we place um and it's extremely well tolerated most these patients leave the hospital and they don't even feel like they've had surgery so uh there's actually a lot of interest in using that procedure to study mental health disorders we are trying to do it for patients with obsessive compulsive disorder we're awaiting an FDA decision on that uh but actually I credit uh our colleagues at Baylor and at UCSF for for studying this uh already we have fabulous colleagues at UCSF that have studied depression using this type of approach a mutual friend of ours uh you know Eddie Chang who's a wonderful friend and colleague somebody I've emulated for many years as well uh and and the the Psychiatry team at UCSF have worked together on this sort of bringing together the epilepsy technique and the Psychiatry expertise to study how we could better Target electrodes in depression and I'll tell you if they have a consistent Target perhaps there becomes an ultrasound Target um but right now the approach is a bit more reversible because you can always shut that electrode off or even remove the electrode if perhaps it's not in the optimal location to treat the depression uh but actually after a large volume of cases perhaps they could pool that data to develop a a new ultrasound Target for depression I think that would be fabulous and probably is their long-term goal um not to speak for them but that would be something that I I'm sure is on their radar and a Baylor is trying to do the same thing for depression their approaches are a little bit different but a similar tool to try to understand uh depression and you know we're working with all these types of uh colleagues some of these are our friends to try to to bring this to OCD as well and you know it makes sense to try to do this for addiction and obesity and anorexia you might ask well why aren't you doing this for obesity right now in uh in our in our study and the reason is that um we've developed a target for obesity uh and binge eating disorder uh developed out of mice that we believe um is relevant for the human State because you can model this problem in a mouse a bit better than you can model depression or OCD so we feel like we can rely on the pre-clinical studies more whereas with these perhaps more I don't want to say more complicated but more human mental health conditions that are hard to model in a mouse you really have to study it in the human and you can perhaps start in an epileptic patient a patient that has electrodes and try to provoke a depressed state or study epileptics like Dr Chang has done that have comorbid depression for example and that can really validate this approach as well but in the end it's it's getting into the human brain that we need to do in the disease specifically that will eventually lead to a non invasive approach either a lesion or modulatory approach modulatory would be like TMS or lesion approach would be with ultrasound couldn't agree more meanwhile because there are many many millions of people suffering from depression Eating Disorders Parkinson's and essential tremor Etc well first of all I should say based on everything you've told me thus far it's amazing to me that any pharmacologic treatments work because of how systemic they are and impacting serotonin serotonergic neurons over here in dopaminergic neurons over there and not targeting any specific batch of cells it makes perfect sense as to why all the side effects exist but earlier you said something that really grabbed my attention I want to come back to which is that if people can be made to feel or make themselves feel just a little bit better a little less anxious just prior to a craving episode or a binge episode maybe even if people can become better at detecting their own internal States and when they're kind of veering toward a binge or veering toward using a drug or maybe even veering towards suicidal thinking I based on what you said earlier that those kind of um pre-behavioral States the kind of drift on the on the steering um those sound like powerful levels of awareness at least for now until we have specific sites in the brain that we can Target non-invasive methods that could be deployed to millions and millions of people seems like that awareness seems like maybe among the best tools that people could develop yes 100 agree with you you know so for the person with OCD or uh who suffers from anorexia or binge eating disorder and to their clinicians you know I I just want to highlight that you said that I mean I'm not again I'm not a clinician I always say this I don't prescribe anything I profess things um and uh but awareness of one's thinking seems immensely powerful in this context yeah um and after all it is the clinical probe that you use because the if let's say the patient were to lie to you about their experience of what happens in their mind when you stimulate you could basically the whole thing the whole surgery the whole procedure could go badly wrong so it's it's up to the patient to be of course honest with you in their their incentivized to do that but to be honest with themselves about ah you know I've gone all day without a binge but you know the the smell of a donut or the thought of a donut is starting to have a particular Allure that awareness seems like an incredibly powerful thing to own and to and to build and cultivate yes I've always thought that if we could improve awareness we can improve outcomes I think that's probably true for many of these patients the problem I think comes down to the fact that some of these patients are so resistant to treatment and the patients that we see as a surgeon for example are the patients that they've tried cognitive behavioral therapy certainly have tried medications they've tried Behavioral Management they are aware of their problem and they've shown that to us they can tell us when they're craving but despite the craving and despite being involved in this invasive brain surgical trial highly you know first in human novel study which I think will have a positive effect but it's still experimental uh they still can't stop themselves so there sort of as made aware as could possibly be did I use grammar there correctly I think so um they're as aware as they could possibly be and they still lose control we've had this studied in the lab so we will bring patients to the laboratory with this implanted device to to try to provoke this electrographic electrical signal that can be detected by the actual device that will stimulate them when they're at home but before we actually initiate stimulation we want us to see can this device detect this craving cell signal which is going to be different than what we saw in the operating room because that's a single cell but these devices these electrodes are about a millimeter in diameter instead of like a tenth of a millimeter which is what we use in the operating room um so they're they're only hearing or or detecting I should say thousands of cells responses and we actually have a way to provoke binges it's called a mood provocation it's very well well very well validated it's a little bit like provoking seizures in the epilepsy monitoring unit but here in these sort of uh psychiatric monitoring unit or the the food monitoring unit uh we we actually have a psychiatrist and eating disorder Specialists come and induce a mood that is related to each patient's sort of self-described binge episode so the psychiatrist comes in and provokes yes a feeling that can evoke the negative behavior that's exactly right so that we can video and synchronize the video to the brain signal recordings um the patients all wear an eye tracker so we can see what they're eating at all times and what they're looking at specifically and that allows us to have the best temporal resolution possible to understand what is happening right before the bite and even under video surveillance through a one day one-way mirror in a laboratory setting when patients are very well aware that their there to be studied if they're going to binge they still do and we believe they do because they just can't control it as aware as they are of it and it's probably because they're the most severe so I think if we can improve awareness not just the societal awareness that I was talking about earlier but the patient awareness around their problem I think that could be a powerful way to help so many of these patients and that's sort of the role of cognitive behavioral therapy um the problem with cognitive behavioral therapy or should say the limitation of it I actually don't have any problem with it I think it's a wonderful treatment um is that if you stop it many of these patients go back to their old behaviors I don't say old habits but it might be a habit but the old behaviors and so um that's the problem is it's not necessarily lasting in the absence of continued cognitive behavioral therapy some people can benefit from it long term but some can't uh but I think in in in the less severe patients improving awareness key but in these really refractory patients this is this is kind of like this is the disease despite the awareness they can't control themselves and that's what we're trying to restore is that improved ability to control their behavior do you think there's a role for machines and artificial intelligence here uh there are a couple Laboratories up at the University of Washington that are using particular signature patterns of within voice to try and help suicidal people who are suicidally depressed know when they're headed towards an episode before they even can consciously know so this gets right down issues of Free Will and whether or not machines can be smarter than we are but you know one could argue that some of the search algorithms on Google and other search engines are actually more aware of our preferences than we are um basically what these are these are devices that are listening to people talk all day they're also paying attention to patterns of breathing and how well people slept Etc integrating a huge number of cues and then signaling somebody with a you know a yellow light like you know you're headed into a depressive episode the person might say I feel fine or I feel pretty good this is kind of Baseline state for me and they say ah this is where you were preceding the last episode that took you down a deep dark trench and it took months to get out of um I wonder whether or not some of these devices could help with the sorts of things that we're talking about today yeah I think so um I've always said we have to get in the Brain before we get out of it and if we get in the brain and understand what these signals look like we'll know what those non-invasive signals are I think it's possible that we are scientifically sophisticated enough to use machine learning um and sort of this kind of botan technique to anticipate when somebody is going to be highly impulsive you know suicide it's the most dangerous impulse it's something that is immensely a focus of the lab is impulsivity we've talked mostly about compulsion compulsion being you know going after a reward or the urge despite the risk um impulsivity is is similar but different it's it's kind of going after something um a little bit if you if you model impulsivity in a mouse it's you know related to you know going after a food reward without the sort of paired tone that your the mouse is supposed to wait for the mouse doesn't want to wait anymore they just go after the food um I've been that Mouse yeah we've all been oh we could all relate with this uh to a certain extent against the Spectrum so um so in any case I uh non-sequitur but I I I certainly think that there is a way to use our own body's physiology to anticipate when these impulses are coming online how best to do that I think we're just scratching the surface but these are the kinds of solutions we need these are some of these problems are of epidemic proportions the largest public health problems in this country in this world obesity opiate crisis depression suicidality I mean that's like a third of our country maybe more probably more and think about it and a colleague of ours at Stanford Psychiatry told me something that still just blows my mind which is that something like 75 percent of the antidepressant and anti-anxiety medication that exists in the world is consumed in the United States it's amazing which is I mean that's an outrageous number yeah we do have an obsession in this country for pharmacy you know and the pharmaceutical industry is very powerful here and probably related some aspect of capitalism I'm capitalistic and just like everybody else but um I do worry about that a little bit um but you know we tend to over prescribe and I think we as patients tend to over want medication we like quick Solutions and sometimes medications provided sometimes not or they're often just abandoned depends on the problem of course so um but but I I agree that we need scalable Solutions but you know I'm a neurosurgeon I'm only going to be able to treat the most severe of patients with these problems you know you know we've only done about 200 000 deep brain stimulation surgeries ever so I mean the problem we're talking about here is 50 million Americans there's no possibility that surgeons can address that problem but we could help Inspire an initiative to go after that kind of problem or help make it more rigorous because the last thing we need is a you know some sort of wearable fancy tool that you know uh waste people's money and time you know we need real therapies for these things not that these devices that we're discussing are not uh I think actually there's lots of promise we use machine learning in the lab all the time I'm not a an electrical engineer or the computational neuroscientist doing this type of work I I just helped develop the hypotheses around it but um and help fundraise around it but I I definitely think there's a future for it I just I I suspect we're scratching the surface on how best to do it let's talk about your hands yeah sure all the neurosurgeons I know are you know very Faithfully protect their hands because talking about insurance is too expensive that's it right but I'm guessing that you you all are not the ones to reach into the garbage disposal even if your eye is on the switch to make sure that it isn't going to get turned on they're just too precious they are your livelihood yeah um and earlier we talked about deadlifts uh there are other forms of exercise um they're things like tennis um they're they're drawing and painting a full range of things that one can do with their hands use your imagination sure um is it true that neurosurgeons don't do any uh really like heavy grip activity because it can refine the motor motor circuits in the brain and elsewhere that can throw off their neurosurgery game I would say that many neurosurgeons uh avoid activities that put their hands at risk um another one by the way you know there's a uh an annual uh softball tournament uh that uh neurosurgeons come to in New York City in Central Park with a very softball no I'm just kidding well actually it's actually a very you know typical hard softball I don't know why they call it softball and uh actually a two close colleagues of mine have gotten injured at that tournament maybe this is a it's also I must say and here I'm poking fun but for those of you who are going in the medical profession it's also one of the more uh how should I say this well I'm just going to say it there's a steep hierarchy of training in neurosurgery yes um there's a certain harshness that's been conveyed to me about the training uh much like Astronaut training to be totally fair and so maybe this is a tactic to uh to weed out either the younger or the older generation it says Evolution right we uh have to evolve and we need in medical the week I guess well I I could say that one of the individuals that got injured is one of the more senior surgeons that I work with now and is one of the best athletes that I know and he's definitely not weak but you can get injured playing these Sports and uh that being said I can tell you briefly is um I think that you know it's funny my my mother came to me recently she's she has osteopenia and she told me her doctor told her she's not allowed to do deadlifts and I was like okay um that's fine uh I'm not telling you you should do deadlifts I just don't exactly understand the relationship but um I can say that I do think I'll give you a little story here the reason why I'm being a little hesitant to to confirm that I agree with you on the deadlifts is I um when I was operating this is when I was at Stanford University operating and uh we as I mentioned earlier we get an interoperative CAT scan uh to confirm accuracy of our lectures I do this for all of my surgeries when I was reviewing that CAT scan the x-ray technician looked at me and said whispered into my ear he's like your posture really bad embarrassing your physical posture while doing your surgeries yeah and I looked at him and I kind of wanted to say I won't curse but yeah exactly I've been doing it intermittently during our conversation because he made me realize that I really did have bad posture and um we kind of had a little brief aside and he I learned he was a personal trainer and uh his name was Zach and he uh you know he said to me you know your posture is weak because or your posture is poor because you're weak you need to strengthen your body and strengthen your core I was like how he's like power lifting and I'm like I'm a little hesitant to do this and I'll tell you I started very slowly and I can't prescribe power lifting to everybody for the exact reason you said um and I've gotten hurt doing it by the way but I do think I I wish I started a little younger and I would argue that with close supervision and very well if you are if you have a very experienced trainer which I would argue if you're a neurosurgeon or an astronaut uh or or have a highly specialized profession where you need your your limbs to to function dentists things like that um if you're going to take something on like this it really needs to be extremely carefully supervised and I can tell you that you know my trainer had a profound impact on my life and my posture and my my physical health and so uh we did deadlift I'll admit so when you brought it up I kind of chuckled to myself but uh yes I I have gotten mildly hurt deadlifting but it was when I was doing it by myself and I was kind of cocky and I wasn't paying attention but when I was with him and he was all over my technique it actually was the most efficient way for me to feel stronger and it improved my posture uh significantly and I I miss him since I left California I I have a new trainer in Philadelphia who's great but uh uh and and I still deadlift occasionally with him but I uh I I can say I I am opposed to deadlifting callously but if you're extremely well monitored by it experienced um personal trainer or weight lifter uh I think it could be a great exercise great I love to be wrong in this case um because I'm a huge proponent and on the podcast I go on and on I mean they're so there's so much data now pointing the fact that 100 and 180 to 200 minutes of Zone 2 cardio kind of jogging cycling swimming type behavior is very healthy for everybody and we should all be doing that at least that yes I need to as well and that resistance training on the order of you know six hard sets per muscle group per week are it's really important just to offset deterioration of muscles and I'm learning skeletal function and tendon strength and that's just to maintain we're not talking about all out sets to Absolute failure but as you point out with um with proper form so even the neurosurgeons are doing this which I think is is wonderful yes as a final question um but one that I think really or maybe second to final question earlier I commented on the remarkable calm at least perceived calm of neurosurgeons it could be caused or could be effective the training but it's obvious to me why one would want that trait in their neurosurgeon um I wouldn't want to hyperactive certainly not an impulsive neurosurgeon given that the margins of error are so so tiny the spatial scale and probably on the temporal scale too yes and you don't want people doing things in time that are or being spontaneous at all do you think that this branch of medicine that you're in selects for people that at least can know how to control any kind of fluctuations in autonomic growl so they can calm themselves in real time and here's a specific question when I've never operated on the human brain although I've had the privilege of being in the operating room and seeing this with some of our experiments with people in VR it's a remarkable thing I wish for everybody that would get this experience at some point not hopefully as a patient unless they have a need but to observe it but what was just striking to me is the various uh stereotype behaviors of the surgeon and when I did surgeries as a graduate student as a postdoc in the brains of other types of animals I would find for instance that if I started to tremble a little bit if I tapped my left foot that my hand would stabilize a bit that there's this kind of need to move the body or one feels the impulse maybe that's my my Tourette's like compulsions again but but that one can kind of um siphon off some of that energy into another limb so that you could remain precise so are these sorts of things that I'm talking about are maybe it's entirely my imagination but are these the sorts of things that one learns as a neurosurgeon how to still the body and still the Mind do you have a meditative practice when you go into the operating room if you had a particularly challenging morning or or a poor night's sleep do you have tools that you use to calibrate yourself and get yourself into the Zone I think this would be very interesting for people to get some insight into even if they don't want to be a neurosurgeon yeah I completely agree and I I appreciate the earlier uh reference to neurosurgeons as uh astronauts because I've also heard you know us compared to Cowboys before and it's a little bit less flattering I uh you know some of what we do surgically really does require a substantial amount of confidence um and that confidence hopefully comes from years of training and experience um you always worry that the confidence is sort of misplaced and that that is problematic luckily I you so rarely see that because our training is so rigorous you know we have a board of uh American Board of neurological surgeons that uh sort of allows and and assesses surgeons to continue practice and holds us to a really high bar I do think it tends to attract a certain personality uh in my sub-specialty as a like a deep brain stimulation surgeon we call it stereotactic and functional neurosurgery you know some people have likened us to the neurologists with a scalpel um we we tend to be a bit more intellectual um uh maybe maybe bedside manner is a little bit friendlier um and then there's the vascular neurosurgeon who doesn't sleep and so they're not as friendly there's the spine surgeons who operate the most and so they're you know busy busy busy uh we there are some of these kind of reputations going around but I I agree with you there's a sort of a common feature of of a calmness across neurosurgeons and you know there's some of my obviously my favorite people my closest friends um and I I can relate with them probably because of that um sort of a big picture they don't get sort of uh flustered uh they they tend to are they tend to be really good at figuring out how to have quality time because we work really hard our hours are uh significant and so the time with our families our friends is less than we would like it to be um that obviously that's true for people who work hard across any profession but definitely true for neurosurgeons and I think that we're very good at figuring out how to make that time high quality um you know even just texting with some of my friends um in that are that are neurosurgeons a great friend of mine just became chairman at Duke and just connecting with him by text which takes seconds you know you feel we feel connected you know and I I think that's a that's a trait amongst neurosurgeons we sort of know how to cut to the chase in a way um and prioritize our time it's a skill that we probably have innately but is also part of the training you know when we are interns now there's a lot of work hour regulations that is probably quite appropriate by the way um I I think our hours before were bordering uh on on uh on not necessarily let's just say they were not ideal for mental health and sleep which we know are very important components um certainly we had no time for meditation I definitely did not I wish I did um now knowing what I know about meditation my wife's a health coach I I get it I see it I I practice it myself with her um I see the value I wish I had that tool when I was in training because it's stressful um you know you even with workout restrictions we still don't sleep very much we're still at work a lot about 80 hours you know a week throughout the entire career uh there are times when it's more because after training there's no work hour restrictions so sometimes I feel like as faculty we get abused and the trainees are a little bit more protected now it definitely was the reverse at one point and that's also a huge problem probably more of a problem um and I'm joking a little bit I don't necessarily think we're abused but certainly our hours are significant um but you know they come a bit more here and there you know on my or days when I'm operating those are long days but on the days that I'm lucky enough to be a researcher you know uh like you those days tend to be a bit gentler unless I'm great writing those days can be long as you know um so I so to answer your question I do think we're we're sort of self-selected for it but I also think it's part of the training you know we because of the long hours that we're in the hospital we're taking care of sick patients and we have sort of a type a mentor approach where our mentors are hard on us you know we learn to cope with our stress and be efficient and prioritize things despite the stress of it all and I think you know we take from that this sort of calm demeanor and you know perhaps um perhaps it's just amplifies what we were probably drawn to because before we come to neurosurgery we want rotated neurosurgery we might spend a month you know pretending to be a neurosurgeon learning from residents and and faculty that are practicing the specialty but you know prior to actually starting your training you you never experience anything like being a resident in neurosurgery uh the stress and the volume of patients that you have to take care of and the long nights it can be quite Lonely by the way um you develop friends in the hospital but sometimes you're on your own when you're on call and you have backup you can call your chief resident or you're attending but you really have to learn how to take care of patients yourself you obviously form teams with nurses and staff and things like that and other residents but it can be lonely it can be really challenging and I think because of those experiences that all neurosurgeons go through uh you know we tend to have this sort of unflappable personality that perhaps we started with a bit compared to the average person but the training definitely amplifies it and do you have tools that you implement if you ever feel that you're getting slightly off-center I do now um you know I when I was in training I actually remember in my second year so most neurosurgery programs when you're a junior resident in some ways that's your toughest year not in every way um it is your toughest year because you're you're young and you're inexperienced and you don't know what you don't know and and that that's why it's such a tough year because you have to learn a lot very quickly for patient safety reasons for self-survival you know you just have to learn a lot um and you're on call by yourself in the hospital and it's uh it's a real Challenge and I think that you know I you know personally I I gained a lot of weight during that year the only exercise I did consciously was taking the stairs I refused to take the elevator and I was at uh Penn at HUB where I currently practice now and I remember I would see patients anywhere from sort of the ground floor where the Chama Bay was or the ER all the way up to Founders 12th 12th floor and I would never take an elevator that was my rule for the year because I knew I would not have time to exercise but I would just take the stairs and in the beginning of the year I would be a little winded when I got to the 12th floor but by the end of the year actually it didn't really phase me it became a great Habit to have um the problem with that though is I paired that unfortunately with you know a lot of sleepless nights or not enough sleep let's say and I had this terrible habit of drinking coffee late at night and I would put a lot of sugar in it and it was sort of the only way for me to get a quick you know um a quick bout of energy that for some reason I prioritized at that time obviously knowing that I would crash which I always did and I always kind of regretted it but I still did it anyway and I I attribute that to poor decision making inexperience um and perhaps being a little vulnerable like I think we all are that's why I relate with a lot of the research that I do and I remember I got married in my third year the year after my second year and my wife and I or my fiance at the time we started going to the gym together in the morning and my hours were a little better so I would actually be able to exercise before I operated that day and I operated almost every day as a third year resident so I remember I'd get to the gym really early in three months I lost like 20 pounds and I wasn't trying to lose weight I just was sleeping better and taking care of myself and I remember when we got married I I you know I fit into a tuxedo that I had in college or it would have fit me in college it actually was a new tuxedo admittedly but it was the same size as my tuxedo from college so I I think that um I've always related with the problems that our our patients have to a certain extent and you know I when I've been most vulnerable which is what I was working the hardest with the least amount of sleep I I related with it the most and yes exercise for me has always been my tool um more recently exercise some some you know strength training I think is important compared with cardio um I don't do enough of either um but I definitely do some and that helps meditation helps me a bit we I do that every night before I go to sleep um you know I I use an app for it it's probably not the best way to do meditation but if it keeps you doing it regularly that's the best way to do it Andrew I couldn't agree with you more you know it's one of those things where I look forward to it every night and you know sometimes my wife falls asleep and I come to bed a little later and I whisper I'm like are you okay if I turn the app on so you know she does the same to me because I think we both value it and I think that's that that's been very helpful I didn't have that tool probably what I needed it most but I have it now and it's very helpful I really appreciate you sharing those tools a number of people uh I'm guessing out there might want to become neurosurgeons I really believe that in hearing today's conversation that you will spark an interest in medicine and or neurosurgery um well certainly you need to be a a physician before you can become a neurosurgeon so end neurosurgery in some cases and that would be beautiful and I predict that will be happen that will happen excuse me as a consequence of um what you've shared today I really appreciate your mentioning of the um emphasis and appreciation on quality time uh I very much see this as quality time I know that our listeners were will as well really want to thank you for taking time out of your not just immensely busy but very important schedule because again the work that you're doing is really out there on that cutting I don't want to say bleeding edge because in this context it's not going to sound right but on that extreme Cutting Edge of what we understand about how the human brain works and how it can be repaired um they're doing marvelous work will Point people to various places they can find you online and should they need your the help of your clinic to to your clinic and your laboratory as well so on behalf of everybody and and myself as well thank you so so very much I'm honored thank you so much for having me thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr Casey Halpern about the use of deep brain stimulation and novel Technologies for the treatment of eating disorders and movement disorders of various kinds for those of you that are interested in learning more about Dr halpern's research please see the links in our show note captions that include links to his laboratory website and to his Clinic as well as various research Publications that are available in complete form as downloadable PDFs if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five star review if you have questions for us or comments or feedback of any kind please put that in the comment section on YouTube we do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much today but in many previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we talk about supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people drive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone optimization the huberman Lab podcast has partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to see the supplements of the huberman Lab podcast has partnered with momentos on you can go to live momentous spelled ous so livemomentis.com huberman and there you'll see a number of the supplements that we talk about regularly on the podcast I should just mention that that catalog of supplements is constantly being updated if you haven't already signed up for the neural network newsletter this is a monthly huberman Lab podcast newsletter in which you get some brief show note summaries as well as a lot of actionable tools in summary form many people find these very useful for distilling out the vast amount of information that we cover on the podcast so for instance if you go to hubermanlab.com com you can click on the menu click to neural network newsletter or simply newsletter and you can sign up just give us your email we do not share your email with anybody and again it's completely zero cost we also have examples of previous newsletters that you can download immediately without having to sign up for anything and decide whether or not you want to sign up again that's the neural network newsletter at hubermanlab.com if you're not already following us on social media we are huberman lab on Instagram on Twitter on Facebook and on LinkedIn and especially on Instagram and on Twitter I cover many of the tools that are discussed on the human Lab podcast but also a lot of Science and science-based tools not covered on the huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman lab on all platforms once again thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr Casey Halpern I hope you learned as much as I did and as always thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 255 ---
Video ID: uXs-zPc63kM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXs-zPc63kM
Title: Nicotine’s Effects on the Brain & Body & How to Quit Smoking or Vaping | Huberman Lab Podcast #90
Published: 2022-09-19 12:00:39 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain how nicotine impacts the brain and body, including its potent ability to enhance attention, focus, and alertness, increase blood pressure and metabolism and reduce appetite. I discuss nicotine’s ability to increase the action of neurochemicals, including dopamine, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine and activate sympathetic (alertness-promoting) neural circuits. I also discuss common nicotine delivery methods, such as cigarettes, vaping, dip, and snuff, and how they each create their own unique experience and how they, but not nicotine itself, cause cancer and other adverse health effects. I also explain science-based tools to permanently quit smoking cigarettes or vaping, including peer-reviewed clinical hypnosis tools, antidepressants, and alternative nicotine replacement (patches, lozenges, gums etc.). As nicotine is one of the most widely used substances with billions of users — most of whom report wanting to quit — this episode ought to be of interest to former/current nicotine users, those who want to quit smoking or vaping and/or those interested in learning the biology behind how nicotine impacts the brain and body. 

#HubermanLab #Science #Health

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Predictors of smoking abstinence following a single-session restructuring intervention with self-hypnosis: https://bit.ly/3LoU0gA
Effect of hypnotic suggestion on cognition and craving in smokers: https://bit.ly/3xtUwEn
Pharmacological Approach to Smoking Cessation: An Updated Review for Daily Clinical Practice: https://bit.ly/3eTkfiV

Resources
Reveri: https://www.reveri.com

Timestamps
00:00:00 Nicotine 
00:02:47 Momentous Supplements 
00:03:41 Tool: Brief Daily Meditation & Focus 
00:05:59 The Arrow Model of Focus, Alpha GPC & Garlic Supplements
00:10:43 Thesis, InsideTracker, ROKA 
00:14:35 Nicotine Effects vs. Methods of Delivery, Acetylcholine
00:19:55 Where is Nicotine Found? Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors
00:25:12 Nicotine & Effects on the Brain: Appetite, Dopamine & GABA
00:30:58 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:32:11 Nicotine, Acetylcholine & Attentional “Spotlighting”
00:37:29 Nicotine, Norepinephrine & Alertness/Energy 
00:41:10 Nicotine & Effects on Appetite & Metabolism
00:46:47 Nicotine & Effects on Body: Sympathetic Tone
00:51:29 Nicotine & Cognitive Work vs. Physical Performance 
00:55:08 Nicotine Delivery Methods & Side Effects, Young People & Dependency 
00:58:35 Smoking, Vaping, Dipping & Snuffing: Carcinogens & Endothelial Cells 
01:02:34 Smoking, Vaping, Dipping & Snuffing: Negative Impacts on Lifespan & Health
01:09:23 How to Quit Smoking, Nicotine Cravings & Withdrawal
01:13:56 Vaping & Nicotine, Rates of Effect Onset, Dopamine, Addiction & Depression 
01:25:06 Tool: Quitting Smoking & Clinical Hypnosis, Reveri
01:30:16 Bupropion (Wellbutrin) & Quitting Smoking 
01:36:24 Tool: A Nicotine Replacement Schedule to Quit Smoking, Nicotine Patch/Gum
01:41:52 Tool: Biological Homeostasis & Nicotine Withdrawal, The “First Week” Strategy
01:51:39 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Neural Network Newsletter, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing nicotine. Nicotine is one of the most commonly consumed substances on the entire planet. There are literally billions of people that ingest nicotine on a daily basis. Most of those people consume nicotine via smoking, and in particular smoking tobacco. Tobacco contains nicotine and it contains a bunch of other things as well, which we will talk about. And the burning of tobacco liberates nicotine and makes it accessible to the various cells and tissues of the body. But of course, there are other sources of nicotine as well. Some people consume nicotine through dip, that is placing tobacco on the inside of the lip or in the cheek. Some people consume nicotine via snuff, which is literally the shoving of tobacco leaves up the nostrils and allowing the tobacco to access the nervous system and other areas of the body by permeating into the mucosal membranes, that is the lining, the soft lining of the nasal passages. And of course there are nicotine patches, nicotine gum, there's nicotine in pill form, there are toothpicks dipped in nicotine, et cetera. Today we are going to separate our discussion of nicotine from a discussion of smoking and vaping and the other forms of delivery for nicotine. We will be talking about smoking and vaping and other routes of nicotine administration, both for sake of highlighting their detriments to health and, believe it or not, in certain cases, keep in mind very specific certain cases, the possible health benefits of delivering nicotine through specific modalities. Turns out those modalities do not include smoking cigarettes or vaping. And we are going to pay particular attention to vaping today because vaping use is on the rise, in particular in young people, and vaping use, and the fact that most tobacco that's consumed through vaping includes quite amount of nicotine has created a scenario where nicotine because of its ability to change certain chemicals in the brain can actually lead to addiction for a number of other substances related to vaping and vaping associated behaviors. If all of that seems like a lot to get your arms and your mind around right here at the outset, don't worry, I'll walk you through this, regardless of whether or not you have a background in biology or not. I promise that you'll come through at the end of this episode with a deep understanding of how nicotine works in the brain and body, some of its benefits, some of its potential drawbacks, and you'll have clear optics as to why smoking and vaping and other forms of nicotine delivery have the effects that they do on your biology and psychology. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we've partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we go any further, I just want to highlight a key takeaway from a previous episode, which is our episode on focus. And in fact was a toolkit for focus. So during the toolkit for focus episode, we talked about a large number of behavioral, pharmacologic, and another interventions that you can use to increase your level of concentration and focus for whatever purpose, cognitive endeavors, learning languages, focusing in school, on work, et cetera, or physical pursuits. Now one of the key takeaways is that there are really two key protocols that I believe everyone should understand and know about and why they work because they are so effective, and also because they dovetail nicely with some of the information that we're going to talk about today, which will explain why nicotine is so effective in increasing focus. And these two protocols are as follows. Data based on studies done in Wendy Suzuki's lab at New York University. And of course, Wendy was a guest on this podcast. So you can check out that episode if you like, but studies done in her laboratory point to the fact that a daily, very brief, in fact, only 13 minute meditation can vastly increase focus and focus ability, not just immediately after the meditation practice, but at all other times as well. So again, this is a meditation practice done daily for just 13 minutes. It's a very simple meditation practice where one sits or lies down, closes your eyes and directs your attention to a place just between your two eyes and right above it. So on your forehead. But just inside of that, and please understand that your brain does not have sensory receptors. So unlike focusing on your fingertips and the sensations there, if you focus on your brain, you can't actually sense anything in your brain except your thoughts. So the idea then is that you continually bring your focus back to that location just about an inch behind your forehead over and over again. And it's the refocusing of your attention to that location after it drifts that succeeds in increasing your focus ability, again, not just during the meditation and afterward, but at other times as well. So this 13 minute a day meditation is exceedingly simple and exceedingly effective. It should be performed every day, but if you miss a day, just go back to doing it. Don't despair too much. And you will see these positive effects, say the data. Also increase effects on mood and other positive aspects of mental health and performance. So that's the first tool in protocol. The second tool in protocol relates to the general what I called arrow model of focus. This was a model that I created in order to simplify the vast amounts of data on focus and concentration and how they are created by the various chemical systems within your brain. We're going to hear a lot about these chemical systems again today in the context of nicotine and they are as follows. You can think about focus on any goal or any endeavor as an arrow. So just imagine an arrow which has an arrow head and a shaft, and we'll add a third component to it in a moment. The head of the arrow, meaning the direction of your focus, is largely set by acetylcholine, which is a chemical in the brain. The shaft of the arrow is set by a chemical called adrenaline, also called epinephrine. Those are the same thing. In the brain typically it's referred to as epinephrine, and in the body, it's more commonly referred to as adrenaline, but those are the same neurochemical. Epinephrine slash adrenaline represents the shaft of the arrow and it's providing the energy for which to focus. And then we can put behind that arrow a little propeller or a motor, if you like, and the propeller or motor in the context of this neurochemistry model is dopamine, which provides ongoing motivation. It pushes that arrow forward continually as you strive to focus on a particular thing. This particular arrow model, that is your ability to increase your focus, can be enhanced therefore by increasing acetylcholine, epinephrine, and dopamine simultaneously. And there are a lot of different ways to do that. But one of the more effective ways to do that via supplement protocols is so-called Alpha GPC. Alpha GPC taken in 300 milligram form 10 to 30 minutes before a about of cognitive work or a about of physical work will increase your focus by way of increasing acetylcholine, and to some extent, increasing epinephrine as well. The dopamine increase will have to be achieved either through cognitive processing, that is telling yourself you're doing a good job and moving forward because thoughts really do impact your levels of dopamine, or some other sort of pro dopamine or dopamine increasing protocol also discussed in the toolkit for focus and our episode on dopamine for motivation and drive. So the key thing here to understand is that the 13 minute a day meditation is a very effective way to increase focus capacity. And then in the short term, if you want to provide a boost now and again to focus, 300 milligrams of Alpha GPC can be very effective. There are various sources for that that we'll link to one of them in the show note captions. By no means am I saying that you need to take alpha GPC. A number of people will certainly opt not to. And a number of people might be saying, well, I've heard that Alpha GPC can increase focus by way of increasing acetylcholine and norepinephrine or epinephrine, but it can also increase TMAO, which is a kind of a negative marker of cardiac health and cardiovascular health. For that reason, I and many others will take 600 milligrams of a garlic capsule, which can offset that TMAO increase. It remains uncertain as to how much Alpha GPC one needs to take before increasing TMAO levels to a point where it's of concern that you would even need to take the garlic capsule. But I just mention it in any case, because it's a pretty simple fix. Garlic has other health benefits too, of course, and for most people, 300 milligrams of Alpha GPC taken every once in a while. I certainly don't encourage people to take Alpha GPC every time they want to focus. I always emphasize behavioral tools first, then focusing on nutritional tools and on occasion using supplement based tools to encourage increased levels of focus. And then of course there are a various number of different prescription compounds that if you're working with a board certified physician, they could prescribe you if you need additional tools for focus, things like Ritalin, Adderall, Modafinil, Armodafinil, Vyvanse, et cetera, for many people are going to be important and maybe even necessary for people with ADHD, et cetera, but that's a category into itself. And as I always say, I'm not a physician, so I don't prescribe anything. I'm a professor, so I profess many things. And today I just wanted to pass along or redirect your attention to that episode on focus and highlight those two tools, the 13 minute a day meditation, and 300 milligram Alpha GPC for increasing focus capacity and for acutely, that is temporarily giving an additional boost for a about of focus. And of course, if you choose not to use those protocols, that's perfectly fine too, there's certainly no obligation. They are simply available to you should you choose to try them. And if nothing else you now have in mind the neurochemistry of acetylcholine, epinephrine slash adrenaline, and dopamine, and that will really set the stage for understanding just how effective and why nicotine is so effective at increasing focus, motivation, and even as you'll soon hear, working memory and cognitive capacity. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public, and keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics, and to be quite direct, I do not like the word nootropics because it translates to smart drugs, and to be direct again, there is no such thing as a smart drug. That is there's no such thing as a drug that can make you smarter because there is no circuit in the brain for being smart. There are circuits in the brain for focus. There are circuits in the brain for task switching. There are circuits in the brain related to creativity and so on and so forth. So the idea that there would be a single smart drug or nootropic is simply foolish. And fortunately Thesis understands this and therefore has created custom notropics that are designed to get you into the states of mind and body that are optimal for your goals. I've been taking Thesis nootropics for quite a while now, and I've been extremely pleased with the results. I take a clarity formula that's specifically designed for me prior to long bouts of cognitive work. And I take an energy formula prior to particularly challenging physical workouts. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman. Take a three minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed with a quality blood test. One of the major issues with blood tests or DNA tests, however, is that typically you'll get your data back and you won't know what to do with those data. InsideTracker has solved this problem by creating a personalized platform where when you get numbers back about your hormones, metabolic factors, et cetera, it will direct you to specific protocols in the realms of nutrition, exercise, supplementation. And that includes things to do, things to consider, and things not to do in order to bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for your immediate and long-term goals. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system. And I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with a number of important challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly. Now ROKA understands this and everything about their eyeglasses were designed in order for you to see with optimal clarity regardless of activities. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are superb for wearing while you run or cycle. In fact, they were originally designed for that purpose. They're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I can't even remember that they're on my face, and they won't fall off if you get sweaty. In addition, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses have a terrific aesthetic. So while a lot of so-called performance eyeglasses out there will make you look like a cyborg if you want to, and they do have those varieties, they also have varieties of aesthetic choices that you would be very comfortable wearing to work or to school or just out and about. And that's one of the reasons I like them. I don't really have to think about having too many pairs of sunglasses or eyeglasses. I can just have one or two of each pair and I'm good to go no matter where I go. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off on your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Let's talk about nicotine and how nicotine impacts our brains, our bodies, our mental performance, our mental health, our physical performance, and our physical health. Now once again, I want to remind everybody that we really need to separate out a discussion about nicotine from the discussion about the delivery device for nicotine. In other words, when we're talking about nicotine, we are not necessarily talking about smoking. Although we might be. There are things associated with smoking and with vaping and other means of getting nicotine into our system that have their own effects, both negative, and in some cases positive. Indeed later, we will talk about how you can actually use nicotine to get over smoking addiction. This won't come as a surprise to many people, but what perhaps will come as a surprise is the fact that many people actually use nicotine-like substances or nicotine itself in order to relieve nicotine addiction. So we'll talk about that and what that looks like and offer various protocols for you later in the episode. I also want to mention here at the outset that I have a long standing interest in nicotine. In fact, early in my scientific career, I did research on nicotine and its role in brain development. And I've had a long standing interest in neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. And so experiments that have been done by close colleagues and friends of mine have really emphasized the fact that acetylcholine, and in particular, when acetylcholine activates so-called nicotinic receptors, something you'll learn more about in a little bit, that can actually serve as a gateway or a trigger for directed rewiring of the brain. So this is fascinating. We think of nicotine as something that we take, but actually we have receptors that is locations in the brain to which nicotine binds and can exert its effects. And those receptors did not come about because of the existence of tobacco or the existence of vaping pens, or because of the existence of anything in the outside world. The fact that there are nicotinic receptors in our brain and body tells you that acetylcholine and nicotine themselves have very important roles in normal brain and body function, so much so that I often like to point to an anecdote of a very well known Nobel prize winning neuroscientist. I won't reveal who they are. They're not a faculty member at Stanford, but many neuroscientists know of this person and many people in the outside world know of this person. And they are also well known for their love of nicotine. I once sat in this person's office, and he, I will reveal it as a he, consumed no fewer than three pieces of nicotine gum during that relatively short conversation of about 45 minutes. And that was surprising to me. And I asked him why he was taking so much nicotine through nicotine gum. And he replied that for years, he had been a chronic smoker, which on the one hand had greatly impaired his cardiovascular health and his fitness, no surprise there. And we'll talk a little bit more about what the underlying reasons are, but most everyone, if not everyone knows that smoking cigarettes or smoking in general really impairs lung health. There's just simply no question about it. There are some more or less unhealthy ways to smoke, but the quite honest message is that smoking of any kind is going to disrupt lung endothelial function, lung function, blood vessels, and so forth. It's going to make it harder to breathe with vigor, take deep breaths, deliver oxygen to tissues, et cetera. That said, he also pointed out that the data on nicotine specifically are pointing to the fact that nicotine can be, can be protective against certain forms of cognitive impairment. And that is why he continued to chew nicotine containing gum. And he swore by the focus enhancing and motivation enhancing effects of nicotine containing gum. Now that is not a call to arms for you to run out and start chewing or consuming nicotine containing products. We will talk about those products later in the episode, some of their potential advantages, some of their potential disadvantages. Now I share this anecdote because it nicely separates nicotine from the delivery device through which nicotine arrives. Now I haven't talked to this individual in a few years to see whether not the nicotine is working to stave off any kind of Alzheimer's or neurodegenerative or cognitive impairment that would come with age. This gentleman is getting up in the years and seems quite sharp nonetheless, but then again was always exceedingly sharp. The point is nicotine is a substance that can both promote cognitive function, and under some conditions, if taken to inappropriate, or I should say to extreme dosages, can also impair cognitive function. So today we really need to have a nuanced conversation about nicotine, one that includes some of the benefits, some of the drawbacks, in particular for children, certainly for people that are pregnant, for people that have addictive tendencies, and for people that have depression and any other kind of mood disorders. What I will tell you soon is that nicotine can be very powerful as a mood modulator and many people who have tried to quit nicotine mainly through the form of smoking will find that their mood can drop substantially. So nicotine does a lot of things in the brain and body. And so I'd like to begin by talking about what exactly nicotine is and how it impacts your brain and body. So what is nicotine and where is it found? Now obviously nicotine is found in the tobacco plant, but nicotine is also found in nightshades. That is tomatoes, eggplant, and sweet peppers. Although the concentrations of nicotine in tomatoes, eggplants, and sweet peppers is vastly lower than it is in the tobacco plant. You actually can also find nicotine in potatoes. Now why is nicotine present in potatoes and tomatoes and in the tobacco plant at all? Well, nicotine is a plant alkaloid. We'll get into alkaloids a little bit later, but it is thought that these alkaloids evolved in plants as a way to prevent insects from eating them. And without going into a lot of insect biology, the reason or the rationale behind this explanation is that nicotine is not only a substance in tobacco that people use or in the various medications that people use, but it's also used as a pesticide because it can dramatically disrupt the nervous system of insects. It can render them infertile, which is not to say that it renders humans infertile. We want to say, again, it is not the case that nicotine renders humans infertile, but it can make certain insects infertile. It can actually disrupt their motor function and their brain function, and the reasons that it has such different effects on insects, in other words, it can kill them or prevent them from reproducing, and therefore explains why plants probably evolved to have this plant alkaloid, nicotine. In humans, because of the differences in receptors for nicotine, where they're located, and the types of receptors, the effects of nicotine on humans is quite a bit different. And again, it does not cause infertility in humans. Although I will talk a little bit later about some double blind peer-reviewed studies conducted in humans that indicate that for instance, nicotine can reduce penile girth, that is the girth of the penis, and can lead to certain forms of sexual dysfunction. And those changes are largely downstream of changes in blood flow and endothelial cell function. Endothelial cells are the cells that make up blood vessels and other vascular type tissues within the brain and body. So nicotine is found in these plants. And what we can know for sure is that at some point in human evolution, somebody or some group of people, either, and here, I'm completely guessing, it's a just so story, but someone or some group must have inhaled the smoke from the tobacco plant or put the dried leaves of the tobacco plant against some mucosal tissue, and you know the different mucosal linings of their body by which substances can pass through, that's right. Any of the mucosal soft lining tissues of the body will allow certain substances, not all certain substances to pass in. That's why people can put tobacco in their mouth and a certain amount of nicotine makes it into the bloodstream, put tobacco up their nose, certain amount of nicotine gets into the bloodstream. I haven't heard of people putting tobacco in other orifices of their body containing mucosal tissue. And I'm certainly not suggesting people do that, but you get the idea and how nicotine gets from these plants, these dried leaves into the bloodstream. Burning tobacco leads to a heat induced change in the availability of nicotine. And this is why smoking tobacco or vaping tobacco, simply by heating it up, allows the nicotine to be liberated and go into the bloodstream simply by inhaling it into the lungs. We will get back to smoking of various kinds later. But right now let's just keep our attention on how nicotine is pulled from these plants and into the human body. Now whether by inhalation or whether or not by placing in contact with the mucosal tissue of the mouth or other mucosal containing orifice of the body, the nicotine then gets into the bloodstream. And once it's in the bloodstream, it only exerts its effects because it binds to certain so-called nicotinic receptors. So the nicotinic receptors are of the acetylcholinergic variety. I know this is a lot to think about and a lot to hear if you haven't heard about this, but it's actually quite simple. Anyone can understand this. Acetylcholine is a molecule, a chemical that is that's released in the brain and body. And when it binds to receptors, that is little parking spots on cells, it changes the way those cells behave. Those cells can increase their activity and release other chemicals. They can become electrically active, they can do any number of different things. When we ingest nicotine, it gets into the bloodstream and eventually some of that will get into the brain and some of it gets into the body. And in both of the brain and body, there are the so-called nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Now the so-called family, and indeed they are a family, this is how we refer to groups of receptors of related design and genetic background just like humans. You have a family of these acetylcholine receptors that are of the nicotinic variety. So maybe on one street in your neighborhood, you know the Joneses and another street, you know the Chows and another street, well in your body, you have the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, and then you have the so-called muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Today it's really simple. Nicotine only binds to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and there are a bunch of different ones on a bunch of different tissues. And the differences in those receptors dictate what sorts of effects the nicotine will have on those tissues. So let's talk about what those effects are, and let's do that by dividing the effects of nicotine into effects on the brain, so everything from the neck up, and on the body, the so-called central nervous system and the periphery. Although I want to point out that your spinal cord is part of the central nervous system. So in fairness to the reality, your brain and spinal cord are all central nervous system. Everything else is considered the periphery. Now there are a lot of different nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, but for those of you that want to know, you aficionados, or if you're ultra curious about this, the main effects of nicotine in the brain are mediated by nicotine binding to the so-called alpha four beta two receptor. Alpha four beta two receptor. Even if you don't care about receptor subtypes, that's going to come up later when we discuss why nicotine suppresses appetite. In fact, one of the major reasons why people don't want to quit smoking, or they quit smoking or another form of ingesting nicotine, and then they relapse, they go back to smoking or ingesting nicotine in some other way is because indeed nicotine will increase metabolism and reduce hunger in large part by binding to this alpha four beta two receptor in a particular area of the brain. We're going to return to that in a little bit, but if you've ever heard that nicotine kills the appetite, indeed it does. It's not the behavior of smoking itself. It's not because you always have a cigarette in your mouth that you're not eating more food. Although I suppose that might be a minor effect. There are direct effects of nicotine on both appetite, that is, it reduces appetite and direct effects on metabolism, that is, it increases metabolism through its effects on some other areas of the brain and body we'll talk about in a moment. Now within the brain, nicotine binds to this alpha four beta two receptor in various locations in the brain. And there are three and maybe a fourth that we'll talk about neurochemical effects of nicotine after you ingest it. First things first, when you ingest nicotine by smoking nicotine containing tobacco, or if you place tobacco in contact with the mucosal lining of the nasal passages of the mouth, takes about two to 15 minutes for that nicotine to enter the bloodstream. Smoking hits the bloodstream faster, vaping even faster, I should mention for a variety of reasons and placing tobacco directly in contact with the mucosal lining is going to be the slowest. Now as I mentioned before, nicotine gets into the bloodstream and then because nicotine can pass through the so-called blood brain barrier, the BBB, which is basically a fence around the brain, because it can pass through the blood brain barrier, it's going to have very rapid effects on the brain in these four major categories of neurochemicals and neural circuits. The first of those categories, this is a very important one, this is one that was brought up in the episode on dopamine, motivation, and drive. And I think not just all scientists, but all human beings should know that within their brain, they have what is called the mesolimbic reward pathway. The mesolimbic reward pathway if you just want to call it, the dopamine reward pathway is, as the name suggests, a set of connections between a brain area called the ventral tegmental area. You don't have to remember the names of these things, of course, but if you want to, that's fine too. The ventral tegmental area or VTA connects to another area called the nucleus accumbens. Now here's what's very important. Nicotine triggers the release of dopamine from the nucleus accumbens. This is what gives nicotine its rewarding properties. It increases motivation. It tends to give a not so subtle, but very transient increase in feelings of wellbeing and alertness and motivation. And that's because of the increase in dopamine caused by nicotine directly within the nucleus accumbens. Nicotine also triggers the release of certain neurochemicals from the ventral tegmental area itself. And those impinge on nucleus accumbens and increase dopamine levels further. This is what makes the rewarding properties or sometimes referred to as the reinforcing properties of nicotine so powerful. This is why so many billions of people ingest nicotine in one form or another. It's also why nicotine is so hard to quit because there's a potent increase in dopamine from multiple neural circuit pathways within this mesolimbic reward circuitry. Now within the mesolimbic reward circuitry, there's an interesting feature. There are accelerators that essentially push out more dopamine, get more dopamine released, and there are breaks of the so-called GABAergic variety. GABA's an inhibitory neurotransmitter. You don't need to know too much about it to just understand that nicotine both increases dopamine, but also decreases the activity of GABA. And so this is like pushing on the accelerator for dopamine, but also removing the brake. So there's a two pronged effect of nicotine on reinforcement reward dopamine related pathways, the feel good motivation pathways. And that is an increase in dopamine and a decrease in GABA. And again, that's all mediated through this mesolimbic reward pathway, involving the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus accumbens. So if you can conceptualize even just 5% of what I just told you, or even if you can just remember nicotine increases dopamine and that's why it feels so good, it makes you want more of it, you will have everything you need to know in mind in order to understand both why nicotine is so highly used, and indeed abused, why it's so hard to quit, and that will point to avenues as to how to quit or reduce intake. And it also points to how nicotine can actually be used in an antidepressant way should you choose. And we will talk about what the various criteria are for choosing that, but just to understand nicotine increases motivation, it decreases negative feelings of mood, it increases positive feelings of mood and motivation. Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens, AKA AG1, is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin and mineral needs. And it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome, the gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system. It also supports the so-called gut brain access, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus, and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3K2 with every order. And of course, vitamin D3K2 are vital for all sorts of things like hormone health and metabolic health and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. The second major effect that nicotine has in the brain is that it increases acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator that exists in you and me, it is released from multiple sites in the brain. And the two major sites are the nucleus basalis, so these are a collection of neurons in the front and base of your brain, and from some brain stem areas. And there are a bunch of different ones back there in your brain stem, which is indeed in the back that release acetylcholine that include the locus coeruleus as kind of a minor site, the pedunculopontine nucleus. There are a bunch of these different areas, that parabigeminal nucleus. There are a bunch of these things back there. We don't have to go into all the names, but just understand that they're little pockets of neurons, nerve cells located in the front and the back and some extent in the middle of your brain, but really in the front and the back of your brain, that can serve two major role, here they are. Acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis leads to a sort of spotlighting or highlighting of particular neural circuits in the brain. What do I mean by this? Well let's say you're working on a puzzle. Let's say it's a cognitive puzzle. Maybe you're doing a word puzzle, or nowadays I've heard of this Wordle thing. I'm on Twitter and people are always posting their Wordle thing and I have no idea what it is, but I'm guessing it's some sort of puzzle. I'm guessing it's like a crossword puzzle, and here, if I'm wrong, I don't know, educate me. Tell me what Wordle is. Somebody put it in the comments and tell me if I should play it or not. Here's the deal. When acetylcholine is released from nucleus basalis, the neurons are there in the base of the brain, but they extend axons, which are like little wires elsewhere in the brain. And when acetylcholine is released, it tends to be released at particular locations in the brain that are associated with whatever activity we happen to be doing. So if I'm doing Wordle, here I'm talking about it as if I've ever done it, doing a crossword puzzle or Wordle, well the neurons that were involved in trying to figure out the solution to that Wordle or crossword puzzle are active, and then acetylcholine is released from the little wires, the little endings of these cells in nucleus basalis. And all of a sudden those neural circuits get a boost. They become more active, and believe it or not, our ability to perform that crossword puzzle or at least focus on that Wordle or crossword puzzle gets enhanced. It literally increases our attention for that and not anything else is enhanced. So it's literally like a neurochemical attentional spotlight. Nicotine increases acetylcholine and thereby focus and concentration and mental performance, not by changing the neural circuits that are activated per se, but rather by making more acetylcholine available at those release sites. So it's as if the spotlight got more intense, the highlighter is more intense than it would be otherwise. And I should also mention because of the so-called pharmacokinetics, the time course in which nicotine has its effects, which are pretty short lived, we'll talk about those in a moment, this enhancement in cognitive performance and attention, it's going to be very transient, probably on the order of about 30, maybe 45 minutes, the half life of nicotine, depending on how it's ingested and whether or not you have food in the gut and what else is in the bloodstream, et cetera, it's going to be anywhere from one to two hours, but typically the effects of nicotine will come on in about two to 15 minutes as I mentioned before, and then will last anywhere from about 30 to 45 minutes. This is why in the old days, and still to some extent in certain areas of the world, but less so in the United States and certainly in Europe as well, we don't see quite as many people smoking cigarettes, for reasons we can discuss later. But you would see these chain smokers who are trying to maintain constant levels of nicotine in their brain and bloodstream. Now perhaps they didn't know that nicotine has this one to two hour half life, but they could sense no doubt the cognitive and the physical effects of nicotine, including this cognitive enhancement effect and highlighting of neural circuits effect. And they would notice they would smoke a cigarette and then for the next five to 45 minutes have heightened focus and then they would start to drop off. So they smoke another cigarette. So in other words, they're trying to maintain a constant level of nicotine for whatever activities they needed to perform. Obviously chain smoking because of the terrible effects of smoking, I'll talk about those terrible effects, but I'm sure you've heard of them before, cancer, depletion of just about every organ and body tissue to the point that it can actually be measured how many years of your life you're peeling off in terms of lifespan and health span by smoking. Well the terrible effects of smoking are indisputable, but the positive effects of nicotine on this circuitry, part of the reason why people would chain smoke in the first place rather than get one big peak of concentration and focus and then just let it disappear after 45 minutes. So what we have is a scenario where dopamine is going up in the mesolimbic pathway. That's why smoking or ingesting nicotine in any other way feels good and makes us feel motivated. And then the increase in acetylcholine, especially from nucleus basalis in the front of the brain, is the reason why it can increase our ability to focus on particular types of endeavors, particular mental work that we're doing, or maybe even particular physical work. Although I should mention anytime I'm pairing the words nicotine and physical work, it's obvious that because of the ways that smoking impairs lung function, those two things really run counter to one another. In other words, if you are thinking about ingesting nicotine through smoking or vaping in order to improve physical performance, that's a terrible idea. The logic isn't there and the health detriments are certainly there. The third neurochemical pathway that's strongly activated when nicotine is brought into the central nervous system into the brain is epinephrine, or in particular norepinephrine, which is related to epinephrine. Now, earlier I said epinephrine is the same as adrenaline. That's still true. Norepinephrine is closely related to epinephrine, and for today's discussion, we're going to use them interchangeably. Although I realize as I say that that the medical students and some biology students are probably going to have a minor seizure when I lump norepinephrine and epinephrine. I don't do that to be too much of a lumper, in science, we talk about lumpers and splitters. Lumpers are people that like to oversimplify a little bit, splitters are people that really like to detail. You'll see a lot of splitters on social media from time to time, they'll say, wait, you didn't mention the alpha two beta six receptor yet. Okay look, I get it. And I am all for having splitters in the room, but for sake of today's discussion and for ease of digestibility of some of this, just want to point out that norepinephrine, epinephrine, and adrenaline, I'm going to treat as a common pool of similar, in fact, very similar molecules that all have the same net effect, at least in the context of this discussion and that's to increase levels of alertness, energy, and arousal. And the way that nicotine accomplishes those increases in alertness and arousal and energy within the brain is by triggering the release of no epinephrine from a little cluster of neurons in the back of the brain called locus coeruleus, tiny cluster of neurons that offers up, or I should say has, because they're always there from birth has these little wires, these axons that extend many, many places in the brain, not every place, but virtually every place and can sprinkler the brain with norepinephrine, essentially serve as a wake up signal, elevating levels of energy. And when that combines with the acetylcholine from nucleus basalis, which causes attentional spotlighting, increases in concentration and focus, and with the feel good properties of dopamine and the motivating properties of dopamine released from the mesolimbic reward pathway. Now you can start to get a picture of why nicotine is such a powerful molecule. It's making people feel motivated and good. It's making people feel focused and it makes people feel alert when they would otherwise feel a little bit sleepy. So this is a really powerful compound, in fact, going back to our earlier discussion about focus and some tools for focus, and I encourage you if you're interested to please check out the episode on focus, there are a number of different tools and protocols there to increase focus. But here we are talking about one molecule, nicotine, found in plants like tomatoes and potatoes and the tobacco plant. And it can be synthesized in a laboratory and ingested through a patch or a gum or even a pill or a toothpick dipped in nicotine. One molecule that can trigger activation of all the circuits for focus and motivation in one fell swoop. That is remarkable. That is absolutely remarkable. And here we haven't even touched on some of the psychological components of focus, right? Whether or not we're interested in something, whether or not we're excited about it or not. This is a very, very powerful system. So powerful in fact, that I think we can really place nicotine right up there at the top, right next to caffeine as the molecule that has fundamentally changed human evolution, human consciousness, and human experience. Even if you're somebody who's never ingested nicotine, this absolutely has to be true because you have these nicotinic receptors, which is to say that acetylcholine that's naturally released without any external trigger within your brain and body, or I should say without any trigger from nicotine in particular is binding these nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and is creating these effects in your brain and body, just absolutely staggering. Now earlier I mentioned the appetite suppressing and indeed metabolism increasing effects of nicotine. And while that's a fairly niche component of what nicotine does, I mean, it's an important one, but it's not the major reason why most people consume nicotine. I'd like to take a moment and talk about that now, because we are in the brain and we're talking about the effects of nicotine in the brain. And so it seems to me the appropriate time to talk about this. Now we can have this conversation about nicotine and appetite and metabolism in a very simple and straightforward way. If you'd like to learn more about the biology of metabolism and appetite and how those things are mediated by neural components, so not just stuff like your liver, et cetera, we have episodes on that, but really the neural components of hunger and appetite. I encourage you to check out our episode on hunger and appetite. But in that episode, we had a discussion. And it's one that I'll just briefly summarize now that you have a collection of neurons that sits right above the roof of your mouth or so called the hypothalamus. Hypo means below and thalamus is right above it, hypothalamus. So the small collection of neurons in the hypothalamus to a number of different things related to sex behavior, aggression, mediating the temperature of your body, et cetera, but also appetite and suppressing appetite. And within the hypothalamus, there's a compact collection of these little neurons, which we referred to as the POMC, P-O-M-C neurons. And the name comes from the fact that they express certain peptides. And we won't get into that now, but the POMC neurons have a very profound impact on whether or not you feel hungry or whether or not you do not feel hungry, whether or not your appetite is suppressed. It turns out that when nicotine gets into the bloodstream and then into the brain, some of that nicotine binds to nicotinic alpha four beta two containing nicotinic receptors. Again, these sub units of receptors, but basically the nicotine binds some of those parking spots, parks there. And as a consequence, these POMC neurons increase their electrical activity and appetite is suppressed. And that's because the POMC neurons have outputs to various areas of the brain and body controlling everything from how full we feel to whether or not our blood sugar goes up or down, which can impact our hunger, and believe it or not, whether or not we have a tendency to want to move the jaw of our mouth in order to chew food. Yes, believe it or not, the neural circuitry associated with appetite and suppression of appetite actually dictates whether or not you prefer to, or I should say are more biased or less biased to moving your mouth, that is chewing. Which makes perfect sense when you hear it. One way to suppress appetite is to sew the jaw shut neurally, or at least make it less likely to open your mouth and put food in it. Actually that reminded me of a story. I'll just interrupt myself to tell a brief story that there's a famous Nobel Laureate who won the Nobel Prize for something totally distant from appetite. But once turned to a friend of mine at a meeting and said, I discovered the biological mechanism for losing weight. And my friend said, well of course, ingest fewer calories than you burn. Calories in, calories out, fundamental rule of thermodynamics. And basically the fundamental rule of weight loss, weight gain, or weight maintenance. And he said, no, it's actually the gene that controls whether or not you open your mouth. Now he was making a very nerdy joke. So if you didn't register that as a joke, that's about as funny as neuroscience or biology jokes get. There are a couple funnier ones, but that one's kind of considered on the funnier side. So this is why we're not considered comedians. But the point of the matter is that whether or not you crave or desire or impulsively want to put things in your mouth and chew it, will actually dictate how many calories that you eat. And so I find it remarkable and indeed important to know that these POMC neurons are actually inhibiting the opening and the movement of the mouth for chewing. So when we smoke or when we ingest nicotine in any other way, you activate these POMC neurons, you suppress appetite, but in part you do that by actually limiting the impulse to chew. Incredible, at least to me. Now in addition to limiting appetite by changing one's desire to ingest food and chew it and actual craving of food by regulation of blood sugar, et cetera, there do seem to be some quite direct effects of nicotine on metabolism, and the effects on metabolism aren't enormous. These are increases in metabolism that are about 2% up to about 5%, but I want to emphasize that those are transient increases in metabolism. Nonetheless, people that quit smoking often find that their appetite goes up, they sometimes gain weight. They sometimes do not depending on whether or not they offset that increase in appetite with increased physical exercise or with decrease food intake in other ways. But there does seem to be this direct effect of ingesting nicotine on metabolism, which I find is interesting because if you look in the literature, one of the reasons why people are reluctant to quit ingesting nicotine, if for instance, they want to quit using the delivery device to nicotine that's causing such problems for their health like smoking or vaping or whether or not they find themselves quote unquote addicted to, or have the habit of ingesting nicotine. In part, that's likely due to be the dopamine effects, because dopamine is highly reinforcing and rewarding. It feels good, so people want to do more of it. But it's also that for many people and here the data really point to the fact that a lot of the younger female smokers or younger female vapers, or when I say that, of course I mean younger females that vape, are doing that because they like the appetite suppressing effects, which of course opens up an entire conversation about the sociology of body imagery, et cetera, a topic for a future podcast. So nicotine has certain effects on the brain by virtue of the fact that nicotine binds these nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. And those receptors are found on some, but not all neural circuits within the brain. And we talked about some of them already, mesolimbic, the POMC neurons, et cetera. Now when we ingest nicotine, it goes from the bloodstream to all the tissues and organs of the body. How does it do that? I mean, amazing. It can pass to everything, the brain, the body, it does that because nicotine is fat soluble. And now when anytime people hear the word fat, they tend to think about body fat, subcutaneous fat, or maybe they think about dietary fat. What I mean by fat soluble in the context of nicotine being fat soluble is that the cells of your body have an outer layer, so-called outer membrane. And it's made up of lipid, of fat, very particular types of lipids in fact. Nicotine has this remarkable ability to move through that fatty tissue. Not all molecules have that ability, but nicotine does. So it can move relatively freely through the brain and body and relatively freely from outside of cells, extracellular space to intracellular space. So it can get into cells, it can do that within the brain. We talked about those effects and it can do that within the body. Now anytime we're talking about the body, we can be talking about any number of things, but today I'm going to refer to the periphery and the body in more or less the same way, but keep in mind in the back of your head, pun intended, you have your brain, your eyes, and the spinal cord. And those three things make up your central nervous system. The peripheral nervous system and the periphery, which is the rest of your body, the contain your organs and so forth outside of the nervous system, things like your liver and your stomach, et cetera, that's what we're going to talk about now because nicotine has profound effects on the organs of the body that are separate from, but that occur in parallel at the same time as the effects of nicotine on the brain. So let's talk about what some of those effects are. When nicotine makes it into the bloodstream, again, within two to 15 minutes of ingesting it, depending on the delivery device, your heart rate will increase, blood pressure will increase, and the contractibility of the heart tissue will actually increase. So what that essentially speaks to is an increase in so-called sympathetic tone. And when I say that, I don't mean an increase in sympathy for others of the emotional sort. What I mean is an increase in the sympathetic activity of the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is real mouthful and mindful of ideas. But all you need to know is that it's a generalized system that increases levels of alertness and physical readiness. So it makes you ready for action, makes you ready for thought. It's balanced by a whole other system called the parasympathetic nervous system, which is basically the so-called rest and digest system, which is a system of neurons and organs, et cetera, that put your body and your brain into a state of not being able to think clearly, to digest, and to fall asleep. So nicotine increases heart rate, blood pressure, and contractibility of the heart. So it's going to cause more blood flow in theory, although it also tends to constrict blood vessels in many locations in the body. This explains the decrease in penile girth effect of nicotine, in particular nicotine ingested by smoking or vaping. That's right, smoking and vaping reduces penis size and also will have damaging effects on the blood lining endothelial tissue. So over time it actually is impairing blood's ability to get to the penis chronically as well as to other organs of the body. But when people ingest nicotine acutely, and let's say they do that by Nicorette patch or by toothpick dipped in nicotine, it will have some of these same effects, but when not smoking tobacco, when bringing nicotine into the bloodstream through other mechanisms, many, if not all of the disruption of the endothelial cell function can be bypassed, but the effects on penile girth, the effects on reducing blood flow to various tissues is still present during the effects of nicotine, which as I mentioned last about one to two hours. The half life is about one to two hours, depending on a number of factors, not interesting for today's discussion. So when nicotine gets into the bloodstream, it's making us more alert, it's preparing our body for readiness. The heart is pumping harder. Epinephrine, that is adrenaline, is released from the adrenal glands, which right atop our kidneys. So everything is pointed toward creating more readiness to move, more readiness to think. And again, this is happening in parallel with all the effects of neurochemistry that are happening with the brain that we talked about a few minutes ago. Now what's interesting about nicotine is that while it causes this global increase in readiness and alertness and attention and mood, et cetera, it also has the effect of somewhat relaxing skeletal muscle. Now that might seem counterintuitive to those of you out there that already know what I'm about to tell the rest of you who didn't know it previously, that your muscles are able to contract because of the effects of acetylcholine released from neurons in your spinal cord that spit out acetylcholine onto the muscle and bind to what? Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Put into plain English, nicotinic receptors are also the ways in which your muscles can get activated. So therefore, why would it be that increasing nicotine would cause relaxation of the muscles? And that has to do with some of the neural circuits that are upstream of the muscles and has to do with a little bit of how the autonomic nervous system is a range in terms of which receptors go where, a topic and kind of rabbit hole of a conversation far too deep for right now, at least in the context of this already somewhat detailed discussion of the effects of nicotine. But if we were to zoom out and just think about the effects of nicotine, we now have a very clear picture. Reward pathways are turned on. Attention is turned on. Alertness is turned on. You feel better than you felt a few minutes ago. Your blood pressure is up. Your heart rate is up. Your preparedness for thinking is elevated as well. And yet your body is somewhat relaxed. That's a very interesting state of mind and body. Interesting because it's somewhat ideal for cognitive work. Like if you were going to sit down and work on a book or you're going to sit down and try and figure out a hard math problem, or you're going to write a letter that's been really challenging for you to write, or maybe that you're really excited to write, but that you've been slow to get out the door for whatever reason. I'm talking about my own habits of procrastination. Well that state of being very alert, but your body being relaxed is almost, if not the optimal state for getting mental work done, because if you're feeling agitated in your body and you want to physically move your body, it's very hard to do cognitive work. At least the sorts of cognitive work that involve typing or writing or these sorts of things. It's also the exact opposite of the optimal state for physical performance, which is one of yes, also alertness, yes, also motivation and elevated mood. That's all wonderful stuff to have in mind, literally when you are exercising or competing in sport or something of that sort. But under those conditions, you really also want to have a fast reaction time, a low latency for muscle activation so that you can make coordinated muscle movements in the ways that you need to, which is of course what's required of physical endeavors. That tells us a few things, first of all, it tells us that nicotine is going to be generally a bad idea for a pre-workout tool or for enhancing physical performance, however, it's apt to be, and in fact is an excellent tool for enhancing cognitive ability. And of course, that triggers my mind to return to the anecdote about my Nobel prize winning colleague who ingests nicotine by way of nicotine containing gum in order to increase levels of cognitive focus. Certainly not for going out and playing sport. In fact, despite the fact that he is very, very tall, he often points to himself in an appropriately funny way that despite being on the basketball team of his high school, he is probably the worst player that ever existed. And they only positioned him there because of his height. And I guess his head was designed to prevent balls from entering the basket. In any event, nicotine does seem to be very good at enhancing cognitive function, at least in the short term, which is not to say that it isn't without its side effects, which we will talk about. And again, those are side effects that are independent of smoking or vaping or other forms of ingesting nicotine. For instance, dipping or chewing tobacco is known to cause a 50 fold, yes, 50 fold increase in mouth cancers, things like leukoplakia and just generally is terrible for your health. I'm sorry to break it to you, but if you're dipping or you're using snuff or things of that sort, certainly I'm not going to tell people what to do. That's not my role in life, but you are dramatically increasing the probability of an oral cancer or of a mucosal lining cancer of some sort. So it's not just that smoking and vaping are bad for your health. These other forms of delivery for nicotine can be bad for your health as well. Now whether or not ingesting nicotine by way of nicotine containing gum or patch or toothpick or other method is dangerous, for other reasons is a discussion that's important, right now, it appears that provided the dosages are kept reasonable. We'll talk about what reasonable means a little later, and the frequency is kept relatively low. So not relying on these things constantly. There may in fact be some benefit to ingesting nicotine from time to time, provided that you are not still developing your brain. Now in reality, neuroplasticity goes on throughout the lifetime. Your life is actually one long developmental arc. It's not like development occurs and then stops, but certainly for people before puberty, during puberty, and probably for the next 15 to 20 years after puberty, avoiding nicotine is probably a good idea. Now of course, development is your entire life. It's not like development starts and then ends, but certainly for people that are 25 years old or younger, ingesting nicotine as a way to enhance cognitive function is probably not the best idea. And certainly, please, for those of you that are 15 years old or younger, ingesting nicotine in any form, unless it's prescribed by your doctor for a very specific clinical reason, to me seems just like a terrible idea based on all the data that I've read. And the reason for that is it's going to create a scenario of nicotine dependence in order to achieve heightened levels of mood and alertness, et cetera, and that's bad. And what we're effectively talking about is an addiction for nicotine directly, not necessarily the delivery device method like smoking or vaping, although it could pull that in as an addictive or habit forming behavior as well, but you want to let your neural circuits develop to the point where again, unless there's a clinical need for a prescribed drug from a licensed physician or psychiatrist, et cetera, that you're not relying on chemical enhancement of these circuits. For people who are 25 years or older, and again, that's not a strict cutoff, but roughly 25 years or older, but for those of you that are thinking about using nicotine to enhance cognitive function as adults and your brain development is slowing down, right. Never ceases, but is slowing down or has slowed down to the point where we would say developmental plasticity is largely over and you're now operating in the context of adult neuroplasticity. Well, in that case, there may be instances in which increasing acetylcholine, dopamine, et cetera, by way of nicotine ingestion might be a good idea, but certainly not by smoking, vaping, or by direct contact of tobacco to the mucosal lining tissue of the mouth or nose, so called dipping or snuffing. For the last 20 minutes or so, we've been talking about the biology of nicotine specifically, how it impacts the brain, how it impacts the body, why it feels so good, why it can enhance focus. And we've largely set aside smoking, vaping, dipping tobacco, and snuffing, and the negative effects that those all have on mental and physical health. Working down from the top of the head to the bottom of the feet, we can say that smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing negatively impact every organ and tissue system and cell of the body by virtue of the fact that they all damage the endothelial cells. Again, the endothelial cells are the cells that make up the vasculature, which delivers blood and other nutrients to all the cells and organs and tissues of the body. And those endothelial cells are strongly and negatively impacted by all of the practices that I just described. Now the way that that happens varies a little bit from each one to the next, for instance, it has been estimated that cigarettes contain anywhere from 4,000 to 7,000 toxins. Now the word toxins is a real buzzword these days, you hear about detoxes and toxins, but more specifically, we know that it contains carcinogens. These are cancer promoting compounds. For instance, we know that the tar in cigarettes, even low tar cigarettes, as well as the ammonia within cigarettes, as well as the formaldehyde contained within cigarettes, as well as the carbon dioxide that's generated from smoking those cigarettes are all carcinogens. Carbon dioxide also has the negative effect of depleting the amount of oxygen that's delivered to any and all of our tissues by way of the impact of carbon dioxide binding hemoglobin and preventing hemoglobin from delivering oxygen to the tissues of the body. So while there may be 4,000 or 4,500 or 7,000 toxins, depending on which cigarette, which papers they happen to be rolled in, whether or not they're filtered or non-filtered, the type of tobacco, et cetera, et cetera, there are a tremendous number of toxins. And there are some very potent carcinogens within that long list of toxins. Again, ammonia, tar, formaldehyde, and carbon dioxide being the most potent of those carcinogens. Now the fact that there are carcinogens in cigarettes sometimes lead cigarette smokers and particularly the cigarette smokers that have the hardest time quitting or that enjoy their cigarettes the most from saying, well, listen, everything is a carcinogen or everything kills you. Well certainly that's not a true statement. And while there are other carcinogens in the environment, so it environmental hazards like solvents. And even if you work in a laboratory, for instance, we use in the laboratory, DNA intercalating dyes, these are literally dyes that allow us to see the DNA structure of cells and see the proteins they make and see the RNAs they make. And it's very important to wear gloves when you work with those things, because as the name suggests, they intercalate, they actually get in between the strands of DNA and separate them. They are mutagens, they mutate DNA. They are often carcinogens as well. So we have them in our laboratory, but we take certain precautions to not have them negatively impact our health, safety protocols and so on. We hear that there are carcinogens in car exhaust and bus exhaust and in all sorts of things like pesticides and that's all true. So in the argument of probabilities, one would say, well, if there are all these other carcinogens in the environment, why would you compound their carcinogenic effect by smoking or vaping or dipping or snuffing? But that usually doesn't get people to quit smoking or doing those things because of the powerful reinforcing effects of nicotine itself. So again, nicotine is the reinforcing element by way of triggering that dopamine reinforcement pathway, the mesolimbic reward pathway. And of course there are all the other additional effects of increased focus, such as increased ability to pay attention to work or to others that lead to other rewards. And so then it becomes a situation of compounding rewards. So it's not really about the cigarette, it's about the nicotine, and it's not really about the nicotine, it's about the dopamine that the nicotine evokes. And then it's not really about the dopamine that the nicotine evokes directly per se, but also about all the positive effects that that increased dopamine results in. So we can easily circle back to the negative effects of smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing, and say the endothelial cells are disrupted. The endothelial cells are involved in delivery of blood and other nutrients to every tissue of the body and smoking vaping, dipping, and snuffing contain carcinogens, which are cancer promoting. And because the epidemiological studies are out there, we can actually arrive at some very clear numbers as to how much life one will lose from ingesting nicotine by way of those four delivery devices, or I should say any one of those four delivery devices. Although I should also mention that many people who are vaping are also smoking cigarettes is becoming increasingly common. A lot of people are using vaping in one context and cigarettes in another, dipping in one context, vaping in another. But even for those that only smoke or only vape or only dip or only snuff, the negative effects are dramatic and calculable. So it is thought that for every pack of cigarettes consumed per day, so you could average that out if you're a two a day cigarette smoker or a pack a day cigarette smoker, two pack a day. For every pack of cigarettes smoked per day, we can reliably estimate a 14 year reduction in lifespan. So cigarettes are literally peeling years off your life. Now because of the way that the brain works and the way that human beings anticipate the future and can be grounded both in the present and the future or the present and the past, that's just how the mind works, right? That's why we can think about the future, but also realize where we are in time and space today. Because of that, many people will say, well, I enjoy cigarettes or I enjoy vaping. And so at least while I'm here, I'm enjoying it. And that's because the dopamine system is not very good at understanding opportunity costs. That is what we would be doing in those 14 years and what we would be enjoying and the enrichment that we would get if we were to live into those 14 years. So at some level the smoker or vaper is being rational when they say, yeah, but I enjoy this. And so the years lost, I can't really register that because it's hard to register what you don't have and what you've never had. On the other hand, we can also point to the statistic that there is this 50 fold increase in mouth cancers from dipping. And there are nasal cancers as well that are greatly increased by snuffing and from smoking, and now we know based on data from vaping that the endothelial cell damage and the direct effects of damage to the lungs from tars, and even if people are vaping, which tends to have lower tars than do cigarettes, even for people that are vaping, greatly increased probability of stroke, of peripheral vascular disease. So this is peripheral pain because remember, blood is delivering, not just blood, but other nutrients and it's clearing things out from tissues. So there's an accumulation of literally toxins and debris that cells generate all the time, which is healthy, but then the normally is cleared away by the endothelial cells and by other cell types of the immune system, that's all increased in people that engage in these nicotine delivery device behaviors. Rates of heart attack, rates of stroke, rates of cognitive decline are all increased. Now you might say cognitive decline, I thought that nicotine increases the likelihood that we can maintain healthy neural function and cognitive capacity. It might even increase cognitive capacity in a potent way in the short term, and indeed it does. However, cigarette smoking and vaping are now known to dramatically decrease cognitive function because one of the key things about the brain is that it is the most metabolically demanding organ, which means it consumes a lot of glucose. Or even if you're ketogenic, you need ketones, you need nutrients getting to the neurons in other cell types of the brain and nervous system in order for it to function properly. And when you disrupt a vasculature through this endothelial cell dysfunction, you get things like interstitial, which just means in the spaces between dysfunction. So it's not just beating up the endothelial cells themselves, but the spaces between the cells is being disrupted. There's a lot of debris that accumulates there. And as a consequence, the brain just simply will not function as well. So you start getting short term memory lapses, you start getting working memory lapses, working memory is the sort of memory if someone tells you their seven digit phone number, typically nowadays people just share their info, but seven digit phone number or a sequence of numbers or an address and your inability to remember that. So you're walking back to the kitchen sink and you can't remember what you were trying to remember just a short moment ago, that's working memory. Working memory suffers, long term memory, projective or intergrade memories into the future. How can you remember things in the future that haven't occurred yet? Well this is more of a memory for future plans or ideas and planning for things that are to come. So what we can very reliably say is that currently more than 1 billion, billion, more than 1 billion people consume tobacco in order to get their nicotine because that's really the reinforcing element within tobacco, more than 1 billion people consume tobacco in the form of cigarettes every day. A growing number of people, more than half a billion people now are starting to vape. The estimates range from 200 million to 500 million. And there's a lot of debate about this because a lot of people are hybrid smokers and vapers, meaning they do one or both depending on time of day and location, as I mentioned before, but now you start to see how you can get to the number that billions of people are consuming tobacco. Because of course you also have your people that are dipping and your people that are snuffing. And as I mentioned before, you have people that are engaging in multiple of these behaviors. So billions of people on planet Earth, anywhere from one eighth to a quarter of human beings, incredible right? Anywhere from one eighth to a quarter of human beings are consuming tobacco in one form or another in order to get their nicotine one way or another. And as a consequence, are peeling years off their life, dramatically increasing the probability of cancer, stroke, heart attack, peripheral neuropathies, brain dysfunction, meaning cognitive dysfunction, memory impairment, sexual dysfunction. There are a number of studies that have looked at increases in cortisol. And while minor, those increases do exist. Decreases in growth hormone, and while minor, those decreases exist, but even setting aside the negative impact on endocrine, on hormone factors, it's very, very clear that smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing are among the worst things that we can do for our health. They are among the leading causes of preventable death and debilitating life conditions, which may lead you to the question as to why in the world would people do this? Well it turns out most of them don't want to. In the best surveys that one can find of if you could quit smoking, if you could quit vaping, would you, what you find is that at least for cigarette smokers, 70% want to quit. They would love to quit. And yet they find that to be exceedingly difficult. And the reason they find it to be exceedingly difficult is because of all the brain neurochemistry that we talked about before. The reason I spent close to 20 minutes talking about dopamine and the mesolimbic pathway, acetylcholine and nucleus basalis, and epinephrine, and the relaxation of muscles in the periphery and the increase in readiness in the body and brain is that all of those combine to make nicotine one of the most powerful and potent cognitive enhancers and to some extent physical enhancer, although, as I mentioned before, the total number of physical exercise or physical sport promoting effects of nicotine is very, very small, if not zero. There are certain conditions under which one might imagine using nicotine specifically for cognitive enhancement where performance of complex motor skills would sort of outweigh the negative effects on the neuromuscular system, our ability to generate coordinated movements. There was actually an excellent study looking at the effects of nicotine, not by smoking delivery, but by different delivery mechanism in which they looked at performance of hitters in baseball. The experiment was kind of an interesting one, even though these were fairly skilled baseball players, what they had them do was hit a ball off a tee, as I recall growing up and I admittedly I didn't play much baseball, but you start off on tee-ball and then you would go, I think it was to pitching machine. Then they would use actual pitchers who throw the ball. But in this case it was a couple of different baseball related tasks. They'd have people hit the ball off a tee, but they had to direct that hit toward a ball atop another tee. So it's fairly precise targeting that's required in order to knock that ball off the other tee. So this is an activity that involves not just motor output, but coordinated motor output, and not just coordinated motor output, but directed, coordinated output that requires some, as we would say, top down processing. This isn't the kind of thing that can be done reflexively. This is the kind of thing where the forebrain, the prefrontal cortex in particular has to be heavily involved in order to suppress certain actions and then create other actions. So the basic takeaway of the study is that nicotine delivered by way of nicotine gum, not by smoking, dipping, or snuffing was able to increase cognitive performance and motor output. So a rare circumstance where a specific set of demands that involved both cognitive engagement and physical engagement showed a slight but significant improvement. But again, in most cases, nicotine is just simply not going to improve physical output if it's delivered through a smoked cigarette, through vaping, through dipping, or through snuffing. So if all these behaviors are terrible for essentially every aspect of our health, frankly, I mean, when you look at the literature, it's terrible for pregnant women, it's terrible for kids, it's terrible for older people, it's terrible for younger people. You really cannot find a scenario in which smoking, vaping, dipping, or snuffing are good for us. And yet people like the effects on the brain and they feel quite addicted to them, even if they say they're not, most of those people would be unwilling to give up their practice of nicotine delivery for more than a few hours. In fact, if you look at the effects of withdrawal and we are going to talk about what withdrawal of nicotine looks like, what you find is that as soon as four hours after the last ingestion of nicotine by way of cigarette or vaping or dipping or snuffing, what people start to experience is some agitation, craving for nicotine, of course. And while craving is kind of a vague concept, it's actually a very specific biological mechanism. It's the drop in dopamine that's starting to occur so much so that there's a drop in dopamine below baseline. That is the increase in dopamine that would normally be experienced from smoking, vaping, dipping, or snuffing is now not happening. And in fact, the levels of dopamine are dropping below where they would've been even without performing that behavior. So that's what craving is. And withdrawal is an increased sense of that craving as well as a lot of negative stuff like stomach aches or nausea or irritability, and often collections of all of those. So because these nicotine delivery approaches are so terrible for our health, and also because as many as 70% of people who smoke would like to quit, but either feel they can't because they've tried and failed repeatedly often, or because it's just too scary, meaning the reinforcing properties are too strong and therefore they can't imagine living without them or the withdrawal effects are too strong and they can't imagine living with those. Well then is there hope for quitting smoking, vaping, snuffing, or dipping? And the short answer, fortunately is yes, there are excellent ways to do that. And some of them are single event treatments. And we're going to talk about those shortly, but before we do that, I want to highlight one very brief point, which is that nicotine is not the cause of cancer. Nicotine is not the carcinogen, it's the other things in tobacco or associated with the nicotine delivery device that are causing cancer. And I should mention the other negative impacts on our health in particular by way of disrupted endothelial blood vessel function. Now that leads us to this issue of vaping, because as many of you know, and probably are thinking as I've been delivering this information, people don't vape tobacco. The way that vaping pens are designed is that it includes some liquid, it involves heat, and it does not involve the burning off of tobacco. In fact, there's a constant updating of the engineering of these vape pens so that they can be very low heat. In some cases they use even non heating approaches to vaporize the nicotine and allow it to enter the bloodstream very quickly. I must say in a lot of ways, vaping resembles crack cocaine. The reason why vaping and crack cocaine are so similar is the speed of entry of nicotine into the bloodstream. This isn't an episode about cocaine, but I just want to very briefly touch on some of the delivery routes for cocaine because they parallel a lot of the delivery routes for nicotine. And we can learn a lot about drug pharmacokinetics and dopamine if we look at the parallels between cocaine and nicotine. I'll preface this by saying cocaine is a terrible drug. It is actually a schedule two drug in the United States, which means that it has a very, very limited yet still present medical application, mainly as an anesthetic in certain laboratory and hospital conditions. But aside from that, it's very clear that cocaine is one of the most debilitating drugs that humans can use because of the way that it impacts the dopamine system. And it basically creates a loop whereby the only thing that can really trigger dopamine release is cocaine. And as I've said before, the way that I define addiction is it's a progressive narrowing of the things that bring people pleasure. Cocaine certainly falls into the category of addictive drugs, strongly addictive drugs. And in fact, it has the additionally pernicious feature that after using cocaine for some period of time, the amount of dopamine that's released becomes progressively lower and lower and lower so that people can never get back to a state in which dopamine release is ever as great as it was the first time they did cocaine or prior to doing cocaine. Now with a long period of no cocaine use whatsoever and protecting the dopamine system in a number of different ways, people can often, not always but often recover their dopamine system, if not completely then near completely. So by all means, if you have a problem with cocaine, quit, find a way to quit, get treatment, get over that one way or another. We have an episode with an expert guest, Dr. Anna Lembke, who's a physician and the chief of the Stanford School of Medicine dual diagnosis addiction clinic, a world expert in dopamine and addictive substances and addictions of all kinds. You can find that episode at hubermanlab.com. It's filled with information about how to get over different types of addictions, including cocaine addiction. Also check out her absolutely phenomenal and indeed important book "Dopamine Nation", which touches on some of this as well. And in the show note captions for the episode where Dr. Lembke was my guest, you can also find some additional resources related to that. So cocaine is terrible. That needs to be acknowledged. It should be avoided and you should find a way to quit it if you are currently using. With that said, the delivery mechanism for cocaine strongly parallels the delivery mechanisms for nicotine. That is people will snort cocaine, which is a lot like snuffing or dipping. That is when people snort cocaine, they're bringing cocaine into proximity or into contact, really with the mucosal lining of the nasal passages, which then allows the psychoactive substances to permeate into the bloodstream. Very seldom do people eat it, although that does happen from time to time, people will inject it, as so-called mainlining, which is a very rapid entry into the bloodstream because it's direct application to the bloodstream by way of injection. And then there's crack cocaine, which is essentially like a vaporizing of the cocaine from a so-called cocaine rock, that somewhat resembles vaping of nicotine. So while the vape pen involves a liquid that's sold, a cartridge that contains nicotine and often other flavors as well, flavorings I should say, both crack cocaine and vaping cause very rapid increases in the relative substances that are psychoactive, in the case of cocaine, that would be cocaine and the increase in dopamine in the brain and body I should mention. And in the case of vaping, there's a very rapid increase in blood concentrations of nicotine, much faster than occur with cigarette smoking or other modes of nicotine delivery. So that speed of onset turns out to be a critical parameter because the speed of onset of nicotine is going to also determine the speed of release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area, that mesolimbic reward pathway. And with the mesolimbic reward pathway, it's not just about the peak, meaning the maximal amount of dopamine that's released, but it's the time course, how steep the curve is, how quickly that dopamine increases that's going to determine how reinforcing, how habit forming and indeed how addictive a particular substance is. One of the major important differences between vaping and cigarette smoking is that the onset of dopamine release from vaping is faster. And even a subtle increase in the rate at which dopamine increases in the mesolimbic reward pathway can make a given amount of nicotine much more habit forming and addictive. Now this probably explains the fact that many, many more people, in particular, young people age 25 and younger are vaping at phenomenal rates. People are starting to vape in just about everywhere. You see this in restaurants, you see it on the street, indeed you even see it in the classroom. This has actually become sort of sport of sorts. Certainly not something I encourage. In fact, when I learned about this from a new college student is telling me that many college students are actually bringing vape pens into the classroom. I think this is also happening in high schools and even junior high schools. This is a really concerning practice. And here I'm not trying to come across as the anti vaping crusader, but I must say given the negative effects on one's health in the long term, but also given these exceedingly powerful reward properties of nicotine entering the bloodstream quickly, and dopamine being released very quickly from the mesolimbic reward pathway, what we're seeing out there makes total sense. Young people's brains are essentially getting wired to the expectation that dopamine is going to be increased dramatically and quickly under their control, except it's under their control only in a very narrow set of circumstances. Recall the definition of addiction, a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. We can change that statement to also say a progressive narrowing and specific kinetics, that is specific time course of the things that bring you pleasure. Now that's a bit of a nerdier statement than a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. But what we are going to see in the next few years, I believe is an entire generation of young people for which a very large percentage of them are going to be seeking out a pattern or feeling because to the person taking it, they're not looking at their dopamine levels rising in their blood. They're experiencing this as an increase in focus, an increase in alertness, an increase in mood and wellbeing that is very rapid, very dramatic, and that simply cannot be recreated by any other substance. And that's a very concerning scenario, concerning because that mesolimbic reward pathway is the only pathway, the only pathway by which you can achieve the rewarding properties of any kind of endeavor, not just vaping of course. It is the way in which people achieve satisfaction from reaching a relationship goal or an athletic goal or an educational goal, any kind of goal or sense of satisfaction. And so it comes as no surprise that vaping is strongly associated with increased levels of depression, especially when vaping use drops off. Why would that be? If people are getting so much more dopamine so much more quickly from vaping, shouldn't they be feeling better? That brings us back to the critical, and I should say, defining feature of the dopamine reward pathway for motivation and wellbeing, which is that initially a given substance will cause, let's say an eight out of 10, again, arbitrary units, but eight out of 10 increase in dopamine. But with repeated use, what ends up happening is that even at similar or higher levels of ingestion, so not just one inhalation a minute, but maybe two inhalations a minute or an inhalation every 30 seconds. Now it's level four out of 10 activation of dopamine and then three and then two. And eventually it drops below baseline. Now the whole system can be recovered by abstinence from nicotine consumption, but the dopamine system is applied to everything, all sense of wellbeing, all sense of motivation. So during the period in which one is abstaining from nicotine and vaping in particular, people do not feel good. They feel miserable. That's why it's called withdrawal. It's associated with a bunch of psychological and physiological symptoms that all lead back to trying to get to the same levels of dopamine release in the same patterns that were experienced when one initially started vaping. So I'm not trying to paint a dark picture here, but frankly, the picture is very dark. I'm very concerned about a practice of ingesting something that powerfully modulates the dopamine system with the sorts of kinetics that one sees from ingestion of crack cocaine in young people that has all these other negative health effects that in the short term is very powerfully rewarding, increased focus, wellbeing, et cetera, but that over a very brief period of time leads to a state in which the entire dopamine reward system is impaired and can become permanently impaired unless one intervenes in a very deliberate way. So people are directly controlling the rate of dopamine and the frequency of dopamine release by the duration and frequency of inhalations off the vape pen. And that's an incredible thing because what it does is it sets up the mesolimbic reward pathway for an expectation that dopamine will be delivered on that schedule. So that's one of the things that makes vaping in particular so hard to quit. Vaping is actually harder to quit than cigarette smoking for most people. Now does that mean that cigarette smoking is fairly easy to quit for most people? No. 70% of people who smoke cigarettes report that they would like to quit if they thought they could. The success rate of quitting smoking when people try to go just cold turkey, just quit with no assistance whatsoever. They might tell their family and friends, hey, I'm quitting, that's it, is exceedingly low, it's 5%. So 5% of the people that say, that's it, I'm not smoking again. Despite cancer diagnosis, I'm not smoking again. Despite the fear of the negative health effects, I'm not going to ever smoke again. Despite the financial cost, the health cost. I could list off a huge number of things that it does that are negative, but you already know these or you've heard them, it makes your skin worse, as I mentioned it lowers libido, it disrupts hormones, it disrupts vascular function, brain function. It does all these terrible things. And yet most people who try and quit simply can't. And of the 5% that succeed in quitting, a full 65% of them relapse within a year. So that's a very depressing picture, but it's not to say that people cannot quit. And in fact, they can. There are a couple of methods that have been shown to help people quit. Some are behavioral and some are pharmacologic. I just want to touch on the behavioral ones first because it turns out that there's a quite powerful method for quitting nicotine ingestion by way of cigarette smoking, which also carries over to vaping. This is beautiful work that's been done by my colleague, in fact, close collaborator, although I was not involved in the research that I'm about to describe at Stanford. And his name is Dr. David Spiegel. He is our associate chair of psychiatry. He's been a guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and he is a world expert, if not the world expert in the clinical applications of hypnosis. Now when I say hypnosis, a lot of people think stage hypnosis, which is the hypnotist trying to get people to do certain things and say certain things, not necessarily against their will because they actually have to agree. But the hypnotist is dictating what the person thinks, says, and does. Clinical hypnosis is vastly different from that. Clinical hypnosis is where the person, the patient actually directs their own brain changes toward a specific emotional or behavioral goal. Work from Dr. David Spiegel's laboratory done in 1993, but that now has been repeated many, many times that has carried over into some more modern studies and I will provide links to those studies in the show note captions so that you can access them. Those studies have shown that using a specific form of hypnosis, people can achieve complete and total cessation of cigarette smoking. And there's no reason to believe this doesn't also carry over to vaping through one single hypnosis session. And the success rates are incredibly high when one considers that normally it would be only a 5% success rate. The success rate with this particular hypnosis developed at Stanford School of Medicine by Dr. David Spiegel is 23% of people who do this hypnosis one time succeed in quitting smoking. Now in the old days, which actually wasn't that long ago, before the advent of smartphones and before the internet took off to the extent that it has now, this was done by having someone come into the clinic and Dr. Spiegel himself or one of his colleagues would take somebody through the hypnosis. Nowadays, you can access this hypnosis. There's a wonderful app that was developed by Dr. David Spiegel and others. It's called Reveri, R-E-V-E-R-I. I've talked about this app a few times on the podcast before, because there are hypnosis scripts within the app for enhancing sleep, for improving ability of fall asleep if you wake up in the middle of the night, for focus, and a number of other behavioral and emotional changes. There's also a function in the Reveri app for smoking cessation, which exactly parallels the sort of in laboratory and in clinic approaches that Dr. Spiegel would use were you to show up at his clinic or his laboratory. And since that's not possible for the large number of people out there, if you or somebody else is trying to quit smoking or vaping or dipping or snuffing for that matter, I strongly encourage you to check out the Reveri app. You can find it easily by going to reveri.com. It's available in various formats. Some of it is available free, some of it is behind a paywall, but given the tremendously negative impact of smoking, vaping, dipping, and snuffing, the hypnosis for smoking cessation that Reveri has seems at least to me as a very powerful and worthwhile resource. So please check that out if you're somebody who's trying to quit ingesting nicotine by any of the four methods that I just described. Now of course, there are other methods that people have used to successfully quit smoking or vaping or other forms of nicotine delivery. And there's actually an excellent review on this topic. So before diving into a few of the specifics about some of the pharmacology of using nicotine itself to quit smoking or nicotine itself to quit vaping, or the use of various things, even SSRIs, antidepressants to quit smoking or vaping. I just want to point you to a review article that if you'd like to get a complete survey of all the options that are available, there's an excellent review on this. It was published just a couple of years ago in 2020. And the title of the article is "Pharmacologic Approach to Smoking Cessation: An Updated Review for Daily Clinical Practice". And even though this is mainly focused on smoking cessation, it carries over quite nicely to vaping. And it details a number of statistics, the fact that every year, 700,000 or more people die because of smoking related diseases. So there again you have the negative health effects that younger people are smoking, that women are smoking more nowadays. And that even though you see less smoking, typically in the US and Canada, and even in Northern Europe, some places, there are still many many people are smoking who would like to quit, but that 75% of people, at least according to this review earlier, I said 70%, but estimates are as high as 75% of people who try to quit smoking relapse within the first week. The first week, they just go right back to it. That's how powerfully reinforcing the nicotine is. Remember, it's the nicotine in the cigarette that's powerfully reinforcing, but it's also the oral habit, the motor habit. There is this thing about density of sensory receptors in the lips. People like bringing things to their lips, food, cigarettes, other lips in some cases, et cetera, there is a reinforcement pathway related to that for sort of obvious adaptive reasons. And as a consequence, there is a reinforcement, both from the behavior and from the dopamine released from the nicotine itself. And as I mentioned earlier, from the positive reinforcement that comes from increased focus. So the money that you make through work or your attentional ability or the fact that you're alert and people feel you present, all of that funnels back into positive reinforcement, behavioral reinforcement, and then what we would call addiction. So this review covers all of that and then steps beautifully through nicotine replacement therapy and various compounds, several of which I'm going to talk about now, which have been shown to increase that number that we talked about earlier of only 5% of people who try to quit with no other support pharmacologic or hypnosis or otherwise just say that's it, I'm not going to smoke again, or I'm not going to vape again, only 5% of people succeed in doing that. And even among those, many end up relapsing later, there are a couple pharmacologic approaches. One of the main ones that's received a lot of attention in recent years is Bupropion, sometimes referred to by its commercial name Wellbutrin. Now Bupropion is a compound that increases the release of dopamine and to a lesser extent epinephrine and some other neurochemicals as well. It's used for the treatment of depression and for smoking cessation. Now I want to point out again, I'm not a psychiatrist, so I'm not telling you to take Bupropion, AKA Wellbutrin, but I'm going to give you a little bit of the contour of what's typically done in terms of Bupropion administration to help people get relief from some of the withdrawal symptoms of trying to quit smoking or vaping or other forms of nicotine ingestion. Typically Bupropion is taken in 300 milligram per day doses divided into two dosages of 150 milligrams each, or sometimes there's a slow release formula. The dosages will vary from person to person. I want to really emphasize that there is an increased seizure risk with Bupropion. It only occurs in a small fraction of the population, but nonetheless is a real concern for those members of the population. So for those of you with seizure risk, whether you know it or not, that's going to be a valid concern in terms of potential side effects. The other thing about Bupropion is that it has to be used with caution in patients that have liver disease or renal disease that can impact the amount that anyone can take meaning sometimes people have to take a much lower dose if they have renal disease or liver disease. And sometimes they can't take it at all. Sometimes if people are taking benzodiazepines for whatever reason or other sedatives, there are contraindications there, so Bupropion isn't a kind of one size fits all or magic bullet for quitting smoking, nonetheless, for people that can take it safely, and again, this is a prescription drug, a board certified psychiatrist or other physician is going to have to prescribe it for you if it's appropriate for you. And it moves that number of 5% success rate to about what one sees with the clinical hypnosis to about 20% of people will successfully overcome their nicotine, or I should say their smoking or vaping addiction. Now it's important to ask why this would work, right? It's not as if Bupropion is increasing nicotine per se. What it's doing is it's tapping on that mesolimbic reward pathway, increasing dopamine, or at least allowing dopamine levels to say substantially elevated enough that people don't experience some of the drop in dopamine that leads to the withdrawal symptoms, the lessening of mood, et cetera. And it's no coincidence that Bupropion is also an antidepressant. It's a common antidepressant for people that experience negative side effects with the so-called SSRIs, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors that prevent them from taking those things like lessen libido or appetite, or in some cases increased appetite or any number of other side effects that some people, not all, but some people experience with SSRIs. They'll be prescribed Wellbutrin, Bupropion is the generic name. So Wellbutrin being the commercial name again, Bupropion is what they'll be prescribed instead with the caveats of seizure risk, renal disease, liver disease, et cetera. The outcomes with Wellbutrin for smoking cessation are pretty good if you think about an increase from 5% to 20%, that's pretty dramatic. And yet I also want to refer back to the incredible success of the clinical hypnosis approach. Again, you can find that at reveri.com, the clinical hypnosis approach has a success rate of 23%. So it's very closely aligned with, if not exceeding the success rate with Bupropion. Of course there are other pharmacologic approaches to quitting smoking or vaping. All of them generally circle back to increasing dopamine and/or norepinephrine in order to offset some of the withdrawal symptoms of smoking cessation or vaping cessation. A very common approach for people to try and quit smoking or vaping is to use nicotine itself to try and prevent people from seeking nicotine through a cigarette or a vape pen. What I mean by that is people using a nicotine patch or nicotine gum or other nicotine delivery device that is not cigarettes and not vaping in order to maintain levels of nicotine in their bloodstream, which of course means maintain levels of nicotine in their brain and body to the same extent that they would if they were smoking or vaping, maybe even gradually taking down the total amount of nicotine in their brain and body by reducing the number or size of nicotine gum pieces that they ingest each day, or keeping the patch on for a shorter amount of time or getting a lower dose patch that releases less nicotine total or over time. All of those approaches have been shown to be reasonably successful, I'll get to the numbers in a few minutes, but reasonably successful in allowing people to quit smoking or vaping. Again, most of the data is on cigarette smoking because vaping is a relatively new phenomenon. Although quite troublingly, it's a very rapidly increasing behavior, especially in the young population. So that's why I'm kind of lumping these two things together because I think very soon we are going to need an all out campaign for how to counter vaping addiction. So what do we know about smoking cessation using nicotine itself? Is the patch best? Is nicotine gum best? Turns out that a combination of approaches is best, so somewhat surprising, but it was very clear from the literature that I was able to find that using nicotine patches for some period of time and then switching to a gum and then perhaps switching to a nasal spray, that's going to be the most effective. Then the question is how long to continue each of those and whether or not to overlap them. It seems as if doing one for about a week and then switching to another for about a week and then switching to another is one rationable and reasonable approach that many people have used successfully. Why would that be? It all has to do with the different rates of absorption of nicotine into the bloodstream, and then the downstream consequences of that on the dopamine, acetylcholine, epinephrine, and other systems of the brain and body. And while there hasn't been an extremely detailed study of the exact kinetics of how the nasal sprays versus the transdermal patches versus the gums, et cetera, work, there's a logical structure to it that will immediately make sense to you. First of all, the transdermal patches provide a fairly steady state dopamine release across the day. And oftentimes people are wearing them at night as well. This is relevant because if people are ingesting nicotine by way of smoking and vaping, hopefully they're not waking up in the middle of the night just to smoke or vape. Believe or not, some people do that, but of course, while people are asleep, they are not smoking or vaping. They always tell you don't fall asleep with a cigarette in your mouth, you'll burn the whole house down, but exceedingly rare to have people are smoking in their sleep. So people wake up in the morning and because the half life of nicotine from smoking or vaping is very short, anywhere from one to two hours, they're essentially in a state of withdrawal at the point where they wake up in the morning. How can I say that? Remember, withdrawal sets in about four hours after the last ingestion of nicotine by cigarette or by inhalation from the vape pen. So people are waking up in nicotine withdrawal and then immediately going into the behavior of ingesting nicotine, or very soon after waking for most people. So nicotine patch is going to be very effective for a week or so, again, talk to your physician about the best approach for this, but then switching to a nasal spray or switching to nicotine gum for about a week, which is going to change the kinetics of that nicotine absorption into the bloodstream and change the release of dopamine and other neurochemicals within the brain. That's going to keep the system intentionally off balance so that it never comes to expect one single pattern or amplitude of dopamine release. And that is a very powerful way for a, let's just call it a quitting method to work. Because as I've always said, the most powerful schedule of dopamine is going to be this random intermittent reward. This is what's used in the casinos in order to take your money. And generally they do, on average, they take your money more than you take theirs, and they take more of it. Not just more often because they use this random intermittent schedule. The random intermittent schedule is one in which you don't really know when the peaks in dopamine are going to arrive. And so there isn't this expectation and craving. And then all of a sudden when dopamine is released, it's extremely high. That's how they get you to continue playing, even though basically you're losing money and your dopamine is dropping, they elevate it every once in a while. Nicotine replacement can be used in a similar way, but in a benevolent way, in order to help you get over smoking or vaping by keeping the total amounts of dopamine variable around the clock and by changing the amount of dopamine that's released, it seems to help people behaviorally and psychologically because they don't come to expect having a particular amount of dopamine in their brain and blood at any given time. And this is an important point because it brings us to this notion of homeostasis. Homeostasis is this tendency for biological systems to try and reach equilibrium. What goes up, goes down, et cetera. And to some extent to the same degree. So I'll talk about this right now in the context of nicotine use withdrawal, and then the period in which people no longer crave nicotine. So you can imagine that if we were to measure your heart rate, your blood pressure, and your overall levels of alertness and wellbeing and mood, let's just give that some value. Let's say it runs from zero to 10, again, arbitrary units. Let's just take all those physiological measures and the subjected measure of your mood. And let's measure it four times an hour across the day, across the waking hours. What we would find is a line that would kind of squiggle a bit, maybe a nice text comes in that you really like, maybe you get not so good news and your kind of autonomic arousal is all over the place, but on average is kind of a squiggly line where it increases in the morning because that's typically when body temperature and autonomic arousal increase. And then towards the afternoon, it's going to come sloping down. And then right before sleep, there'll be an increase again, if you've ever felt that you kind of run around a lot before sleep and then it goes down, that's kind of the typical contour of autonomic arousal, mood, et cetera, across the day, removing of course life events and things like psychiatric illness and depression and et cetera. That's the typical arc of that. Now let's superimpose on whatever that contour is for you, nicotine. So you get a little bolus as we say, a little bit of nicotine from smoking a cigarette or from taking an inhalation on a vape pen, what ends up happening is there's an increase in blood pressure, increase in heart rate, increase in mood, increase in alertness, all the things we talked about earlier. Over time, the body starts to adjust so that the baseline upon which that nicotine induced increase in arousal would occur is actually reduced, right? Why would that be? Well, the body and the brain, your physiology seeks homeostasis. So if there's a big increase in all those things like blood pressure and mood, et cetera, typically your baseline will drop a little bit to compensate for that over time, after a couple days or even weeks of ingesting nicotine. So let's say you wake up, you're typically take an inhalation off your vape, or you have a cigarette around nine or 10:00 AM and you do that daily. You get used to a certain level of mood and alertness and wellbeing for that time of day. And then if you smoke again in the afternoon, let's say you also get accustomed to a certain level of mood and alertness and wellbeing for that time of day. Again, it'll vary depending on life events, but your system sort of gets used to it and your baseline will drop to compensate for those peaks so that the peaks aren't quite as high as they were when you first started using nicotine. Now you decide to quit. So now what we're talking about is transitioning from the consumption to what we're going to call the withdrawal phase. So now what happens is you say, that's it, I'm going cold turkey. I know there's only a 5% success rate, but I'm going to just go cold turkey or somebody will say, no, I'm going to use the Reveri app. Or somebody says, no, I'm going to use Bupropion or another method or nicotine patch or something of that sort. Setting aside the nicotine patch or the nicotine delivery device and only focusing on approaches for getting through withdrawal that have no direct effects on nicotine. So not using the nicotine patch, but say the hypnosis or Bupropion, which can increase dopamine, but it doesn't increase nicotine directly. What happens? The day that you quit, that homeostatic mechanism in your brain and body that sets your level of mood and arousal, et cetera, does not know and hasn't adjusted to the fact that you're not bringing in nicotine. You're not having that cigarette. You're not having that inhalation on the vape pen. So what ends up happening is that baseline, which has been adjusted down to offset the increases in mood and alertness, et cetera, when you smoke or vape is lower than it normally would be. So that 9:00 AM cigarette time or vape inhalation time no longer feels above baseline, it actually feels below baseline because what you're seeing is the lower amplitude of arousal that was there to offset the increase you were getting from vaping or smoking. And then in the afternoon, if normally you have a kind of phase of your afternoon you really enjoy, you go outside, you have a vape or a cigarette, you normally are feeling relaxed or you go out at night and you like to vape and you say, nope, I'm not going to do that anymore, you're going to feel much, much worse than you would've had you never started smoking or vaping. Now that's not much help to anyone who's already started smoking or vaping. But I say this because it's very important to understand that the reason why relapse rates are so high within the first week, 75% of people relapse within one week and overall failure rates are 95% is because people don't expect to feel even worse than they did prior to ever smoking or vaping. So that first week is absolutely critical. And the beauty of understanding this is that if you can get through that first week, either by sheer grit or by finding other methods to increase dopamine, healthy methods I would hope, and certainly cold showers, ice baths have been shown to do that by the way. And this was described in Dr. Anna Lembke's book, "Dopamine Nation", cold showers can increase dopamine, exercise, positive social interactions. It's very likely that people will need to use other healthy methods to offset that reduction in dopamine if ever they stand to get through that first week. And again, if you can get through that first week, chances are quite a bit higher that you'll be able to maintain the cessation of smoking or vaping. And of course, hypnosis, things like Bupropion, can also assist in that, Bupropion by way of increasing dopamine pharmacologically, hypnosis through changes in neural circuitry that aren't completely understood, but seem to involve a remapping of some of the so-called default networks and some of the networks that are involved in kind of understanding of your own internal state. This stuff gets a little bit complicated and we're going to return to this in a upcoming episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but there are indeed legitimate changes in neural circuitry caused by clinical hypnosis that can at least partially explain why it is so effective in helping treat or allow people to stop smoking and vaping. So for those of you out there that, either here or are saying yourselves, I just can't seem to quit smoking or vaping or dipping or snuffing, hopefully an understanding of how that homeostasis process works and the time course of nicotine, depending on the delivery device, hopefully understanding that will allow you to develop a protocol. Maybe it involves hypnosis. Maybe it involves just understanding that the typical times in which you ingested nicotine through any of the different approaches of bringing it into your system are going to be particularly hard. But I don't just mean particularly hard. I mean, particularly hard, and you're going to need to do something specific to offset that decrease in overall autonomic arousal and dopamine, et cetera. Hopefully an understanding of that will allow you to get through that first week. And if you can make it past that first week, you stand a very good chance of never going back. However, I did consult with Dr. David Spiegel in anticipation of this episode, regardless of the method that you used to quit smoking or vaping, snuffing, or dipping, there's good evidence that a routine maybe once a month or even once a week hypnosis type approach to replenish or even enhance the neural circuits that are allowing you to stay away from nicotine is going to be a very good idea. And given that it's a purely behavioral intervention, I can see no reason as to why people wouldn't want to do that, go in and reinforce, you know, tighten the bolts on that circuitry that are allowing you to not feel the impulse to smoke, not feel the impulse to vape. And just a very brief mention, there is a vast literature on the fact that when people have quit smoking or vaping or other form of consuming nicotine, that when they consume alcohol, there's a much higher probability of relapse. There are interactions between alcohol and nicotine that we'll cover in future episodes. But for those of you that want to quit, I want to assure you, despite the fact that 95% of people fail, with the appropriate tools, and I like to think within an additional understanding of the underlying biology and psychology and what you can expect and when to really dig your heels and when to reinforce your system with more dopamine through any of the number of the different protocols and tools that we've offered here and that you can find elsewhere in other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I have a high degree of confidence that you can quit smoking or vaping, dipping or snuffing. So today, typical of frankly all episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've covered a lot about the biology of a particular system. We talked about the biology of nicotine in particular, we talked about vaping and smoking, dipping and snuffing and the negative health consequences associated with those. I want to reemphasize that nicotine is not what causes cancer. It is the delivery device that causes cancer and the other negative health effects. That is not to say that people should be ingesting nicotine through any different methods simply to get a cognitive boost. There are certain circumstances where that might be appropriate for the occasional work about, certainly not for physical exercise, given what we talked about earlier, but of course there are more and more approaches to increasing, not just nicotine, but acetylcholine generally in order to achieve cognitive enhancement or physical enhancement, or I should say physical performance enhancement. Some of those we talked about earlier, such as Alpha GPC. In any event, nicotine, it should now be clear, is an immensely powerful substance. One of the most commonly ingested substances on the face of the earth and has been for a very long time. And now that you understand the underlying biology and the way in which this changes your psychology and physiology, that should come as no surprise. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify, and on both Apple and Spotify, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments or suggestions of topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to invite onto the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That is the best way to support this podcast. During today's episode and on various previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements, while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep, hormone function, focus, and so on. The Huberman Lab Podcast is partnered with Momentous Supplements, spelled momentous, O-U-S. You can find those supplements at livemomentus.com/huberman. If you haven't already subscribed to the Huberman Lab Podcast Neural Network Newsletter, it's a monthly newsletter. We provide summaries of different podcasts and we provide summaries of specific tools that you can use to enhance sleep for instance, or enhance dopamine. We talk about deliberate cold exposure, deliberate heat exposure. It's very easy to sign up for, and it's completely zero cost. You go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, click on newsletter, provide us your email. We do not share it with anybody else. And you'll receive that monthly newsletter, and there, you can also find PDFs of previous newsletters that you can immediate download without even having to sign up. If you're not already following us on social media, we are hubermanlab on Twitter, hubermanlab on Instagram, and hubermanlab on Facebook. And at all of those locations, I describe science and science related tools. Some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, much of which is distinct from the content covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So once again, I'd like to thank you for joining me today for a discussion about the biology and psychological effects of nicotine, this incredibly powerful substance. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 256 ---
Video ID: uxZFl4BDOGk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uxZFl4BDOGk
Title: Dr. David Anderson: The Biology of Aggression, Mating, & Arousal | Huberman Lab Podcast #89
Published: 2022-09-12 12:00:38 UTC
Description:
My guest is David Anderson, PhD, a world expert in the science of sexual behavior, violent aggression, fear and other motivated states. Dr. Anderson is a Professor of Biology at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), a member of the National Academy of Sciences and an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). We discuss how states of mind (and body) arise and persist and how they probably better explain human behavior than emotions per se. We also discuss the many kinds of arousal that create varying levels of pressure for certain behaviors to emerge. We discuss different types of violent aggression and how they are impacted by biological sex, gender, context, prior experience, and hormones, and the neural interconnectedness of fear, aggression and sexual behavior. We also discuss peptides and their role in social isolation-induced anxiety and aggression. Dr. Anderson also describes novel, potentially powerful therapeutics for mental health. This episode should interest anyone wanting to learn more about mental health, human emotions, sexual and/or violent behavior.  

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. David Anderson
Dr. David Anderson: https://davidandersonlab.caltech.edu/davidanderson 
The Nature of the Beast: https://amzn.to/3qsrdOH
Dr. David Anderson’s Lab: https://davidandersonlab.caltech.edu 
Dr. Anderson’s publications: https://bit.ly/3L5uGMl

Articles
Two Different Forms of Arousal in Drosophila Are Oppositely Regulated by the Dopamine D1 Receptor Ortholog DopR via Distinct Neural Circuits: https://bit.ly/3Dmyh7b

Resources
Mouse switching from mating behavior to aggressive behaviors upon stimulation of VMH: https://youtu.be/AIlp69kfqjw?t=882 
VMH stimulation causes mouse to display aggressive behaviors toward an inanimate object (e.g., glove): https://youtu.be/AIlp69kfqjw?t=689
Picture of Periaqueductal Gray (PAG): https://neuroscientificallychallenged.com/posts/know-your-brain-periaqueductal-gray

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. David Anderson, Emotions & Aggression 
00:03:33 Momentous Supplements 
00:04:27 Levels, Helix Sleep, LMNT 
00:08:10 Emotions vs. States
00:10:36 Dimensions of States: Persistence, Intensity & Generalization
00:14:38 Arousal & Valence 
00:18:11 Aggression, Optogenetics & Stimulating Aggression in Mice, VMH
00:24:42 Aggression Types: Offensive, Defensive & Predatory 
00:29:20 Evolution & Development of Defensive vs. Offensive Behaviors, Fear
00:35:38 Hydraulic Pressures for States & Homeostasis
00:38:33 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:39:46 Hydraulic Pressure & Aggression
00:44:50 Balancing Fear & Aggression
00:48:31 Aggression & Hormones: Estrogen, Progesterone & Testosterone
00:52:33 Female Aggression, Motherhood
00:59:48 Mating & Aggressive Behaviors 
01:05:10 Neurobiology of Sexual Fetishes 
01:10:06 Temperature, Mating Behavior & Aggression
01:15:25 Mounting: Sexual Behavior or Dominance?
01:20:59 Females & Male-Type Mounting Behavior
01:24:40 PAG (Periaqueductal Gray) Brain Region: Pain Modulation & Fear 
01:30:38 Tachykinins & Social Isolation: Anxiety, Fear & Aggression 
01:43:49 Brain, Body & Emotions; Somatic Marker Hypothesis & Vagus Nerve 
01:52:52 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter, Huberman Lab Clips

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. David Anderson, Dr. Anderson is a professor of biology at the California Institute of Technology, often commonly referred to as Caltech University. Dr. Anderson's research focuses on emotions and states of mind and body, and indeed he emphasizes how emotions, like happiness, sadness, anger and so on, are actually subcategories of what are generally governed by states, that is, things that are occurring in the nervous system in our brain and in the connections between brain and body that dictate whether or not we feel good about how we are feeling, and that drive our behaviors, that is, bias us to be in action or inaction and strongly influence the way we interpret our experience and our surroundings. Today, Dr. Anderson teaches us, for instance, why people become aggressive and why that aggression can sometimes take the form of rage. We also talk about sexual behavior, and the boundaries and overlap between aggression and sexual behavior. And that discussion about aggression and sexual behavior also starts to focus on particular aspects of neural circuits and states of mind and body that govern things like, for instance, male-male aggression, versus male-female aggression, versus female-female aggression. So today, you will learn a lot about the biological mechanisms that govern why we feel the way we feel. Indeed, Dr. Anderson is an author of a terrific new popular book, entitled "The Nature of the Beast: How Emotions Guide Us". I've read this book several times now, I can tell you it contains so many gems that are firmly grounded in the scientific research. In fact, a lot of what's in the book contrasts with many of the common myths about emotions and biology. So whether or not you're a therapist, or you're a biologist, or you're simply just somebody interested in why we feel the way we feel and why we act the way we act, I cannot recommend the book highly enough. Again, the title is "The Nature of the Beast: How Emotions Guide Us". Today's discussion also ventures into topics such as mental health and mental illness, and some of the exciting discoveries that have been made by Dr. Anderson's laboratory and other laboratories identifying specific peptides, that is, small proteins that can govern whether or not people feel anxious or less anxious, aggressive or less aggressive. This is an important area of research that has direct implications for much of what we read about in the news, both unfortunate and fortunate events, and that will no doubt drive the future of mental health treatments. Dr. Anderson is considered one of the most pioneering and important researchers in neurobiology of our time. Indeed, he is a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator. I've mentioned the HHMI once or twice before when we've had other HHMI guests on this podcast, but for those of you that are not familiar, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute funds a small number of investigators doing particularly high-risk, high-benefit work, and it is an extremely competitive process to identify those Howard Hughes investigators. They are essentially appointed, and then every five years, they have to compete against one another and against a new incoming flock of would-be HHMI investigators to get another five years of funding. They are literally given a grade every five years as to whether or not they can continue, not continue, or whether or not they should worry about being funded for an extended period of time. Dr. Anderson has been an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute since 1989. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single-ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There, you'll see those supplements, and just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Levels, Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important factors governing our immediate and long-term health and indeed our ability to think and focus clearly is our blood glucose levels, also referred to as blood sugar. To maintain healthy energy and focus throughout the day, you want to keep your blood glucose levels steady and avoid peaks and crashes. I first started using Levels about a year ago as a way to better understand how specific foods, food combinations, exercise and supplements impact my blood glucose levels, and it's been tremendously informative. In fact, it's changed and shaped the way that I organize my entire day. Levels even provides a simple score after you eat a meal so you can see how different foods affect you and develop a personalized nutrition program that's ideal for you. So if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, you can go to levels.link/huberman, that's levels.link/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality. They also have some really unique features, because they are customized to your unique sleep needs. I've talked over and over again on this podcast and on other podcasts about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health and performance, there's just simply no other substitute for a quality night's sleep on a regular basis. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for well over a year now and it's the best sleep that I've ever had, and that's in large part because the mattress was designed for me. What you need to know, however, is what's the ideal mattress for you, and you can do that by going to Helix's site, you can take their brief quiz, which will ask you, "Do you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach? Or maybe you don't know, or maybe all three. Do you tend to run hot or cold in the night? Maybe you know, maybe you don't." At the end of that short quiz, they will match you to the ideal mattress for you. I matched to the Dusk, the D-U-S-K mattress, but again, that's what I need, that's not necessarily what you need in order to get your best night's sleep. But if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you and you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows, they have terrific pillows. And you get to try out that mattress for 100 nights risk free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it, but I'm certain you will. Again, if you're interested in it, you go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off your mattress order and two free pillows. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't, meaning no sugar, but it has sodium, magnesium and potassium in the proper ratios. Sodium, magnesium and potassium are critical for the functioning of all your cells, but of your neurons, your nerve cells in particular. Many people out there, believe it or not, need to ingest more sodium and more potassium, and magnesium in the proper ratios to sodium and potassium. For those of you that are prehypertensive or hypertensive, you definitely don't want to crank up your sodium intake, but many people out there, especially people following low-carb diets or eating exceptionally clean very well may need more sodium. And by drinking LMNT mixed with water, which is what I do once or twice a day, and certainly also during workouts and after workouts, you can optimize mental functioning and physical performance by increasing your electrolyte balance in the proper ratios. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's L-M-N-T, .com/huberman, and you'll get a free sample pack with your order. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to get a free sample pack with your order. And now for my discussion with Dr. David Anderson. David, great to be here and great to finally sit down and chat with you. - Great to be here too, thank you so much. - Yeah, I have a ton of questions, but I want to start with something fairly basic, but that I'm aware is a pretty vast landscape, and that's the difference between emotions and states, if indeed there is a difference, and how we should think about emotions. What are they? They have all these names, happiness, sadness, depression, anger, rage, how should we think about them and why might states be at least as useful a thing to think about, if not more useful? - That's great. First, the short answer to your question is that I see emotions as a type of internal state, in the sense that arousal's also a type of internal state, motivation's a type of internal state, sleep is a type of internal state. And the sort of simplest way I think of internal states is that, as you've shown in your own work, they change the input-to-output transformation of the brain. When you're asleep, you don't hear something that you would hear if you were awake, unless it's a really, really loud noise. So from that broad perspective, I see emotion as a class of state that controls behavior. The reason I think it's useful to think about it as a state is it puts the focus on it as a neurobiological process rather than as a psychological process. And this gets around all of the definitional problems that people have with the word emotion, where many people equate emotion with feeling, which is a subjective sense that we can only study in humans, because to find out what someone's feeling, you have to ask them, and people are the only animals that can talk, that we can understand. So that's how I think about emotion, if you think of an iceberg, it's the part of the iceberg that's below the surface of the water, the feeling part is the tip that's sort of floating above the surface of your consciousness. Not that that isn't important, it is, but you have to understand consciousness if you want to understand feelings, and we're not ready to study that in animals yet, and so that's how I think about it. - What are the different components of a state? You mentioned arousal as a key component, what are some of the other features of states that represent this, as you so beautifully put in your book, that represent below the tip of the iceberg? - Right, right. So you can break states up into different facets, or people would call them dimensions, and so there have been people who have thought of emotions as having just really two dimensions, an arousal dimension, how intense is it? And also a valence dimension, which is, is it positive or negative, good or bad? Ralph Adolphs and I have tried to expand that a little bit to think about components of emotion, particularly those that distinguish emotion states from motivational states, because they are very closely related. One of those important properties is persistence, and this is something that distinguishes state-driven behaviors from simple reflexes. Reflexes tend to terminate when the stimulus turns off, like the doctor hitting your knee with a hammer, it initiates with the stimulus onset and it terminates with the stimulus offset, emotions tend to outlast, often, the stimulus that evoke them. If you're walking along a trail here in Southern California, you hear a rattlesnake rattling, you're going to jump in the air, but your heart is going to continue to beat and your palms sweat and your mouth is going to be dry for a while after it's slithered off in the bush, and you're going to be hypervigilant, if you see something that even remotely looks snake-like, a stick, you're going to stop and jump. So persistence is an important feature of emotion states, not all states have persistence. So for example, you think about hunger. Once you've eaten, the state is gone, you're not hungry anymore, but if you are really angry and you get into a fight with somebody, even after the fight is over, you may remain riled up for a long time and it takes you a while to calm down, and that may have to do with the arousal dimension or some other part of it. And then generalization is an important component of emotion states that make them, if they have been triggered in one situation, they can apply to another situation. And my favorite example of that is, you come home from work and your kid is screaming, if you had a good day at work, you might pick it up and sooth it, and if you had a bad day at work, you might react very differently to it and scream at it. And so that's a generalization of the state that was triggered at work, by something your boss said to you, to a completely different interaction. And again, that's something that distinguishes emotion states from motivation states, motivation states are really specific, find and eat food, obtain and consume water, and they're involved in homeostatic maintenance. So states are very multifaceted, and just asking questions about how these components of states are encoded, like what makes a state persist? What gives a state a positive or a negative valance? How do you crank up or crank down the intensity of the state? It just opens up a whole bunch of questions that you can ask in the brain with the kinds of tools we have now. - You mentioned arousal a few times, and you mentioned valence, realizing that there are these other aspects of states, I'd like to just talk about arousal a little bit more, and valence, because at a very basic level, it seems to me that arousal, we can be very alert and pissed off, stressed, worried, we can have insomnia, we can also be very alert and be quite happy. So the valence flips, people can be sexually aroused, people can be aroused in all sorts of ways. Is there any simple or simple-ish neurochemical signature that can flip valence? So for instance, is there any way that we can safely say that arousal with some additional dopamine release is going to be of positive valence, and arousal with very low dopamine is going to be of negative valence? - I would be reluctant to say that it's a chemical flip, I would say it's more likely to be a circuit flip. - Mm-hmm. - Different circuits being engaged. And it might be that a given neurochemical, even dopamine, is involved in both positively valanced arousal and negatively valanced arousal, that's why people think about these as different axes. So I think the interesting question that you touch on is, is arousal something that is just completely generic in the brain, or are there actually different kinds of arousal that are specific to different behaviors? And you raise the question, sexual arousal feels different from aggressive arousal, for example, and we actually published a paper on this, back in 2009, in fruit flies, where we found some evidence for two types of arousal states. One of which is sleep-wake arousal, you're more aroused when you wake up than when you're asleep, and flies show that, and the other is a startle response, an arousal response to a mechanical stimulus, and not just mechanical stimulus. If you puff air on flies, kind of like trying to swat the wasp away from your burger at a picnic table, they come back more and more and more vigorously. And we were able to dissect this and show that although both of those forms of arousal required dopamine, they were exerted through completely separable neural circuits in the fly. And so that really put, number one, the emphasis on it's the circuit that determines the type of arousal, but also that arousal isn't unitary, that there are behavior-specific forms of arousal. And I think the jury is still out as to whether there is such a thing as completely generalized arousal or not. And I think some people would argue there is, but I think more attention needs to be paid to this question of domain-specific or behavior-specific forms of arousal. - Yeah, it's a super-interesting idea, 'cause I always thought of arousal as along a continuum, like you can either be in a panic attack at the one end of the extreme, or you can be in a coma, and then somewhere in the middle, you're alert and calm, but then this issue of valence really, as you say, presents this opportunity that really there might be multiple circuits for arousal. - Yeah. - Or multiple mechanisms that would include neurochemicals, as well as different neural pathways. - Yeah. - So like to talk a bit about a state, if it is indeed a state, which is aggression, your labs worked extensively on this. And if you would, could you highlight some of the key findings there, which brain areas that are involved? The beautiful work of Dayu Lin and others in your lab that point to the idea that indeed there are kind of switches in the brain, but that thinking of switches for aggression might be too simple, how should we think about aggression? And I'll just sort of skew the question a bit more by saying, we see lots of different kinds of aggression, this terrible school shooting down in Texas recently, clearly an act that included aggression, and yet, you could imagine that's a very different type of aggression than an all-out rage or a controlled aggression, there's a lot of variation there. So what are your thoughts on aggression, how it's generated, the neural circuit mechanisms and some of the variation in what we call aggression? - Yeah, this is a great question, and it's a large area. I would say that, first of all, the word aggression, in my mind, refers more to a description of behavior than it does to an internal state. Aggression could reflect an internal state that we would call anger in humans, or could reflect fear, or it could reflect hunger if it's predatory aggression. And so this gets at the issue that you raised of the different types of aggression that exist. The work that Dayu did when she was in my lab that really broke open the field to the application of modern genetic tools for studying circuits in mice is that she found a way to evoke aggression in mice using optogenetics to activate specific neurons in a region of the hypothalamus, the ventromedial hypothalamus, VMH, which people had been studying and looking at for decades, following, first, the work of, in cats, the famous Nobel Prize-winning work of Walter Hess, and then followed by work done by Menno Kruk, in the Netherlands, in rats, where they would stick electrical wires into the brain and send electric currents into the brain, and they could trigger a placid cat to suddenly bare its teeth, hiss and almost strike out at the experimenter, and they could trigger rats to fight with each other. And even in Hess's original experiments, he describes two types of aggression that he evokes from cats depending on where in the hypothalamus he puts his electrode, one of which he calls defensive rage, that's the ears laid back, teeth bared and hissing. And the other one is predatory aggression, where the cat has its ears forward, and it's batting with its paw at a mouse-like object, like it wants to catch it and eat it. So he already had, at that stage, some information about segregation in the brain of different forms of aggression. So fast forward to 2008, 2009, when Dayu came to the lab and we had started working on aggression in fruit flies, and I wanted to bring it into mice so that we could apply genetic tools. And we started by having Dayu, who was an electrophysiologist, just repeat the electrical stimulation of the ventromedial hypothalamus in the mouse, just like people had done in rats, in cats, in hamsters, even in monkeys. And she could not get that experiment to work over 40 different trials, it just didn't work. What she got instead was fear behaviors, she got freezing, cornering and crouching. And finally, in desperation, and we got a lot of input from Menno Kruk on this, he really was mystified, "Why doesn't it work in mice?" We realized why there had been no paper on brain-stimulated aggression in mice in 50 years, 'cause the experiment doesn't work. And the one bit of credit I can claim there is I convinced Dayu to try optogenetics, because it just had sort of come into use deep in the brain, from Karl Deisseroth and others' work. And I thought maybe because it could be directed more specifically to a region of the brain and types of cells than electrical stimulation, it might work. And Dayu said, "Never, never going to work. If it doesn't work with electricity, why should it work with optogenetics?" And the fact is that it did work, and we were able to trigger aggression in this region using optogenetic stimulation of ventromedial hypothalamus. And in retrospect, I think the reason that we were seeing all these fear behaviors is because right at the upper part, if you think of ventromedial hypothalamus like a pear sitting on the ground, the fat part of the pear near the ground is where the aggression neurons are, but the upper part of the pear has fear neurons. And it could be because it's so small in a mouse, when you inject electrical current anywhere in the pear, it flows up through the entire pear and it activates the fear circuits, and those totally dominate aggression. And so that's why we were never able to see any fighting with electrical stimulation, whereas when you use optogenetics, you confine the stimulation just to the region where you've implanted the channelrhodopsin gene into those neurons. And so fast forward from that, from a lot of work from Dayu now on her own at NYU, and with her postdoc, Annegret Falkner, as well as work of other people, there's evidence that the type of fighting that we elicit when we stimulate VMH is offensive aggression that is actually rewarding to male mice. - They like it. - They like it, male mice will learn to poke their nose or press a bar to get the opportunity to beat up a subordinate male mouse. And in more recent experiments, if you activate those neurons and the mouse has a chance to be in one of two compartments in a box, they will gravitate towards the compartment where those neurons are activated, it has a positive valance. And when I went into this field and I was thinking, "Well, what goes on in my brain and my body when I'm furious?" it certainly doesn't feel like a rewarding experience, it's not something that I would want to repeat because it feels good when I'm in that state, it doesn't feel good at all when I'm in that state. And it is still, I think, a mystery as to where that type of aggression, which is more defensive aggression, the kind of aggression you feel if you're being attacked or if you've been cheated by somebody, where that is encoded in the brain and how that works, still, I think, is a very important mystery that we haven't solved. And predatory aggression there has been some progress on, so mice show predatory aggression, they use that to catch crickets that they eat, and that involves different circuits than the ventromedial hypothalamic circuits. So it's become clear that, if you want to call it the state of aggressiveness, is multifaceted, it depends on the type of aggression and it involves different sorts of circuits. There's a paper suggesting that there might be a final common pathway for all aggression in a region, which is one of my favorites, it's called the substantia innominata, the substance with no name, I like. - Anatomists are so creative. - Yes. [Andrew laughing] Or the nucleus ambiguous, or the zona incerta, these are places that no one can think of what they are. Anyhow, that might be a final common pathway for predatory aggression, and offensive and defensive aggression, but it can be really hard to tell just from looking at a mouse fight whether it's engaged in offensive or defensive aggression. We've tried to take that apart using machine learning analysis of behavior, but in rats, for example, it's much clearer when the animal is engaged in offensive versus defensive aggression. They direct their bites at different parts of the opponent's body. - [Andrew] In particular. - Offensive aggression is flank directed, defensive aggression goes for the neck, goes for the throat. - Mm, I've seen some nature specials where in a very barbaric way, [laughing] at least to me, it seems, like hyenas will try and go after the reproductive axis, they'll go after testicles and penis and they basically want to, it seems they want to limit future breeding potential. - Yes, or create pain. [David laughing] - Right, or create pain, or both. - Yeah. - Yeah, I mean, in terms of offensive aggression and your reflection that it doesn't feel good, I mean, I can say, I know some people who really enjoy fighting. - [David] Hmm. - I have a relative who's a lawyer, he loves to argue and fight. - [David] Huh. - I don't think of him as physically aggressive, in fact, he's not, but loves to fight and loves to prosecute and go after people. - Hmm. - And he's pretty effective at it. - Right. - I have a friend, former military special operations, and very calm guy, had a great career in military special operations, and he'll quite plainly say, "I love to fight." - Mm-hmm. - "It's one my great joys." He really enjoyed his work. - [David] Yep. - And also respected the other side because they offered the opportunity to test that and to experience that joy. So in a kind of bizarre way to somebody like me, who I'll certainly defend my stance if I need to. - Yeah. - But I certainly don't consider myself somebody who offensively goes after people just to go after them, there's no, quote-unquote, dopamine hit here. - Right. - Acknowledging that dopamine does many things, of course. - Yeah. - I have couple of questions about the way you describe the circuitry, I should say, the way the circuitry is arranged. - [David] Mm-hmm. - And of course, we don't know, because we weren't consulted at the design phase. [David laughing] But why do you think there would be such a close positioning of neurons that can elicit such divergent states and behaviors? I mean, you're talking about this pear-shaped structure, where the neurons that generate fear are cheek to jowl with the neurons that generate offensive aggression of all things. It's like putting the neurons that control swallowing next to the neurons that control vomiting, [laughing] it just seems to me that, on the one hand, this is the way that neural circuits are often arranged, and yet, to me, it's always been perplexing as to why this would be the case. - Yeah, I think that is a very profound question, and I've wondered about that a lot. If you think from an evolutionary perspective, it might have been the case that defensive behaviors and fear arose before offensive aggression, because animals, first and foremost, have to defend themselves from predation by other animals. And maybe it's only when they're comfortable with having warded off predation and made themselves safe, that they can start to think about, "Who's going to be the alpha male in my group here?" And so it could be that if you think that brain regions and cell populations evolve by duplication and modification of preexisting cell populations, that might be the way that those regions wound up next to each other. And developmentally, they start out from a common pool of precursors that expresses the same gene, the fear neurons and the aggression neurons, and then with development, it gets shut off in the aggression neurons and maintained in the fear neurons. Now, that view says, "Oh, it's an accident of evolution and development," but I think there must be a functional part as well. So one thing we know about offensive aggression is that strong fear shuts it down, whereas defensive aggression, at least in rats, is actually enhanced by fear. It's one of the big differences between defensive aggression and offensive aggression. And if you think about it, if offensive aggression is rewarding and pleasurable, if you start to get really scared, that tends to take the fun out of it, and maybe these two regions are close to each other to facilitate inhibition of aggression by the fear neurons. We know for a fact that if we deliberately stimulate those fear neurons at the top of the pear, when two animals are involved in a fight, it just stops the fight dead in its tracks and they go off into the corner and freeze. So at least hierarchically, it seems like fear is the dominant behavior over offensive aggression, and how that inhibition would work is not clear, 'cause all these neurons are pretty much excitatory, they're almost all glutamatergic. And so one of the interesting questions for the future is, how exactly does fear dominate over and shut down offensive aggression in the brain? How does that work, is it all circuitry, are there chemicals involved? What's the mechanism and when is it called into play? But I think that's the way I tend to think about why these neurons are all mixed up together. And it's not just fight and freezing, or fight and flight, there are also metabolic neurons that are mixed together in VMH as well. - Mm-hmm. Controlling body-wide metabolism? - Yeah. - Very interesting. - There are neurons there that respond to glucose, when glucose goes up in your bloodstream, they're activated, and VMH has a whole history in the field of obesity, because if you destroy it in a rat, you get a fat rat. So the way most of the world thinks about VMH is they think about, "Oh, that's the thing that keeps you from getting fat." It's the anti-obesity area, but in the area of social behavior, we see it as a center for control of aggression and fear behaviors. And again, why these neurons and these functions, I like to call them the four Fs, feeding, freezing, fighting and mating. - Mm-hmm. - That they all seem to be closely intermingled with each other, maybe because crosstalk between them is very important to help the animal's brain decide what behavior to prioritize and what behavior to shut down at any given moment. - One of the things that we will do is link to the incredible videos of these mice that have selective stimulation of neurons in the VMH, Dayu's and the other studies that you've done. Whenever I teach, I show those videos at some point, with the caveats and warnings that are required when one is about to see a video of a mouse trying to mate with another mouse, or mating with another mouse, and they seem both to be quite happy about the mating experience, at least as far as we know, as observers of mice. And then upon stimulation of those VMH neurons, one of the mice essentially tries to kill the other mouse. And then when that stimulation is stopped, they basically go back to hanging out. They don't go right back to mating. - Right. - There's some reconciliation clearly that needs to [laughing] happen first, we assume. - Yes. - But it's just so striking, and I think equally striking is the video where the mouse is alone in there with the glove, the VMH neurons are stimulated and the mouse goes into a rage, it looks like it wants to kill the glove, basically. - Yep. - So striking, I encourage people to go watch those, because it really puts a tremendous amount of color on what we're describing, and it's just the idea that there are switches in the brain, to me, really became clear upon seeing that. One of the, excuse me, one of the concepts that you've raised in your lectures before and that I think was Hess's idea is this idea of a sort of hydraulic pressure. - Mm-hmm. - Or maybe it was Konrad, I can't speak now. [David laughing] Excuse me, Konrad Lorenz, pardon. - Mm-hmm. - Who talked about a kind of hydraulic pressure towards behavior. I'm fascinated by this idea of hydraulic pressure, because I don't consider myself a hot-tempered person, but I am familiar with the fact that when I lose my temper, it takes quite a while for me to simmer down. I can't think about anything else, I don't want to think about anything else. In fact, trying to think about anything else becomes aversive to me, which, to me, underscores this notion of prioritization of the different states. - Mm-hmm. - And potentially conflicting states. What do you think funnels into this idea of hydraulic pressure toward a state? And why is it, perhaps, that sometimes we can be very angry, and if we succeed in winning an argument, all of a sudden, it will subside? Because clearly that means that there are external influences, it's a complex space here that we're creating, I realize I'm creating a bit of a cloud. - Yeah. - And I'm doing it on purpose, because, to me, the idea of a hydraulic pressure towards a state, like sleep, there's a sleep pressure. - Yeah. - There is a pressure towards aggression, that all makes sense, but what's involved? Is it too multifactorial to actually separate out the variables, but what's really driving hydraulic pressure toward a given state? - Yeah, so really important question, I think one way that is helpful, at least for me, to break this question apart and think about it is to distinguish homeostatic behaviors, that is, need-based behaviors, where the pressure is built up because of a need, like, "I'm hungry, I need to eat. I'm thirsty, I need to drink. I'm hot, I need to get to a cold place," it's basically the thermostat model of your brain. You have a set point, and then if the temperature gets too hot, you turn on the AC, and if the temperature gets too cold, you turn on the heater and you put yourself back to the set point. I don't think that's how aggression works. That is, it's not that we all go around, at least subjectively, I don't go around with an accumulating need to fight, which I then look for an excuse to release it. Now, maybe there are people that do that, and they go out and look for bar fights to get into to. - Or Twitter. - Yeah, [laughing] or Twitter, yeah. - Twitter seems to, I'm sort of half joking, because Twitter seems to draw a reasonably sized crowd of people that are there for combat of some sort, even though the total intellectual power of any of their comments is about that of a cap gun. [David laughing] They seem to really like to fire off that cap gun. - Right, right. - But I agree. - Yeah. - Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens, aka AG1, is an all-in-one, vitamin-mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin-mineral needs and it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system, it also supports the so-called gut-brain access, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with every order. And of course, vitamin D3 K2 are vital for all sorts of things, like hormone health and metabolic health, and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. - So you can think of this accumulated hydraulic pressure either being based on something that you were deprived of creating an accumulating need, or something that you want to do building up a drive or a pressure to do that, and the natural way to think about that, at least for me, is as gradual increases in neural activity in a particular region of the brain. And so for example, in the area of the hypothalamus that controls feeding, Scott Sternson and others have shown that the hungrier you get, the higher the level of activity in that region in the brain, and then when you eat, boom, the activity goes right back down again. And that state is actually negatively valenced, so it's like the animal, quote-unquote, feels increasingly uncomfortable, just like we feel increasingly uncomfortable the hungrier we are, and then when we eat, it tamps it down, but there is this increased activity. And I think in the case of aggression, our data and others show that the more strongly you drive this region of the brain optogenetically, the more of just a hair trigger you need to set the animal off to get it to fight. Now, the interesting thing is that if there is nothing for the animal to attack, it doesn't really do much when you're stimulating this region. It sort of wanders around the cage a little bit more, but it will not actually show overt attack unless you put something in front of it. And the same thing is true for the areas we've described that control mating behavior. This is what Lindsay is working on, you can stimulate those areas 'til you're blue in the face, and the mouse just sort of wanders around, but if you put another mouse in, wham, he will try to mount that mouse, if you put a kumquat in the cage. [Andrew laughing] He'll try to mount the kumquat, and so it becomes a sort of any port in the storm. So there is this idea that the drive is building up pressure that somehow needs to be released where that pressure is actually being exerted, if you accept that it's increased activity in some circuit or circuits someplace, what is it pushing up against that needs something else to sort of unplug it in the Lorenz hydraulic model? That is, you don't see the behavior until you release a valve on this bucket and let the accumulated pressure flow out. And that's one of the things we're trying to study in the context of the mating behavior as well, how does the information that there's an object in front of you come together with this drive state that is generated by stimulating these neurons in the hypothalamus to say, "Okay, pull the trigger and go, it's time to mate, it's time to attack?" And we're just starting to get some insights into that now. - Fascinating, and I should mention to people, Dr. Anderson mentioned Lindsay, Lindsay is a former graduate student of mine that's now a postdoc in David's lab. And I haven't caught up with her recently to hear about these experiments, but they sound fascinating. I would love to spend some time on this issue of why is it that a mouse won't attack nothing, but it'll attack even a glove, and why it will only try and mate if there's another mouse to mate with? It's actually, I think, fortunately for you, you're not spending a lot of time on Twitter and Instagram or YouTube, but there's this whole online community that exists now, as far as I know, it's almost exclusively young males who are obsessed with this idea, I'll just say it, it has a name, it's called NoFap, of no masturbation as a way to maintain their motivation to go out and actually seek mates. Because of the ready availability of online pornography. - Huh. - There's probably a much larger population of young males that are never actually going out and seeking mates because they're getting porn addicted, et cetera. There's actually a serious issue that came up in our episode with Anna Lembke, who wrote the book "Dopamine Nation". - Hmm. - Because of the availability of pornography, there's a whole social context that's being created around this, and genuine addiction. So humans are not like the mice, or mice are not like the humans, humans seem to resolve the issue on their own. - Yeah. - In ways that might actually impede seeking and finding of sexual partners and/or long-term mates. - Right. - So serious issue there, I raise it as a serious issue. - Yep. - That I hear a lot about, 'cause I get asked hundreds if not thousands of questions about this, "Is there any physiological basis for what they call NoFap?" And I never actually reply 'cause there's no data. - [David] Yep. - But what you're raising here is a very interesting mechanistic scenario that can, and as you mentioned, is being explored. So what do we know about the internal state of a mouse whose VMH is being stimulated or a mouse whose other brain region that can stimulate the desire to mate, what do we know about the internal state of that mouse if it's just alone in the cage wandering around? iI it wandering around really wanting to mate and really wanting to fight? We, of course, don't know, but is its heart rate up, is its blood pressure up? Is it wishing that there was pornography? [David and Andrew laughing] Something's going on, presumably, that's different than prior to that stimulation, and is it arousal? And what do you think it is about the visual factory perception of a conspecific that ungates this tremendous repertoire of behaviors? - Right, that is a central question. I can say, at least with respect to the fear neurons that sit on top of the aggression neurons, we know that when those neurons are activated optogenetically, in the same way we would activate the aggression neurons, that there's clearly an arousal process that's occurring, you can see the pupils dilate in the animal. There is an increase in stress hormone release into the bloodstream, we've shown that heart rate goes up. So in addition to the drive to actually freeze, which is what those animals do, there is autonomic arousal and neuroendocrine activation of stress responses. And some of that is probably shared by the aggression neurons and the mating neurons, although we haven't investigated it in as much detail, but I wouldn't be surprised because they project to many of the same regions that the fear neurons project to, which is a interesting issue in the context to discuss later maybe, in the context of why we're comfortable with mental illnesses that are based on maladaptations of fear, but not mental illnesses that are based on maladaptations of aggression if they have pretty similar circuits in the brain. But that's how I would imagine there is an arousal dimension, as you say, there are stress hormones that are activated, these regions, VMH projects to about 30 different regions in the brain, and it gets input from about 30 different regions. So I kind of see it as both an antenna and a broadcasting center, it's like a satellite dish that takes in information from different sensory modalities, smell, maybe vision, mechanosensation, and then it sort of synthesizes and integrates that into a fairly low-dimensional, as the computational people call it, representation of this pressure to attack, and it broadcasts that all over the brain to trigger all these systems that have to be brought into play if the animal is going to engage in aggression. Because aggression is a very risky thing for an animal to engage in, it could wind up losing and it could wind up getting killed, and so its brain constantly has to make a cost-benefit analysis of whether to continue on that path or to back off as well. And I think that part of this broadcasting function of this region is engaging all these other brain domains that play a role in this kind of cost-benefit analysis. - I want to talk more about mating behavior, but as a segue to that, as we're talking about aggression and mating behavior, I think, "Hormones." And whenever there's an opportunity on this podcast to shatter a common myth, I grab it. One of the common myths that's out there, and I think that persists, is that testosterone makes animals and humans aggressive, and estrogen makes animals placid and kind or emotional. And as we both know, nothing could be further from the truth, although there's some truth to the idea that these hormones are all involved. Robert Sapolsky supplied some information to me when he came on this podcast, that if you give people exogenous testosterone, it tends to make them more of the way they were before. If they were a jerk before, they'll become more of a jerk, if they were very altruistic, they'll become more altruistic. And then eventually I pointed out, "You'll aromatize that testosterone into estrogen and you'll start getting opposite effects," so it's a murky space, it's not straightforward. But if I'm not mistaken, testosterone plays a role in generating aggression, however, the specific hormones that are involved in generating aggression via VMH are things other than testosterone. Can you tell us a little bit more about that? 'Cause there's some interesting surprises in there. - Yeah, that's a really important question. So when we finally identified the neurons in VMH that control aggression with a molecular marker, we found out that that marker was the estrogen receptor. So that might strike you as a little strange, why should aggression-promoting neurons in male mice be labeled with the estrogen receptor? Other labs have shown that the estrogen receptor in adult male mice is necessary for aggression. If you knock out the gene in VMH, they don't fight. And it's been shown, and a lot of this is work from your colleague, Nirao Shah, at Stanford, who is one of my former PhD students, that if you castrate a mouse and it loses the ability to fight, not only can you rescue fighting with a testosterone implant, but you can rescue it with an estrogen implant. So you can bypass completely the requirement for testosterone to restore aggressiveness to the mice. And as you say, it's because many of the effects of testosterone, although not all, many of them are mediated by its conversion to estrogen, by a process called aromatization, it's carried out by an enzyme called aromatase. In fact, most of your listeners may have heard of aromatase 'cause aromatase inhibitors are widely used in female humans as adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. They are a way of reducing the production of estrogen by preventing testosterone from being converted into estrogen. And in fact, there are a lot of animal experiments showing if you give males aromatase inhibitors, they stop fighting, as well as also stop being sexually active. And so that's one of the counterintuitive ideas, and Nirao has shown that progesterone also seems to play a role in aggression, because these aggression neurons also express the progesterone receptor. So here are two hormones that are classically thought of as female reproductive hormones, this is what goes up and goes down during the estrous cycle, estrogen and progesterone, and yet, they're playing a very important role in controlling aggression in male mice, and presumably in male humans as well. - Fascinating, so estrogen is doing many more things than I think most people believe. - Yep. - And testosterone is doing maybe different and fewer things in some cases, and more in others. I've known some aggressive females over the time I've been alive, what's involved in female aggression that's unique from the pathways that generate male aggression? - Great question, so we and other labs have studied this in both mice and also in fruit flies. So one thing in mice that distinguishes aggression in females from males is that male mice are pretty much ready to fight at the drop of a hat, female mice only fight when they are nurturing and nursing their pups after they've delivered a litter. And there is a window there where they become hyper-aggressive, and then after their pups are weened, that aggressiveness goes away. So this is pretty remarkable that you take a virgin female mouse and expose it to a male, and her response is to become sexually receptive and to mate with him. And now you let her have her pups, and you put the same male or another male mouse in the cage with her, and instead of trying to mate with him, she attacks him. So there is some presumably hormonal and also neuronal switch that's occurring in the brain that switches the response of the female from sex to aggression when she goes from virginity to maternity. And we recently showed in a paper, this is work from one of my students, Mengyu Liu, that within VMH in females, there are two clearly divisible subsets of estrogen receptor neurons, and she showed that one of those subsets controls fighting and the other one controls mating. And in fact, if you stimulate the fighting-specific subset in a virgin, you can get the virgin to attack, which is something that we were never able to do before, and if you stimulate the mating one, you enhance mating. The reason we could never get these results when we stimulated the whole population of estrogen receptor neurons is that these effects are opposite and they cancel out. And so it turns out that if you measure the activity of the fighting and the mating neurons going from a virgin to a maternal female, the aggression neurons are very low in their activity in the virgin, but once the female has pups, the activation ability of those neurons goes way up and the mating neurons stay the same. So if you think of the balance between them like a seesaw, in the virgin, there is more activity in the mating neurons than in the fighting neurons, whereas in the nursing mother, there's more activity or more activation the other way around, the fighting neurons in the mating. - Mm-hmm. - Did I say, "Fighting and mating," the first? Mating neurons dominate fighting in the virgin, fighting neurons dominate mating in the mother. So that's a really cool observation, and it's not something that happens in males, and we don't know what causes that or controls that. Interestingly, this gets into the whole issue of neurons that are present in females, but not in males. So the field has known for a long time that male and female fruit flies have sex-specific neurons. And most of the neurons that we've identified in fruit flies that control fighting in males are male specific, they're not found in the female brain, but recently, we discovered a set of female-specific fighting neurons in the female brain, together with a couple of other laboratories. Now, they do share one common population of neurons in both male and female flies, that in females, activates the female-specific fighting neurons, and in males, activates the male-specific fighting neurons, so it's kind of a hierarchy with this common neuron on top. And in mice, we discovered that there are male-specific neurons in VMH, and those neurons are activated during male aggression. Now, the neurons that are active in females when females fight in VMH are not sex specific, so they are also found in males. So this is already showing you some complexity, the male mouse VMH has both male-specific aggression neurons and generic aggression neurons. And then the female VMH, the mating cells are only found in females, they are female specific and not found in the male brain. And so we're trying to find out what these sex-specific populations of neurons are doing, but that indicates that that is some of the mechanism by which different sexes show different behaviors. - I'm fixated on this transition from the virgin female mouse to the maternal female mouse, and I have a couple of questions about whether or not, for instance, the transition is governed by the presence of pups. So for instance, if you take a virgin female, she'll mate with a male, once she's had pups, she'll try and fight that male, or presumably another intruder female, right? - Yes, equally towards females and male intruders. - Does that require the presence of her pups? Meaning if you were to take those pups and give them to another mother, does she revert to the more virgin-like behavior? Is it triggered by lactation or could it actually be triggered by the mating behavior itself? 'Cause it's possible for the virgin to become a non-virgin, but not actually have a litter of pups. - Right, those are all great questions, and we don't know the answer to most of them. What I can say is that a nursing mother doesn't have to have her pups with her in the cage in order to attack an intruder male or an intruder female, she is just in a state of brain that makes her aggressive to any intruder. And those aggression neurons in that female's brain are activated by both male and female intruders equally, whereas in male mice, the aggression neurons are only ever activated by males, not by females, because males are never supposed to attack females, they're only supposed to mate with them. So that's another difference in how those neurons are tuned to signals from different conspecifics. Does it require lactation? I don't know the answer to that, I think there are some experiments where people have tried to, classical experiments, people have tried to reproduce the changes in hormones that occur during pregnancy in female rats to see if it can make them aggressive. And some of those manipulations do, to some extent, but there's a whole biology there that remains to be explored about how much of this is hormones, how much of this is circuitry and electricity, and how much of it is other factors that we haven't identified yet? - I don't want to anthropomorphize, but, well, I'll just ask the question. So the other day, I was watching ferrets mate, right? They're mustelids, and they're mating behavior, I guess I didn't say why I was watching this, doesn't matter. [David laughing] It simply doesn't matter, but if one observes the mating behaviors of different animals, we know that there's a tremendous range of mating behaviors in humans. There can be no aggressive component, there could be an aggressive component in humans that have all sorts of kinks and fetishes and behaviors, and most of which probably has never been documented 'cause most of this happens in private. And here, I always say on this podcast, any time we're talking about sexual behavior in humans, we're always making the presumption that it's consensual, age appropriate, context appropriate and species appropriate. Well, today, we're talking about a lot of different species. With that said, just to set context, I was watching this video of ferrets mating, and it's quite violent actually. There's a lot of neck biting, there's a lot of squealing. If I were going to project and anthropomorphize, I'd say it's not really clear they both want to be there, one would make that assumption. And of course, we don't know, we have no idea, this could be the ritual. It seems, to me, that there is some crossover of aggression and mating behavior circuitry during the act of the mating, and do you think that reflects this sort of stew of competing neurons that are prioritizing in real time? Because, of course, as states, they have persistence, as you point out, and you can imagine that states overlapping, four different states, the motivational drive to mate, the motivational drive to get away from this experience, the motivational drive to eat at some point, to defecate at some point, all of these things are competing, and what we're really seeing is a bias in probabilities. But when you look at mating behavior of various animals, you see an aggressive component sometimes, but not always. Is it species specific, is it context specific? And more generally, do you think that there is crosstalk between these different neuronal populations and the animal itself might be kind of confused about what's going on? - Right, great questions. I can't really speak to the issue of whether this is species specific, 'cause I'm not a naturalist or a zoologist. I've seen, like you have, in the wild, for example, lions when they mate, I've seen them in Africa, there's often a biting component of that as well. One of the things that surprised us when we identified neurons in VMHvl that control aggression in males is that within that population, there is a subset of neurons that is activated by females during male-female mating encounters. Now, you don't generally think of mouse sex as rough sex, but there is a lot of what superficially looks like violent behavior sometimes, especially if the female rejects the male and runs away. And there's some evidence that those female-selective neurons in VMH are part of the mating behavior. If you shut 'em down, the animals don't mate as effectively as they otherwise would. What happens when you stimulate them we don't yet know because we don't have a way to specifically do that without activating the male aggression neurons. But I think they must be there for a reason because VMH is not traditionally the brain region to which male sexual behavior has been assigned. That's another area called the medial preoptic area, and there we have shown that there are neurons that definitely stimulate mating behavior. In fact, if we activate those mating neurons in a male while it's in the middle of attacking another male, it will stop fighting, start singing to that male and start to try to mount that male until we shut those neurons off. So those are the make-love-not-war neurons, and VMH are the make-war-not-love neurons, and there are dense interconnections between these two nuclei, which are very close to each other in the brain. And we've shown that some of those connections are mutually inhibitory, to prevent the animal from attacking a mate that it's supposed to be mating with, or to prevent it from mating with an animal it's supposed to be attacking. But it's also possible that there are some cooperative interactions between those structures, as well as antagonistic interactions, and the balance of whether it's the cooperative or antagonistic interactions that are firing at any given moment in a mating encounter, as you suggest, may determine whether a moment of coital bliss among two lions may suddenly turn into a snap or a growl and a baring of fangs. We don't know that, but certainly the substrate, the wiring is there for that to happen. - I'm sure people's minds are running wild with all this. I'll just use this as an opportunity to raise something I've wondered about for far too long, [laughing] which is, I have a friend who's a psychiatrist who works on the treatment of fetishes. This is not a psychiatrist that I was treated by, I'll just point that out. [David laughing] But they mentioned something very interesting to me long ago, which is that when you look at true fetishes, and what meets the criteria for fetish, that there does seem to be some, what one would think would be competing circuitry that suddenly becomes aligned. For instance, avoidance of feces, dead bodies, feet, things that are very infectious, typically those states of disgust are antagonistic to the states of desire, as one would hope is present during sexual behavior. Fetishes often involve exactly those things that are aversive, feet, dead bodies, disgusting things to most people, and true fetishes, in the pathologic sense, exist when people have, basically, a requirement for thinking about or even the presence of those ordinarily disgusting things in order to become sexually aroused. - Hmm. - As if the circuitry has crossed over, and the statement that wrung in my mind was people don't develop fetishes to mailboxes, or to the color red, or to random objects and things, they develop fetishes to things that are highly infectious and counter-reproductive appetitive states. - Hmm. - So I find that interesting, I don't know if you have any reflections on that as to why that might be. I'm tempted to ask whether or not you've ever observed fetish-like behavior in mice, but I find it fascinating that you have this area of the brain that's so highly concerned with the hypothalamus, in which you have these dense populations intermixed, and that the addition of a forebrain, especially in humans, that can think and make decisions could in some ways facilitate the expression of these primitive behaviors, but could also complicate the expression of primitive behaviors. - Right, I would agree. I think one way of looking at fetishes from a neurobiological standpoint is that they represent a kind of appetitive conditioning where something that is natively aversive or disgusting, by being repeatedly paired with a rewarding experience, changes its valence, its sign so that now it somehow produces the anticipation of reward the next time a person sees it. Now, I don't know that literature in animals, so I don't know if you could condition a mouse to eat feces, for example, although there are animals that are naturally coprophagic, and maybe mice do that occasionally, I'm not sure. But that is one way to think about it, and that could certainly involve in humans, the more recently evolved arts of the brain, the cortex that is sort of orchestrating both what behaviors are happening and whether reward states are turning on in association with those behaviors that are happening. And that's the part that I think is difficult and challenging to study in a mouse, but certainly bears thinking about, because it's a really interesting, again, sort of counterintuitive aspect. Again, like rough sex, people that want to have fighting, or violence, or aggressiveness in order to be sexually aroused, and fetishes. And in fact, when we made that discovery initially, it raised the question in my mind whether some people that are serial rapists, for example, and engage in sexual violence might, in some level, have their wires crossed in some way, that these states that are supposed to be pretty much separated and mutually antagonistic are not, and are actually more rewarding and reinforcing. I think it's going to be a long time before we have figured it out, but when you think about it, there is no treatment that we have for a violent sexual offender that eliminates the violence, but not the sexual desire and sexual urge, whether it's physical castration or chemical castration, it eliminates both. - Definitely an area that I think, well, human neuroscience in general needs a lot of tools, right? In terms of how to probe and manipulate neural circuitry. I'd love to turn to this area that you mentioned, the medial preoptic area. I'm fascinated by it, because just as within the VMH, you have these neurons for mating and fighting, or aggression, my understanding is medial preoptic area contains neurons for mating, but also for temperature regulation. And perhaps I'm making too much of a leap here, but I've always wondered about this phrase, "In heat," as certainly the menstrual and or estrous cycle in females is related to changes in body temperature. In fact, measuring body temperature is one way that women can fairly reliably predict ovulation, et cetera. Although this is not a show about contraception, please rely on multiple methods [laughing] as necessary, don't use this discussion as your guide for contraception based on temperature. But if you stimulate certain neurons in the medial preoptic area, you can trigger dramatic changes in body temperature and/or mating behavior. What's the relationship, if any, between temperature and mating, or do we simply not know? - I don't know what the relationship is between temperature and mating neurons in the preoptic area. I suspect that they are different populations of neurons because it's become pretty clear that the preoptic area has many different subsets of neurons that are specifically active during different behaviors, even different phases of mating behavior. So there are mounting neurons, there are intromission thrusting neurons, and ejaculation neurons and sniffing neurons. - Wait, wait, so I think I've heard this before, but I just want to make sure that people get this and I want to make sure I get this. So you're telling me within medial preoptic area, there are specific neurons that if you stimulate them, will make males thrust as if they're mating? - No, so this is not based on stimulation experiments. - Mm. - It's based on imaging experiments right now. - I see, I see. - That we see when we look in the preoptic area at what neurons are active during different phases of aggression, we see that there are different neurons that are active during sniffing, mounting, thrusting and ejaculation, and they become repeatedly activated each time the animal goes through that cycle. - During mating, yeah. - During the mating cycle. There are also some neurons there that are active during aggression, which are distinct, and we don't know whether those neurons are there to promote aggression or to inhibit mating when animals are fighting. We have some evidence that suggest it may be the latter, but we don't know for sure yet. The thermosensitive neurons are really interesting, because you mentioned the phrase, "In heat," and then in the context of aggression, you talk about hotblooded people or hotheads, there's just recently a paper showing there are thermoregulatory neurons in VMH as well. So all of these homeostatic systems for metabolic control and temperature control are intermingled in these nuclei, these zones that control these basic survival behaviors, like mating and aggression and predator defense. And I would imagine that the thermal regulation is tightly connected to energy expenditure, and that, again, these neurons are mixed together to facilitate integration of all these signals by the brain in some way that we don't understand to maintain the proper balance between energy conservation and energy consumption during this particular behavior or that behavior. I mean, I've always been fascinated by the question, why is it that violence goes up in the summertime when the temperatures are high? Does it really have something to do with the idea that increased temperature increases violence? It seems hard to believe because we're homeothermic and we pretty much stay around 98.6 Fahrenheit. It could be other social reasons why that happens, people are outside, out on the street, bumping into each other, but I think there could well be something that ties thermoregulation to aggressiveness, as well as to mating behavior. - Fascinating, yeah. I ask in the hopes that maybe in the years to come your lab will parse some of the temperature relationships. And I realize it could be also regulated by hormones in general, so it's tapping into two systems for completely different reasons, but anyway, an area that intrigues me, because of this notion of hotheadedness. - Right. - Or cool, calm and collected. And also the fact that, and I probably should've asked about this earlier, that arousal itself is tethered to the whole mating and reproductive process. I mean, without a sort of seesawing back between the sympathetic and parasympathetic arousal, relaxed states, there is no mating that will take place. So it's fascinating the way these different competing forces and seesaws operate. Several times during the discussion so far, we've hit on this idea that the same behavior can reflect different states, and different states can converge on multiple behaviors as well. You had a paper not long ago about mounting behavior, which I found fascinating. Maybe you could tell us about that result, because, to me, it really speaks to the fact that mounting behavior can, in one context, be sexual, and in another context, actually be related to, we presume, dominance. And I think that my friends who practice jujitsu, when I talk about that result, they say, "Of course, mounting the other person and dominating them, there's nothing sexual about it," it's about overtaking them physically, literally being on their neck side, as opposed to lying on their own back. - [David] Hmm. - Just fascinating, very primitive. - Hmm. - And yet, I think speaks to this idea that mounting behavior might be one of the most fundamental ways in which animals and perhaps even humans express dominance and/or sexual interactions. - Yep, and that's a fascinating question, and it was harder to figure out than you might've thought. So there's been this debate for a long time in the field, when you see two male mice mounting each other, is this homosexual behavior, is this a case of mistaken sexual identification, or is this dominance behavior? And if you train an AI algorithm to try to distinguish male-male mounting from male-female mounting, it does not do a very good job, because motorically, those behaviors look so similar. And so how did we wind up figuring out that most male-male mounting is dominance mounting? There are two important clues, one is the context, and so male-male mounting tends to be more prominent among mice when they haven't had a lot of fighting experience. And then as they become more experienced in fighting, they will show relatively less mounting towards the other male and more attack, and they'll transition quickly from mounting to attack, and so the mounting is always seen in this context of an overall aggressive interaction. And then the second thing, which, believe it or not, was suggested by a computational, theoretical person in my lab, Ann Kennedy, who now has her own lab at Northwestern. She said, "Well, males are known to sing when they mount females, ultrasonic vocalizations, why don't you see what kinds of songs they're singing when they're mounting males? Maybe it's a different kind of song." Well, what we found out is, they don't sing at all when they're mounting a male, so you can easily distinguish whether mounting behavior by a male mouse is reproductive or agonistic, aggressive, according to whether it's accompanied by ultrasonic vocalizations or not. And it turns out that different brain regions are maximally active during these different types of mounting. So VMH, the aggression locus is actually active during dominance mounting, and you can stimulate mounting, dominance mounting, if you weakly activate VMH, whereas MPOA is most strongly activated during sexual mounting, and that's always accompanied by the ultrasonic vocalization. So this shows how difficult and dangerous it can be to try to infer an animal's state, or intent, or emotion, from the behavior that it's exhibiting because the same behavior can mean very different things depending on the context of the interaction with the animal. - And I would say, even more so with when that animal is a human or is multiple humans. - That's right, and there are many examples, animals show chasing to obtain food, a prey animal that they're going to kill and eat, and they show chasing to obtain a mate that they're going to have sex with. And so the intent of the chasing is completely different, and we don't know in all these cases whether there are separate circuits or common circuits that are being activated. - I'm obsessed with dogs and dog breeds and et cetera, et cetera, and one thing I can tell you is that female dogs will mount and thrust. We had a female pit bull mix, a very sweet dog, but in observing her, it convinced me that one can never assume that male dogs are more aggressive than female dogs. It turns out, in talking to people who are quite skilled at dog genetics and dog breeding, that there's a dominance hierarchy within a litter and it crosses over male-female delineations. So you can get a female in the litter that's very dominant and a male that's very subordinate, and no one really knows what relates to. This is also why little dogs sometimes will get right up in the face of a big Doberman Pinscher. - Mm. - And just start barking, which is an idiotic thing for it to do, but they can be dominant over a much larger dog. - Hmm. - Very strange, to me anyway. Female-female mounting, do you observe it in mice? Are there known circuits, and what evokes female-female mounting, or female-to-male mounting if it occurs? - Good, yes, there are clear examples of females displaying male-type mounting behavior towards other females. We see this most commonly in the lab where we are housing females with their sisters, say three or four in a cage, we take one out and we have her mate with a male, where the male's doing the mounting, now we take that female and we put her back in the cage with her litter mates and she starts mounting them. Now, what the function of that is, if it has any function, or what it means, what's driving it, we don't know, but we do know that if we stimulate the neurons that control mounting in males in the medial preoptic area, if we stimulate that same population in females, it evokes male-type mounting towards either a male or a female target. In fact, we have a movie where we have a female that has just been mounted by a male, so the male's on top and she's underneath, and we stimulate that region of MPOA in the female. And she crawls out from underneath the male who has just mounted her, circles around behind him and climbs up on top of him and starts to try to mount him and thrust at him. - That has a name online, it's called a switch. [Andrew laughing] - Is that right? [laughing] - [Andrew] Don't ask me how I know that. - Okay. - But it's a pretty, yeah, it's a term that you hear. You also hear the term topping from the bottom, which it sounds like that is a literal topping from the bottom. - I see. - That's a more of a psychological phrase, from what I hear. I have friends that are educating me in this language, mostly because I find this kind of neurobiological discussion fascinating. And at some point, right? I attempt, in my mind, to superimpose observations from the online communities. - Yeah. - That I'm told about and asked about to this, but I should point out, it's always dangerous, and in fact, inappropriate to make a one-to-one link. - Yes. - Humans, they maintain all the same neural circuitry and pathways that we're talking about today in mice, but that forebrain does allow for context, et cetera. - Yep. - Yeah. - So what the function is of female mounting, I don't know, it could be a type of dominance display. It's hard to measure that because people haven't worked on female-dominance hierarchies to the same extent that they've worked on male-dominance hierarchies, but it indicates that the circuits for male-type mounting are there in females, as early work from Catherine Dulac suggested some years ago. - Fascinating, fascinating. I love that paper because, as you pointed out for chase, for mounting behavior, we see it and we think one thing specifically, and after hearing this result, actually, I'm not a big fan of fight sports. I watch them occasionally 'cause friends are into them, but I've seen boxing matches, MMA matches, where at the end of a round, if someone felt that they dominated, they will do the unsportsmanlike thing of thrusting on the back of the other person before they get off. - Really? - Almost like, "I dominated you, and I'm," so mimicking sexual-like behavior, but there's no reason to think that it's sexual, but they're sending a message. - Yeah. - Of dominance is what it implies. I'd love to talk about something slightly off from this circuitry, but I think that's related to the circuitry, at least in some way, which is this structure that I've always been fascinated by and I can't figure out what the hell it's for, 'cause it seems to be involved in everything, which is the PAG, the periaqueductal gray, which is a little bit further back in the brain, for people that don't know. It's been studied in the context of pain, it's been studied in the context of the so-called lordosis response, the receptivity or arching of the back of the female to receive intromission and mating from the male. How should we think about PAG? Clearly, it can't be involved in everything, I'm guessing it's at least as complex as some of these other regions that we've been talking about, different types of neurons controlling different things, but how does PAG play into this? In particular, I want to know, is there some mechanism of pain modulation and control during fighting and/or mating? And the reason I ask is that, while I'm not a combat sports person, years ago, I did a little bit of martial arts, and it always was impressive to me how little it hurt to get punched during a fight and how much it hurt afterwards, [laughing] right? So there clearly is some endogenous pain control. - Yep. - That then wears off, and then you feel beat up. - [David] Yep. - Or at least, in my case, I felt beat up. What's PAG doing vis-a-vis pain, and what's pain doing vis-a-vis these other behaviors? - Good, good. So I think of PAG like a old-fashioned telephone switchboard, where there are calls coming in, and then the cables have to be punched into the right hole to get the information, to be routed to the right recipient on the other end of it, because pretty much every type of innate behavior you can think of has had the PAG implicated. And there's a whole literature showing the involvement of the PAG in fear, different regions of the PAG, the dorsal PAG is involved in panic-like behavior, running away, the ventral PAG is involved in freezing behavior. Both the MPOA and VMH send projections to the PAG, to different regions of the PAG. So in cross-section, I hate to say this, but in cross-section, the PAG kind of looks like the water in a toilet when you're standing over an open toilet bowl. - Mm-hmm. - And if you imagine a clock face projected onto that, it's like the PAG has sectors, from one to 12, maybe even more of them, and in each of those sectors, you find different neurons from the hypothalamus are projecting. So could turn out that there is a topographic arrangement along the dorsal-ventral axis of the PAG and the medial-lateral axis of the PAG that determines the type of behavior that will be emitted when neurons in that region are stimulated. And I think sort of all of the evidence is pointing in that direction, but by no means, has it been mapped out. Now, the thing that you mentioned about it not hurting when you got beat up during martial arts, there is a well-known phenomenon called fear-induced analgesia, where when an animal is in a high state of fear, like if it's trying to defend itself, there is a suppression of pain responses, and I'm not sure completely about the mechanisms and how well that's understood, but for example, the adrenal gland has a peptide in it that is released from the adrenal medulla, which controls the fight-or-flight responses, and that peptide has analgesic activities. Now, whether. - May I ask what that peptide is? - It's called bovine adrenal medullary peptide of 22 amino acid residues. And I only know about it because it activates a receptor that we discovered many years ago that's involved in pain, and we thought it promoted pain, but it turns out that this actually inhibits pain, it's like an endogenous analgesic. Whether this is happening, this type of analgesia is happening when an animal is engaged in offensive aggression or in mating behavior, I don't know, but it certainly is possible. And I don't know whether these analgesic mechanisms are happening in the PAG, they could also be happening a little further down in the spinal cord. The PAG is really continuous with the spinal cord, if you just follow it down towards the tail of an animal, you will wind up in the spinal cord. And so it could be that there are influences acting at many levels on pain in the PAG and in the spinal cord as well. And it may well be known, I just don't know it, I want to distinguish clearly between things that are not known, that I know are unknown, which is in a fairly small area where I have expertise, from things that may be known, but I'm ignorant of them, because I just don't have a broad enough knowledge base to know that. - Sure, we appreciate those delineations. Thank you, PAG, I think this description of it as an old-fashioned telephone switchboard, and now every time I look into the toilet, I'll think about the periaqueductal gray. - [laughing] That's right. - [Andrew] And every time I see an image of periaqueductal gray, I'll think about a toilet. - That's right. [laughing] - That is an excellent description, because, in fact, I drew a circle with a little thing at the bottom. And well, I'll put a post or link to a picture of PAG and you'll understand why David and I are chuckling here, because, indeed, it looks like a toilet, when staring into a toilet. Tell us about tachykinin, I've talked about this a couple times on different podcast episodes because of its relationship to social isolation, and in part, because the podcast was launched during a time when there was more social isolation. My understanding is that tachykinin, and you'll tell us what it is in a moment, is present in flies and mice and in humans, and may do similar things in those species. - That's right, so tachykinin refers to a family of related neuropeptides. So these are brain chemicals, they're different from dopamine and serotonin in that they're not small, organic molecules, they're actually short pieces of protein that are directly encoded by genes that are active in specific neurons and not in others. And when those neurons are active, those neuropeptides are released together with classical transmitters, like glutamate, whatever. Tachykinins have been famously implicated in pain, particularly Tachykinin-I, which is called Substance P, one of the original pain modulating, this is something that promotes inflammatory pain. But there are other tachykinin genes, in mice, there are two, in humans, I think there are three, and in Drosophila, there's one. And the way we got into tachykinins is from studying aggression in flies. We thought, since neuropeptides have this remarkable parallel evolutionary conservation of structure and function, like Neuropeptide Y controls feeding in worms, in flies and mice and in people. Oxytocin-like peptides control reproduction in worms and mice and in people. We thought we might find peptides that control aggression in flies and in people, and so we did a screen, unbiased screen of peptides, and found, indeed, that one of the tachykinins, Drosophila tachykinin, those neurons when you activate them strongly promote aggression, and it depends on the release of tachykinin. Now, the interesting thing is that, in flies, just like in people and practically any other social animal that shows aggression, social isolation increases aggressiveness. So putting a violent prisoner in solitary confinement is absolutely the worst, most counterproductive thing you could do to them. And indeed, we found in flies that social isolation increases the level of tachykinin in the brain, and if we shut that gene down, it prevents the isolation from increasing aggression. So since my lab also works on mice, it was natural to see whether tachykinins might be upregulated in social isolation and whether they play a role in aggression. And this is work done by a former postdoc, Moriel Zelikowsky, now at University of Salt Lake City in Utah, and she found, remarkably, that when mice are socially isolated for two weeks, there is this massive upregulation of Tachykinin-II in their brain. In fact, if you tag the peptide with a green fluorescent protein from a jellyfish, genetically, the brain looks green when the mice are socially isolated 'cause there's so much of this stuff released. And she went on to show that that increase in tachykinin is responsible for the effect of social isolation to increase aggressiveness and to increase fear and to increase anxiety. And in fact, there are drugs that block the receptor for tachykinin which were tested in humans and abandoned because they had no efficacy in the tests that they were analyzed for. If you give those drugs to a socially isolated mouse, it blocks all of the effects of social isolation. It blocks the aggression, it blocks the increased fear and the increased anxiety, and Moriel described it, "The mice just look chill." It's not a sedative, which is really important, it's not that the mice are going to sleep. Most remarkably is, once you socially isolate a mouse and it becomes aggressive, you can never put it back in its cage with its brothers from its litter because it will kill them all overnight, but if you give it this drug, which is called osanetant, that blocks Tachykinin-II, that mouse can be returned to the cage with its brothers and will not attack them, and seems to be happy about that for the rest of the time. So this is an incredibly powerful effect of this drug, and I've been really interested in trying to get pharmaceutical companies to test this drug, which has a really good safety profile in humans, in testing it in people who are subjected to social isolation stress or bereavement stress. And this is one of the areas where I learned an eye-opening lesson, as a basic scientist who naively thought that if you make a discovery and it has translational applications to humans, that pharmaceutical companies are going to be falling all over themselves to try it. And they are not interested, because once burned, twice shy, these drugs were tested for efficacy in schizophrenia. I have no idea why, there's very little preclinical data to suggest that. Not surprisingly, they failed. When a drug fails in clinical trials in Phase 3, it costs $100 million to the company that carried out that clinical trial. So there's a huge slag heap of discarded pharmaceuticals, many of them inhibitors of neuropeptide action, that could be useful in other indications, such as the one we discovered, but there's a huge economic disincentive for pharmaceutical companies to test them again, because the conclusion that they drew from all these failed tests, particularly in the 2010s and before that, is that the reason they failed is because animal experiments with drugs don't predict how humans will respond to the drugs, and therefore, we shouldn't try to extrapolate from any other data that we get from animal experiments, mouse or rat experiments to humans, because they'll lead us down the wrong track, and I think that that is probably wrong. In some cases, it may be right, but in other cases, there's good reason to think, because these brain regions and molecules are so evolutionarily conserved that they ought to be playing a similar role in humans. In fact, there is a paper showing that in humans that have borderline personality disorder, there's a strong correlation between their self-reported level of aggressiveness and serum levels of a tachykinin, in this case, Tachykinin-I, as detected by radioimmunoassay. This is work of Emil Coccaro, who's a clinical psychiatrist at the University of Chicago. So there is a smoking gun in the case of humans as well. And I was actually trying to interest a pharmaceutical company that was testing these drugs, actually, for treatment of hot flashes in females, in humans, where there is actually good animal data to think that it might be useful, but I realized that this clinical trial was going on during the COVID pandemic. And I approached him and said, "Look, nature may have actually done for you the experiment that I want you to do, 'cause some of the people who are getting drug or placebo are going to have been socially isolated and some of them will have not. Why don't you get them to fill out questionnaires and see whether the ones who were given the drug and socially isolated felt less stressed and less anxious than the ones who were not socially isolated?" And they would not touch it, because they're in the middle of a clinical trial for a different indication for this drug, and they have to report any observation that they make about that drug in their patient population. So if they were to ask these questions and get an unfavorable answer, "Oh my God, I felt even worse when I took this drug and I was isolated," they would be obliged to report that to the FDA and that could torpedo the chances for the drug being approved in the thing that it was in clinical trials for. So it's better not to ask and not to know than it is to try to find out more information that could lead to another clinical indication. So I remain convinced that this family of drugs could have very powerful uses in treating some forms of stress-induced anxiety or aggressiveness in humans, but it's just very difficult, for economic reasons, to find a way to get somebody to test that. - Yeah, a true shame that these companies won't do this, and especially given the fact that many of these drugs exist and their safety profiles are established, 'cause that's always a serious consideration. - Yep. - When embarking on a clinical trial. Perhaps in hearing this discussion, someone out there will understand the key importance of this and will reach out to us, we'll provide ways to do that, to get such a study going in humans. Because I think if enough laboratories ran small-scale clinical trials, pharma certainly would perk up their ears, right? I mean, they're so strategic. - Yep. - Sometimes to their own. - I mean, I would like to say also, I'd like to see this tested on pets. I mean, there's a huge number of pets right now that are suffering separation anxiety because humans bought them to keep them company during the COVID pandemic, and now they're home alone. - And now they're home alone, yeah. - Okay? And if this thing works in mice, there's certainly a higher chance it's going to work in dogs or in cats than it is going to work in humans. And if it did, that would be even more encouragement to continue along those lines. People sometimes forget that although we work on animals and we ultimately want to understand humans, we care about how our results apply to the welfare of animals as well, and particularly domestic pets, which is a multi-billion-dollar industry in this country. So if there is ways that they can be made to feel better when they're separated from their owners, that would certainly be a good thing. - Absolutely, we will put out the call, we are putting out the call, and I know for sure there will be a response. Just underscoring what we've been talking about even more, every time we hear about a school shooting, like in Texas recently, or I happened to be in New York during the time when there was a subway shooting. For whatever reason, I listened to the book about Columbine, that went into a very detailed way about the origin of those boys that committed that, and every single time, the person who commits those acts is socially isolated, as far as I know. - Yeah, yeah. - There might be some exceptions there. And sometimes this crosses over with other mental health issues, but sometimes no, no apparent mental health issues. So social isolation clearly drives powerful neurochemical and neuro biological changes, I really hope that Tachykinin-I and II, those are the main ones in humans? - Yeah, yeah. - Will be explored in more detail. Also, I didn't know that Tachykinin-I is Substance P. - Yes. - And Substance P is Tachykinin-I. - Yes. Tachykinin-I is the gene name, and Tachykinin-II, in humans, is called Neurokinin B, that's the name of the protein. I just refer to it by the gene name 'cause it makes it easier and I don't have to keep remembering two names for each thing. - And if I'm not mistaken, you put yourself in the company of geneticists because your original training was in genetics, immunology and areas related to that. - It was in cell biology, and I didn't actually have formal training in genetics as a graduate student, but I think I'm a geneticist at heart, that's just the way I like to think about things. And when I started working on flies, that sort of, I came out of the closet as a geneticist, as it were. [laughing] - Wonderful, as long as we're talking about humans, I'd love to get your thoughts about human studies of emotion. I know you wrote this book with Ralph Adolphs, you have this new book, which we'll provide a link to, which I've read front to back twice, it's phenomenal. - Thank you. - I've mentioned it before on the podcast, it's really, there are books that are worth reading, and then there are books that are important, and I think this book is truly important for the general population to read and understand, and neuroscientists should read and understand the contents, because we, as a culture, are way off in terms of how we think about emotions and states and behaviors. So we'll put a link to that, it's really worth the time and energy to read it, and it's written beautifully, I should say. - Thank you. - Very accessible even for non-scientists. There's a heat map diagram in that book that I think about, this is a heat map diagram of subjective reports that people gave of where they experience an emotion, or a feeling, a somatic feeling, in their body, or in their head, or both, when they are angry, sad, calm, lonely, et cetera, et cetera. And I wouldn't want people to think that those heat maps were generated by any physiological measurement, because they were not. And yet, I don't think we can have a discussion about emotions and states and the sorts of behaviors that we're talking about today without thinking about the body also. - [David] Yep. - And I'm not coming to this as a Northern California, mind-body. - Yeah. - I've been to Esalen once. [David laughing] I didn't go in the baths, I went there, I gave a talk and I left. It is very beautiful. If anyone wants to know what it looks like, I think that final scene of "Mad Men" is shot at Esalen, it's a very beautiful place. And yet, mind-body, to me, is a neurobiological construct. - Yes. - Because the nervous system extends through out of the cranial vault and into the spinal cord. - Yeah. - And body and back and forth, okay. How should we think about the body, in terms of states? And at some point, I'd love for you to comment on that heat map experiment, because it does seem that there's some regularity as to where people experience emotions. When people are in a rage, for instance, they seem to feel it both in their gut and in their head, it seems, on average. And people love to extrapolate to gut intuition or that the chakras or anger is in the stomach, and this goes to Eastern medicine, et cetera. How should we think about mind-body in the context of states, and think about it as scientists, maybe even as neuroscientists or geneticists? - Good, so for the answer to the first question about the heat maps and people associating certain parts of their body with certain emotional feelings, this goes back to something called the somatic marker hypothesis, that was proposed by Antonio Damasio, who is a neurologist at USC, the idea that our subjective feeling of a particular emotion is, in part, associated with a sensation of something happening in a particular part of our body, the gut, the heart, I don't see the liver invoked very much in emotional characterization, but. - But gall and the gallbladder. - Yes. - Somebody having a lot of gall. - That's right. - I don't know why I make a fist when I say that. - Right. - But I'm guessing the gall bladder is shaped like a fist. [Andrew laughing] - That's right, and if there is a physiology underlying these heat maps, it could reflect increased blood flow to these different structures. And that, in turn, reflects what you were talking about, that is, emotion definitely involves communication between the brain and the body, and it's bidirectional communication, and it's mediated by the peripheral nervous system, the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system, which control heart rate, for example, blood vessel, blood pressure. And those neurons receive input from the hypothalamus and other brain regions, central brain regions that control their activity. And when the brain is put in a particular state, it activates sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons, which have effects on the heart and on blood pressure, and these, in turn, feed back onto the brain through the sensory system. And a large part of this bidirectional communication is also mediated through the vagus nerve, which many of your listeners and viewers may have heard about because it's become a topic of intense activity now. People have known for a long time, so the vagus nerve is a bundle of nerve fibers that comes out basically of your skull, out of the central nervous system, and then sends fibers into your heart, your gut, all sorts of visceral organs. And that information is both, you used the words earlier in our discussion, afferent and efferent. So the vagal fibers sense things that are happening in the body, so the reason you feel your stomach tied up in knots if you're tense is that those vagal fibers are sensing the contraction of the gut muscles, and they're also afferents, which means that information coming out of the brain can influence those peripheral organs as well. And there's work from a number of labs, just in the last six months or so, where people are starting to decode the components of the different fibers in the vagus nerve. And it's amazing how much specificity is, there are specific vagal nerves that go to the lung, that control breathing responses, that go to the gut, that go to other organs. It's almost like a set of color-coded lines, labeled lines for those things. And now how those vagal afferents play a role in the playing out of emotion states is a fascinating question that people are just beginning to scrape the surface of. But I think what's exciting now is that people are going to be developing tools that will allow us to turn on or turn off specific subsets of fibers within the vagus nerve and ask how that affects particular emotional behaviors. So you're absolutely right, this brain-body connection is critical, not just for the gut, but for the heart, for the lungs, for all kinds of other parts of your body, and Darwin recognized that as well. And I think it's a central feature of emotion state, and I think, what underlies our subjective feelings of an emotion. - Incredible, well, David, I have to say, as a true fan of the work that your lab has been doing over so many decades, and first of all, I was delighted when you stopped working on stem cells. [David laughing] Not because you weren't doing incredible work there, but because I saw a talk where you showed a movie of an octopus spitting out, or not spitting, but squirting out a bunch of ink and escaping, and you said you were going to work on things of the sort that we're talking about today, fear, aggression, mating behaviors, social behaviors. It's been incredible to see the work that your lab has done, and I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous number of people when I say thank you for taking time out of your important schedule to share with us what you've learned. My last question is a simple one, which is, will you come back and talk to us again in the future about the additional work that's sure to come? - I would be happy to do that, and I really have appreciated your questions, they've all been right on the money, you've hit all of the critical, important issues in this field. And you've uncovered what is known, the little bit is known, and how much is not known, and I think it's important to emphasize the unknown things, because that's what the next generation of neuroscientists has to solve. And so I hope this will help to attract young people into this field, because it's so important, particularly for our understanding of mental illness and mental health and psychiatry, we've got to figure out how emotion systems are controlled in a causal way if we ever want to improve on the psychiatric treatments that we have now, and that's going to require the next generation of people coming into the field. - Absolutely, I second that. Well, thank you, it's been a delight. - Thank you, great, really appreciate it. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. David Anderson. Please also be sure to check out his new book, "The Nature of the Beast: How Emotions Guide Us". It's a truly masterful exploration of the biology and psychology behind what we call emotions and states of mind and body. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel, that's a simple, zero-cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions, or comments, or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover, or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those comments and we do take them to heart. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, and check out Momentous supplements, our new partners in the supplement space, and check out Athletic Greens, that's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so. We are hubermanlab on Twitter, and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram. And both places, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab on Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes, it also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter, you go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to Newsletter. You supply your email, but we do not share your email with anybody, we have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month, and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the Neural Network Newsletter. I'd also like to point out that the Huberman Lab Podcast has a clips channel. So these are brief clips, anywhere from three to 10 minutes, that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols, related to sleep, to focus, interviews with various guests, we talk about things like caffeine, when to drink caffeine relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on, all the things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube, look for, "Huberman Lab Clips," in the search area, and it will take you there, subscribe. And we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes or you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab podcasts, which admittedly can be rather long. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 257 ---
Video ID: yb5zpo5WDG4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yb5zpo5WDG4
Title: Focus Toolkit: Tools to Improve Your Focus & Concentration | Huberman Lab Podcast #88
Published: 2022-09-05 12:00:39 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I provide a list of behavioral, nutritional, and supplement-based tools you can use to improve your ability to get into a focused state to do mental or physical work. I explain science-supported strategies for transitioning into focus, maintaining focus during the work bout, and exiting the focus session, which is also critical, including decompression/defocusing tools. I explain when and how to use: binaural beats, caffeine, deliberate cold exposure, the pros and cons of working in fasted vs. fed states, and supplements and foods that enhance dopamine, epinephrine (i.e., adrenaline) and acetylcholine to promote optimal focus. Also, I explain how short behavioral practices, such as meditation and visual gaze training, will benefit your ability to focus over the long term. As deep focus is crucial to significantly improve cognitive or physical performance in any realm, this episode should be useful to anyone. By the end, you’ll have an essential toolkit of science-supported, low- to zero-cost focus and concentration strategies to select from that can be tailored to your physical and mental performance needs.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
Virtusan: https://virtusan.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Acute Stress Improves Concentration Performance: https://bit.ly/3wVuJoh
Human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures: https://bit.ly/3ep6Z5x
Brief, daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotional regulation in non-experienced meditators: https://bit.ly/3ai0X4D

Books
Altered Traits: Science Reveals How Meditation Changes Your Mind, Brain, and Body: https://amzn.to/3wXsKj8

Resources
Huberman Lab Toolkit for Sleep: https://hubermanlab.com/toolkit-for-sleep
BrainWave (App Store): https://apple.co/3QavGzO
Brain Waves (Google Play): https://bit.ly/3enO8HP
White, Pink vs. Brown Noise: https://youtu.be/aiyh2j-BfkQ
Madefor NSDR: https://youtu.be/pL02HRFk2vo
Reveri: https://www.reveri.com
Anna Park Yerba Mate: https://amzn.to/3wzvfrV
Examine: https://examine.com

Timestamps
00:00:00 Focus Toolkit 
00:04:25 Momentous Supplements 
00:05:38 Thesis, LMNT, Eight Sleep 
00:09:37 The “Arrow Model” of Focus: Epinephrine, Acetylcholine & Dopamine
00:15:15 Modulation vs. Mediation, Importance of Sleep
00:18:11 Tool: Binaural Beats to Improve Concentration 
00:20:54 Tool: White, Brown & Pink Noise, Transition to Focused State
00:22:55 Warm-Up for Cognitive Work, Refocusing Attention & Neuroplasticity 
00:26:14 Tool: Ultradian Cycles: Warm-Up, Maintaining Focus & Deliberate Defocusing 
00:31:22 How Many Daily Ultradian Cycles Can One Perform? 
00:34:14 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:35:35 Virtusan: Mental & Physical Health Journeys 
00:36:52 Tool: Fasted vs. Fed States & Focus, Prevent an Afternoon Crash, Ketosis
00:45:52 Tool: Foods to Improve Focus & Regulating Food Volume
00:47:53 Tool: Caffeine & Focused Work, Dopamine Efficacy, Alertness
00:52:55 Tool: Stress & Improved Concentration 
00:55:46 Tool: Deliberate Cold Exposure & Focus, Dopamine & Epinephrine 
01:00:39 Layer Focusing Tools & Design Your Own Protocols 
01:01:19 Tool: Short Meditation & Improved Ability to Refocus 
01:07:40 Tool: Yoga Nidra, Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR) & Defocus Periods
01:12:13 Tool: Hypnosis & Focus/Deep Relaxation States
01:16:07 Optimal Time of Day to Use Specific Tools
01:16:46 Tool: Overt Visual Focus & Deliberate Gaze 
01:20:42 Covert Visual Focus; Deliberate Gaze Warm-Up & Focused Work 
01:24:43 Tool: Omega-3 Essential Fatty Acids 
01:27:28 Tool: Creatine Monohydrate 
01:29:10 Tool: Alpha-GPC & Acetylcholine, Increased Risk of Stroke? & Garlic 
01:33:52 Tool: L-Tyrosine Supplements & Food
01:34:47 Combining & Choosing Focus Tools, Variability 
01:36:50 ADHD Prescriptions, Training Neural Circuits, Maintenance & Reduced Dosage
01:39:19 Tool: Optimal Order Approaching Focus Tools, Prescriptions & Dependency 
01:42:56 Tool: Phenylethylamine & Dopamine
01:44:50 Tool: Other Supplements to Enhance Dopamine, Epinephrine & Acetylcholine 
01:46:46 Behavioral, Nutrition & Supplement Tools for Focus
01:49:12 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussing focus and concentration and tools for improving your focus and concentration. This is a topic that I've covered previously on the Huberman Lab Podcast, but in different contexts. For instance, we had a very popular episode on ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which of course relates to the topic of focus and how to improve focus. We've also talked a lot about dopamine motivation and drive. In fact, that's the title of your previous also quite popular episode of this podcast, but never before have we had a single episode solely devoted to the tools to improve focus and concentration. The rationale for recording this episode is to provide people one location where they can go and quickly access the specific tools for increasing focus and concentration that are known to be the most powerful tools and the most up to date tools. In fact, today's episode is going to include description of several peer reviewed studies and the tools that emerge from those scientific peer reviewed studies that point to new, and fortunately, even briefer protocols than I've described before. So what I'm basically describing here is tools that in a very short amount of time will allow you to significantly increase your focus and concentration abilities. Those tools will include behavioral tools, nutrition based tools, supplement based tools, brain machine interface based tools, and for those of you that are working with a physician, prescription drug tools. Today's episode ought to benefit anybody, young or old or anything in between whether or not you have ADHD or not. Today's episode is going to give you tools that you can apply in your daily life, most all of them are completely zero cost and those tools will allow you to tap into the neurochemistry and the neurocircuits within your brain and body that peer-reviewed science has reliably shown can significantly improve your focus and concentration abilities. Just to give you a little teaser of the kinds of tools that I'm going to provide you on today's episode, a previous guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast was Dr. Wendy Suzuki. Dr. Suzuki is a professor of psychology and neuroscience at New York University, or NYU as it's commonly referred to. She's also the Dean of Arts and Sciences at NYU. Her laboratory made a very important discovery, which was that a very brief, just 12, actually 13 if you really count the intro, but 13 minute daily meditation performed for a period of about eight weeks significantly increased people's focus and concentration abilities. And the great news is you didn't need all eight weeks, it was just that's how long that you ran the study. So during today's episode, I will describe that protocol in detail. I'll also provide you an even briefer alternative to that protocol that you can use, if for instance, you find yourself with only three minutes or four minutes or five minutes a day to meditate. The great news is there's quality peer reviewed science to support that form of meditation for improving focus and concentration. And that falls under the bin of these zero cost tools that you can really use to tap into the neurochemistry and neurocircuits that really allow you to take control of your cognitive abilities and improve them over time. I'll also provide you important details about that protocol and other protocols. For instance, contrary to popular belief, it is not, I repeat it is not a good idea to do a focused based meditation within the four hours before bedtime. Many people, including some of the subjects in that study performed by the Suzuki lab, found that when they did a focusing meditation protocol, even if it was very calming, it led to difficulties in falling and staying asleep. So that runs counter to a lot of what we've heard about meditation being great for sleep. It turns out meditation might be great for sleep, it certainly is great for improving focus capacity, but I highly recommend that if you're going to apply a focus meditation tool in order to improve your focus and concentration, that you make sure that that's performed not within four hours prior to bedtime. So that's just a brief example of the sorts of tools and protocols and details about the tools and protocols that I'll provide on today's episode. I should mention that we have provided links in the show note captions so that you can quickly go to the studies that we describe as well as some of the behavioral tools and other tools that we'll cover, things like the use of binaural beats, supplements, et cetera. Our goal here again is to provide you the maximum number of tools for focus and concentration that you can pick from and choose from and apply in your life and try to eliminate as much of the legwork required to seek out and apply those tools. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States, that's valuable. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. This is really hard to do if you're taking blends of different supplements or if the dosages are such that you can't titrate, or that is adjust the dosages, of a given supplement. So by using single ingredient supplements, you can really build out the supplement kit that's ideal for you and your specific needs. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. And to be quite honest, I don't like the word nootropics because the translation of nootropics is smart drugs. And as a neuroscientist, I can tell you there is no neural circuit in the brain for being smart. Rather, there are neural circuits that are responsible for focus, neural circuits for creativity, neural circuits, for task switching and so on and so on. Fortunately, Thesis understands this and has developed custom nootropics that are tailored to your specific goals and your specific needs. They use only the highest quality ingredients, things of the sort that we'll talk about in today's podcast, things like Alpha-GPC, phosphatidylserine, ginko biloba, et cetera. However, I should mention that they are customized to you. So you can go to Thesis, take a brief quiz, and you can get a nootropic starter kit that will allow you to try various nootropics and determine which ones you like and work for you and which ones don't. I've been using Thesis nootropics customized for me for close to six months now and can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game changer. My go-to formula is the Clarity Formula, I like to use that before cognitive work, and I use the Energy Formula before my workouts. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take that three minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has all the things you need and none of what you don't. That means the electrolytes, salt, magnesium, and potassium are in there, but it does not have sugar. Electrolytes are key to cellular function, in particular neuronal or nerve cell function. In fact, for your nerve cells to be able to fire action potentials, those are the electrical signals that allow your brain and body to work and move and think, et cetera, you need sodium, a lot of people don't realize that. And while of course there are people out there that need to reduce their sodium intake, these would be people with pre-hypertension or hypertension, many people actually don't get enough sodium, especially people that are following low carbohydrate diets, drinking a lot of caffeine or eating extremely clean. Oftentimes, those people feel better when they increase their sodium intake and their health can actually improve when they increase their sodium intake. LMNT contains a science backed electrolyte ratio of one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's l-m-n-t.com/huberman to claim a free element sample pack with any purchase. Again, that's drink LMNT, l-m-n-t.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with heating, cooling, and sleep tracking capacity. The reality is that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. Now I've talked before in this podcast about the fact that there's a direct relationship between temperature and our ability to fall and stay asleep. In fact, our body temperature needs to drop by about one to three degrees in order to fall asleep and then there are further decreases in our body temperature that allow us to get into the deepest stages of sleep and the so-called rapid eye movement sleep, all the aspects of sleep that really restore our brain and body. And then waking up actually involves a heating up of core body temperature. By sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you're able to control the temperature of your sleeping environment precisely. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for many months now and I can tell you it has completely changed my sleep. I thought I was sleeping pretty well before and now, frankly, I don't even want to travel because I don't want to be away from my Eight Sleep. I can't wait until hotels and Airbnbs include Eight Sleep. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out their new Pod 3 Cover to save $250 off as a special Labor Day offer now through September 11th. Eight Sleep currently ships within the USA, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $250 off an Eight Sleep cover now through September 11th. Okay, let's talk about focus and concentration and how you can improve your focus and concentration using science based protocols. Now because today's episode is mainly focused on tools and not so much the underlying mechanisms, I'm mainly going to focus on what to do and when and how to do it. But I just want to take about three minutes and briefly describe a model, that is a visual image that you can put in your mind, that will help you incorporate the tools that I'll provide and that generally will help you understand at a mechanistic level how focus and concentration work. So what I want you to imagine is an arrow. And an arrow of course, has an arrowhead and it has the shaft of that arrow. And in the context of the neuroscience of focus and concentration, the neurochemical system that really represents the shaft of that arrow, right, the straight line is epinephrine, also called adrenaline. And today, I'll refer to adrenaline and epinephrine interchangeably. Turns out that epinephrine/adrenaline are released within your brain from a little location, a little cluster of neurons called locus coeruleus, but you do not need to remember that name, and from your body from the adrenal glands. And the release of epinephrine from those two locations overall increases energy, it increases alertness. It does not alone increase focus, okay? So the reason I've assigned epinephrine, adrenaline as the shaft of the arrow is that if focus is the arrow, there is no focus without epinephrine. So things, whether or not they're behavioral or psychological or supplements or drugs that increase epinephrine allow focus to occur, they are necessary for focus, but they are not sufficient for focus, that is they are required but they are not enough to create focus. So we're going to need epinephrine in the equation. Without epinephrine, there is no focus or concentration. Now the arrowhead on this metaphorical arrowhead that represents focus and concentration is going to be represented or related to the mechanisms of acetylcholine, a different neurochemical that also exists in the brain and body. In fact, in the body, it's responsible for the contraction and movement of your muscles. But today, we're talking about acetylcholine not in that context, but rather in the context of its release within the brain. Acetylcholine is released from a couple of different locations in the brain and the best way to think about it is it's like a spotlight. It highlights specific neurons, nerve cells that should be active, or more active I should say, than the other neurons in the environment. So the reason I've assigned the arrowhead to acetylcholine and acetylcholine to the arrowhead is that if you have an arrow with a very big arrowhead that's really broad, really broad, imagine a mile wide arrowhead, that's not very focused on any one location, it's not really pointing to any one location, is it? But with a narrow, really tightly focused arrowhead, well, that's focused on one location. So we have alertness, epinephrine, and then we have the actual direction in which our concentration and focus is placed, and that's, at least in this mental model I'm creating, acetylcholine. And then in order to have ongoing focus, we need another neurochemical. And it turns out that that third neurochemical is dopamine, a molecule often associated with pleasure and reward, but it's really the molecule of motivation. So here, I want you to imagine in your mind, an arrow with an arrowhead, think acetylcholine in the arrowhead, a shaft or a line behind that arrowhead, which is epinephrine also called adrenaline. And then behind it, a sort of an engine that keeps that focus moving forward, right because we don't just want to be focused for a moment, we want to be able to focus for 10 minutes or for an hour or maybe even for two hours. Turns out there's an optimal duration to focus, I'll teach you that in just a little bit, but these three neurochemicals together, acetylcholine, epinephrine and dopamine really allow you to get focused, to focus very precisely, and in fact, increasingly precisely over time to really narrow and narrow and narrow your focus progressively within a single about of focus and to continue to do that and to be able to do that repeatedly whenever you want. So here, I'm purely talking in metaphor and in models and mental models of arrows, but in a moment or two, I'll start transitioning to discussing tools in which I'll talk about increasing dopamine and acetylcholine or increasing epinephrine and dopamine in various combinations with various approaches. And what I'd like you to conceptualize is how those are contributing to creating a very narrowly pointed arrow that has the capacity to continue moving forward over and over so that you can focus as sharply and as long as you like. And of course, for those of you that want to get really down in the weeds of how dopamine works, we have an entire episode about dopamine motivation and drive that really gets into neurotransmitter release and dopamine baselines and thresholds and all of that sort of thing. We also have episodes on focus, much longer episodes, I should say on focus that incorporate a lot of the biology of acetylcholine. It turns out acetylcholine is also involved in neuroplasticity, et cetera, and epinephrine of course, relates to stress and our capacity to deal with and buffer stress and on and on. Those episodes are all available to you in their long form at hubermanlab.com, you can find them very easily. They are all timestamped so you can navigate to the particular topics most of interest to you. I mention this all not as a diversion from what we want to cover today, but I know that some of you are hungry for a lot more mechanism, but today's episode is really mainly focused on the tools, I will of course touch on mechanism, but if you really want to do the deep dive on mechanism, go to hubermanlab.com and you'll have more than you ever could want about those mechanisms. Let's jump into the tools for concentration and focus. If you want to think about tools of any kind to modify your biology or physiology in any way, whether or not it's for cognitive function or you want to get better at exercising, or you want to build muscle, or you want to improve your hormones, you need to think and understand tools in the context of modulation and mediation. What do I mean by that? Well, it's quite simple really. Mediation is how specific types of chemicals and cells and circuits and organs control very specific things in your brain and body whereas modulation is the ability of chemicals and cells and circuits to adjust how different things change, how different things work in your brain and body, but to do it more broadly. What do I mean by this? Let me give an example. For instance, I'm going to tell you now that one of the most important things to build and maintain your focus and concentration is to optimize your sleeping behavior, that is to get enough quality sleep I would say 80% of the nights of your life. Not everyone can get optimal sleep 100% of the nights of their life, nobody, truly nobody achieves that. However, sleep has been shown to relate to cognitive performance, physical performance, hormone output, and so many other things, including immune system function. What we can reliably say is that sleep modulates just about every process in your brain and body. So you have to get great sleep. There is simply no tool that's going to allow you to overcome chronic sleep deprivation and allow you to remain focused, no pill, no device, no supplement, no protocol whatsoever. There are tools to overcome one night or maybe two nights of sleep deprivation and we'll talk about those, but at a fundamental level, we need to do the things that modulate our focus and attention in powerful ways and sleep really is that thing. So we've done two episodes, one called "Master Your Sleep" and the other episode is "Perfect Your Sleep." The "Perfect Your Sleep" is a little bit more like this episode, more focused on protocols. "Master Your Sleep" includes protocols and mechanism. Again, you can find those at hubermanlab.com. We also have a sleep toolkit, a distilled list of things to do in order to optimize your sleep. I highly recommend that you download that. You can go to hubermanlab.com, go to the Neural Network Newsletter, it is listed there. If you want you can sign up for the newsletter, but you don't have to, you can simply download the PDF of that toolkit for zero cost. Why do I say sleep modulates focus and attention? Well, I'll give an analogy. If right now someone pulled a fire alarm in this building or if we had a fire in this building, my attention would drift, it would not be on recording this podcast, it would be on something else. But would I say that the fire alarm mediates attention? I mean fire alarms are not really involved in attention. No, rather they modulate my attention. The noise in the room modulates my attention. That's quite a bit different than a tool that I'll provide later and I'll just give you a little hint of now, in fact, I'll give it to you now, which is that 40 HZ binaural beats have been shown in a number of peer reviewed studies to increase focus and concentration. And if you'd like to access 40 HZ binaural beats in order to improve your focus and concentration, you can do that, you can actually get it at zero cost. You can go into the app store, for instance, the Apple App Store, this is also available for Android phone, there's an app called BrainWave, and you can go there, you can dial in 40 HZ and it'll play these binaural beats. It's been shown in multiple quality peer reviewed studies that playing a pattern of sound waves to one ear, do, do, do, do, do, and the other ear, which is slightly offset in frequency, meaning not quite the same frequencies, so more like do, do, do, do, that that combination of frequencies played to the different ears, actually get integrated within deep brain centers and can increase focus and concentration in part by increasing levels of the neurochemical dopamine and acetylcholine, which we talked about a little bit earlier in this arrow model of focus. So we'll provide a link to that app, I don't have any relationship to that app I should mention, but it's an excellent one, it's one that I've used for many years. There are also additional functions within the app, such as for sleep and for other things, but the 40 HZ, 4-0-h-z is the way it reads out, 40 HZ stimulation has been shown to improve focus and concentration. Here is my recommendation and the way that I use it. I would not use 40 HZ binaural beats every time I'm doing a about of work. What I tend to do is use it for about five minutes prior to that work and then turn it off and then do the work and I'll talk about other tools to use during that work, whether or not it's reading or math or even just emailing or something where I require a bunch of focus for a while. However, there are times in which I'm in an area or I'm in a state of mind where I'm feeling very distractable and then I'll keep the 40 HZ binaural beats on the entire time I'm doing that about of cognitive work. I'll also sometimes use the 40 HZ binaural beats prior to a workout, in particular weight workouts, where I really want to be able to focus on and contract specific muscles. So it's a very useful tool, again, supported by quality peer reviewed science, zero cost, available out there not just in the BrainWave app but in multiple apps. I think many of you will benefit from it. Some of you might not experience it immediately as a total dropping into a tunnel of focus in the same way that you might with say the sorts of neurochemicals that we'll talk about later, like Alpha-GPC and some of these other things that change neurochemicals directly, but nonetheless 40 HZ binaural beats are a very powerful tool, again, zero cost non-pharmacologic tool that tap into your own endogenous, meaning within you or exists within you physiology in order to increase acetylcholine and some other neurochemicals and they have been shown to work quite well. Okay so assuming that you are sleeping well 80% of the nights of your life or at least working on the various protocols and tools to sleep well and sufficiently long 80% of the nights of your life, and you are interested in additional tools that are sound based in order to improve your ability to concentrate and focus, there are quality peer reviewed studies supporting the idea that white noise or pink noise, and believe it or not, there is something called pink noise, it has to do with the specific frequencies of sound that are in the noise, well white noise and pink noise have been shown to not improve concentration per se, but to improve people's ability to transition into concentrated states. So I don't tend to use white noise and pink noise while I work, but I know a number of people that do. I know people that also use what's called brown noise. The folks I know from the engineering and computer science side get really into these details of white noise, pink noise, brown noise. You can find white noise, pink noise or brown noise and listen to it through headphones or in the room. There is indeed some data to support the fact that white noise, and to some extent, pink noise and brown noise can support the release of particular neurochemicals, but more data showing that they can amplify the activity of neurons in the so-called prefrontal cortex, this front area, sort of the bumper behind your forehead, that is directly related to your ability to direct your own focus and remain focused on certain things. So you have the option of either using binaural beats before, but not during your work, that is 40 HZ binaural beats, or 40 HZ binaural beats throughout your attempt to focus. You also have the option of not using binaural beats, but using white noise, pink noise or brown noise. Again, there are a lot of zero cost apps, you can find also white noise, pink noise and brown noise on YouTube. Again, these are tools that really have been shown over and over in humans to allow people to focus with more depth and to decrease the transition time into focus. This is a really key point. A lot of people are challenged with getting into a mode of focus. None of us, however, should be expected to just sit down and drop directly into a state of focus. I think that's completely an unfair request of ourselves. I mean, for instance, you wouldn't expect yourself to go out on the track or go out for a run and not warm up. You might jog for a few minutes or even walk before you would jog and then jog before you would run, right, I would hope you would do that. And if you're doing resistance training, I doubt that you go over and load up the bar or the machine with the maximum amount of weight that you can move and then just drop right into that, you always do a warmup. And I think it's very important to understand mental work, focus and concentration as requiring that warmup. What is that warmup? Well, you know what that warmup is. That warmup is the ramping up or the increase of epinephrine, adrenaline, acetylcholine, and dopamine. Right, the way that neurochemicals work is we don't just get to flip switches in our brain because we decide to, that's a fantasy. That's sort of the "Limitless" movie or movies and ideas that suddenly you're going to flip a switch on your arm and all of a sudden you're going to be in a laser focus, that is just not the way that your nervous system works. There's a gradual dropping into any state, whether or not that state is sleep, right, you go from shallow sleep to deep sleep and then out eventually. Focus too, you go from shallow focus to increasingly deep focus. That is, in our metaphor of the arrow, it's very broad, it's pointed at a lot of things. And over time as we drop into focus, that arrow is narrowing and narrowing and narrowing. In fact, probably better to think about it narrowing and then sometimes oscillating and getting wider again. We might hear something down the hallway or more typically our phone will buzz or we'll think, oh, I wonder what so and so is doing or I had to contact them about something. Your focus is dynamic, it is not what we call a step function. It's not like you go from unfocused to focused and then you drop into your maximal focus. By understanding that it's dynamic, by understanding that you are going to be continually going in and out of progressively but varying levels of focus, you will greatly release the pressure on yourself to feel focused all the time when you want to be. This is very key. People who are very good at focusing understand this and understand that they can't expect themselves to just immediately focus and then snap into or out of focus. Okay so be patient with yourself and also understand that focus is an ability, that you can improve your ability to focus by engaging the neural circuits responsible for focus repeatedly over time through so-called neuroplasticity, the ability of your nervous system to change in response to experience. And that has a couple of different components, but put very simply, what we repeat gets etched into our nervous system and becomes easier over time. And the more emotionally important or vital something feels to us, the more likely it is to trigger neuroplasticity. We're going to talk a little bit more about how to increase neural circuits for focus later, but right now, what you have in hand is the key importance of sleep and I again will direct you to hubermanlab.com and the Neural Network Newsletter to really work on optimizing your sleep. We've also got two auditory sound based tools for improving focus, there's 40 HZ binaural beats used before or during bouts of focus and concentration. And if you don't like those, or even if you do, you might alternate them with or occasionally use white noise, pink noise or brown noise, also readily available at zero cost. A question I often get is how long should I try to focus? Well, the research literature point to the key importance of so-called ultradian cycles. You've all probably heard of circadian cycles or circadian biology, circa, the day, circadian, is about 24 hour cycle. Well, our brain and body operate within that day or within each and every day I should say with 90 minute ultradian cycles. So my suggestion would be anytime you're going to sit down and try and focus or you're going to try and do a focused about of physical exercise or skill learning or musical learning, or maybe you're even just having a conversation, maybe you're a therapist or you're attending therapy or a class, how long should it be? And the ideal duration is about 90 minutes, not exactly 90 minutes, but we can reliably say 90 minutes or less, okay, it doesn't have to be the full 90 minutes. But trying to push yourself to be able to drop into two hours of focus or three hours of focus, while possible is not really in line with what we know about the underlying biology. Everything from our sleep states or the different stages of sleep and our waking states is divided into these 90 minute cycles or so-called ultradian cycles. So what I like to do is set a timer for 90 minutes. I acknowledge and accept the fact that under most conditions unless I'm really pressed for a deadline and I'm optimally caffeinated, et cetera, the first five to 10 minutes of that 90 minutes are a transition time, it's like the warm up for focus, but I do include it in that 90 minutes. And then I really try and drop into doing focused mental work or learning of some sort, again, this could be physical as well, motor skill learning or anything, we're running or lifting weights, et cetera, and really try and drop into that across the full 90 minutes, again accepting the fact, okay it's not just an idea, the fact that occasionally our focus will flicker, it will jump out of focus, and then a big part of being able to focus is to go back to focusing. The way I'd like you to conceptualize this perhaps is that arrowhead suddenly getting very, very broad, that you're focusing on many things or that arrow shifts to a different location in the room. The key is to be able to shift it back and to narrow it once again and that's an active process, so much so that it requires a lot of metabolic energy, your brain is the chief consumer of metabolic energy. The calories that you consume, the so-called basal metabolic rate, most of that isn't related to movement or heartbeat or breathing, it's related to brain function. Your brain is a glutton with respect to caloric need. So understand that at the end of 90 minutes or maybe even after 45 minutes, you might feel rather tired or even exhausted. And it's very important that after a about of focus that you take at least 10 minutes and ideally as long as 30 minutes and go through what I call deliberate defocus. You really want to focus on somewhat menial tasks or things that really don't require a ton of your concentration. This is starting to become a little bit of a movement out there in the kind of pop psychology and optimization world, this idea of not looking at your phone as you walk down the hall to the bathroom, certainly not looking at your phone in the bathroom. And I should mention, by the way, this is a particular annoyance of mine, have you noticed that wait times for restrooms in public places has increased substantially in the last 10 years? The reason for that is not digestive, okay, it's not the gut microbiome, I mean it might be the gut microbiome, but chances are it's because people are on their phones in the bathroom. So you're doing yourself and everybody else a favor by staying off your phone in the restroom, staying off your phone while walking down the hall. Try and give yourself some time to deliberately decompress, to let your mental states idle, to not be focused on any one thing. That period of idling is essential for your ability to focus, much in the same way that rest between sets of resistance training or rest between exercise is vital to being able to focus and perform during the actual sets or during the actual bouts of running or cycling or whatever your particular form of exercise might be. So deliberate decompression is key. And I know this is hard because we're all being drawn in by the incredible rich array of sensory information available on our phones and other devices, but I can't emphasize this enough, our ability to focus is not just related to what happens during the entry and movement through those focused bouts but after those focused bouts. We really need to deliberately decompress. And of course, the ultimate decompress, the time in which we are not directing our thinking interaction is during sleep. And so it's no wonder, or I should say it holds together logically, that that deep, long lasting duration of not controlling where our mind is at is in fact the ultimate form of restoration, even if we have very intense dreams. So take that period after each 90 minute or less focus about, right, remember those focus bouts don't have to be full 90 minutes, let's say you do 45 minutes of work, you're just done with it, set it down and go do something for maybe five, 10, maybe even 30 minutes that is functional for your day, right, not just walking around in circles or staring up at the sky although if you can do that, do that, but most of us have other things to do, but do things that are rather automatic or reflexive for you, and try not to do any focused reading, try not to bring your vision into a tight location, such as your phone and try and deliberately decompress, because that will allow you to drop into intense spouts of focus again repeatedly and repeatedly throughout the day. I'm often asked how many ultradian cycles one can perform throughout the day? That depends on how well you've slept, how well you are nourished, which we'll talk about in a moment, and how well trained up your focus capacity is. And here's the paradox, if you are very trained at focusing, if you're very good at dropping into focus, you're actually going to need more deliberate decompression and defocus and I recommend only doing about two, maybe three deep work sessions per day. So not one 90 minute session than expecting yourself to do to another one and another one, another one, but rather one deep work 90 minute session, and maybe another in the afternoon. A lot of people get surprised by this and say, "Wait, how many people can afford to just work three hours a day?" I'm not saying just work three hours a day. I'm really talking about the hard mental work. And again, somewhat paradoxically, the more you can concentrate, the more deeply you can concentrate, the fewer deep work concentration bouts you can actually perform each day. This makes sense, however, if you think about it in the context of say resistance training. If you are stronger and stronger in the gym, or you're an endurance athlete and you can run ultra-marathons, 100 miles or so, you are essentially cutting a deeper cut into your recovery capacity than somebody who's not very skilled at those things or can't perform as much intense work. So the intensity of the work scales directly with how long you need to rest after that work. I at this stage of my life am pretty good at dropping into and maintaining focused bouts of concentration provided the landscape of my life is right, you know, I don't have some burning stressful thing that's essential or an emergency that I'm tending to and that I put my phone away or turn it off, I can do three 90 minute focus bouts per day, but that's about it. And then in between those focus bouts, I'm doing other things that require less focus. Some of you may be able to perform four. What I highly recommend is that you try doing at least one, that is one 90 minute or less about of focused concentrated work per day, and yes, that means the weekends too. And on the weekends, I like to read a book with my phone nowhere in sight, not on a device, that's what I do or I'll listen to an audiobook sometimes while taking a walk, but really concentrating on what I'm trying to learn, what I'm hearing and what I'm seeing. So again, a daily 90 minute about is one to start with and I would say after about four weeks of that, if you're able to stay concentrated and work through the agitation, then I would consider increasing the number of focus bouts. Again, this is not to say that you should go to your teacher or your PhD advisor or your parent or your friends and say, "Listen, I can't really concentrate or think about anything for more than 90 minutes per day." That's not what I'm saying. These are deep focus bouts. These are bouts of work, or I should say mental work or physical work where you're really forcing yourself to focus and refocus, to sharpen the head of that arrowhead, to redirect it to what you're trying to concentrate on, and it is indeed hard work. I would even think about it more or less like a workout of any kind. Before we continue with today's discussion, we're going to take a brief pause to acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, also called AG1. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012 so I'm delighted that they've been a sponsor of this podcast. Athletic Greens contains vitamins, minerals, probiotics, digestive enzymes, and adaptogens, so it's got a lot of things in there and that's actually the reason I started taking it and the reason I still take it once or twice a day. It essentially covers all of my nutritional bases and the probiotics in particular are important to me because of the critical importance of what's called the gut brain axis, that is neurons and other cell types in the gut, in the digestive tract that communicate with the brain and the brain back to the digestive tract in order to control things like mood, immune function, hormone function, and on and on. Whenever somebody has asked me, what's the one supplement they should take, I always answer Athletic Greens. I gave that answer long before I ever had this podcast and it's the answer I still give now for all the reasons that I detailed just a moment ago. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year supply of vitamin D3+K2, which are also very important for a huge number of bodily factors and brain factors that impact your immediate and long-term health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. I'd like to call your attention to a new and extremely useful tool for learning and applying science based protocols for mental health, physical health and performance. It's called Virtusan, v-i-r-t-u-s-a-n, and it's an app. And inside the app, you'll find what are called journeys. Each journey is aimed at a specific goal, such as improving your sleep or tracking your sleep or improving your ability to focus and concentrate or improving your nutrition or specific exercise programs. The Virtusan app makes a lot of the protocols that you've seen here on the Huberman Lab Podcast and elsewhere very easy to understand and access and practice. And in fact, it tracks your progress with each of these protocols. I and several other researchers have been directly involved in developing the specific journeys and protocols that you'll find within the Virtusan app. In fact, a lot of it involves direct video tutorials from me and others that you'll recognize from social media and from podcasts. Everything that you'll find within the Virtusan app is geared towards giving you the latest science in simple, straightforward protocols to allow you to improve your mental health, physical health and performance. If you want check it out, you can go to the App Store under Virtusan, again, that's spelled v-i-r-t-u-s-a-n, or you can go to virtusan.com/huberman. Again, that's virtusan.com/huberman. I mentioned the topic of nutrition a little bit ago, and of course, nutrition is a complicated topic. In fact, one of the quickest ways to get yourself into a battle online is to say something definitive about nutrition. I just want to clearly state my stance about nutrition. I fully support and applaud those of you that are vegans for whatever reason, those of you that are pure carnivore for whatever reason, and those of you that are omnivores for whatever reason. I happen to be an omnivore. My goal is always to eat high quality, minimally or non-processed foods and to eat things in moderation. So I do eat some meat from sustainable sources or from organic sources, I eat some starches and I eat vegetables and I eat fruits, I try not to eat sugars and I don't really like highly processed foods at this point in my life. That's me, that's what I do, but I'm certainly not dictating what people should eat. I know certain people are ketogenic, and I can say that for people who achieve ketosis and can get into ketosis, yes indeed, there is a mental state associated with ketosis that will allow your brain to function and to think really clearly that many people find very attractive and keep them going back over and over again to a ketogenic diet. I'm somebody who for instance has not been in ketosis many times in my life, at least not deliberately so, but I actually will ingest liquid ketones from time to time because of the further cognitive enhancement and physical enhancement that I experience on top of nutrition that does include some carbohydrates. So there are a lot of different ways to approach all this, whether or not you're a vegan, omnivore, vegetarian, carnivore, et cetera, the point is this, your ability to focus, and in fact, your ability of neurons to encode specific information in your environment, that is to represent what's out there in the world, is actually related to your blood glucose level. Now here I'm setting aside the discussion of ketosis and ketogenic diets for the moment, but there's a beautiful study that was published in Neuron not long ago that showed that the tuning, that is the precision with which neurons in the brain will represent things in our environment is actually much greater when there is sufficient glucose in the brain. Translated into English, this means that when we are fasted or when our blood glucose is very low, we aren't able to perceive and think about things as clearly. Now there's a twist to this, however. Many people who practice intermittent fasting, and I should say I practice a sort of pseudo intermittent fasting, I generally eat my meals between the hours of 11:00 AM and 8:00 PM although sometimes there's some wiggle around that, occasionally have an early breakfast, I'm not super rigid about it, but I know there are a number of people who are doing longer fasts or they're eating in a six hour window. We did an entire episode about fasting, you can again find that at hubermanlab.com, we'll likely have Satchin Panda, who's an expert in intermittent fasting, on the podcast. Intermittent fasting has a lot of different potential benefits. For some people, it's a convenient way to restrict their calories. For other people, it's a convenient way to avoid eating, that is it's easier to not eat than to eat a small portion so they opt for intermittent fasting and so on and so forth. But one of the things that you hear very often is that some people like being fasted because they like the clarity of mind that it provides. Here's the situation. Neurons, unless you're in a ketogenic diet, really thrive on glucose, they love glucose. And as I mentioned before, your ability to think and perceive things is actually enhanced by having sufficient glucose in your bloodstream. So why would it be that some people experience a heightened state of mental clarity when they are fasted? I've certainly experienced that before. Well, I should say that provided you're well hydrated enough and you have enough electrolytes in your system, what tends to happen is that when you ingest food, there's a shift in your nervous system towards so-called parasympathetic mode, that is the more relaxed, you've probably heard it as rest and digest, although it does other things, the more relaxed mode that can indeed make us very sleepy. If we have too many carbohydrates, it actually can make us quite sleepy. However, if we have any food, if we have enough of it, that is if our gut is full, it diverts blood to our gut and we become sleepy and we can't focus as well. So a lot of people really like fasting and the state of being fasted for focus and concentration because they don't have as much of that parasympathetic activation, they're just not as sleepy. And in fact, under those conditions, half as much caffeine will give you just as much lift as twice as much caffeine will give you on a full belly of pasta and that's just the way that caffeine interacts with blood glucose. So what I'd like you to imagine is if you had a measure of focus from zero to 10, these are arbitrary units, 10 being maximally focused and zero being not focused at all, imagine a U-shaped function, right, where if you're very fasted, you're going to have high degree of focus and concentration, but then if you ingest some food and your belly is full, your focus and concentration is reduced. But having enough blood glucose and maybe even elevated blood glucose will increase cognitive function. So there are two ends of the spectrum. On one end of the spectrum, blood glucose is relatively low and you're fasted and you can think and behave in a very concentrated way and on the other end of the spectrum, you have a lot of blood glucose, or I should say, sufficient blood glucose, you never want your blood glucose to be too high, and that allows your neurons to encode and perceive and basically allow you to think really clearly. So you sort of have to pick your condition. What do you want for your bouts of focus and concentration? I actually do both. So what I do is, as I mentioned before, I eat my meal sometime around 11:00 AM, my first meal typically unless I'm very hungry when I wake up. And so I will do my workout and one about of focused work. I always think of this as my hard work early in the day and I do that fasted, I'll be consuming water with electrolytes, maybe LMNT or other electrolytes, maybe some caffeine as well in the form of yerba mate or coffee, that's my first focus about of 90 minutes or less, that is essentially done fasted and then I'll eat and then I do notice after I eat, I actually have a diminished capacity to focus. But then again in the afternoon, I will do another 90 minute about of focus, and I'll talk about some of the tools I use to make sure that that about of focus is optimal for getting the most amount of focused work done, whether or not it's mental work or physical work, although I tend to do my physical work early in the day and my mental work both early and late in the day. So to make this very simple or as simple as I can for you being fasted is great for focus and concentration provided you're not thinking about food the entire time and being fed is terrific for focus and concentration, it actually can improve neuronal function provided that you didn't eat too much food. So one way to manage this is if you're going to have a lunch, to make sure that you don't stuff yourself at lunch, that you're not overeating and to not get quite so full that you put your nervous system into this parasympathetic mode and make it hard to focus in the afternoon. I know a lot of people experience a dip or even a crash in energy in the afternoon that make it really hard to focus. For that reason, I'll just remind people of a tool I've talked about many times before, which is based on the biology of adenosine and caffeine, et cetera, which is to delay your first caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes after waking up. I know that can be painful for certain people. I violate that rule, when I'm working out very early in the morning. I'll drink my caffeine before my workout which often occurs within 30 to 60 minutes of waking. But in general, unless I'm working out very early, I will ingest my caffeine 90 to 120 minutes after I wake up. So again, I want to emphasize that if you hear somebody out there say being fasted is optimal for focus and concentration. Well, that is true in one context and perhaps ideal for a certain part of the day. And other people will say, no, neurons run on glucose, you need glucose in your bloodstream in order to get those neurons to be tuned, that is to respond with electrical activity in the optimal way when you're reading something or when you're trying to perform exercise. Well, that's also true. And of course, you can incorporate both. I, in fact as I just described, incorporate both fasted states and fed states in order to optimize my concentration and focus. And as a brief note about ketosis, for those of you that actually managed to transition into ketosis and are maintaining a ketogenic state, that, as I mentioned earlier, can enhance brain function, concentration and focus because of the way in which ketones can be used as a so-called optimal fuel for neurons. The ketogenic diet was originally designed, if you will, for epilepsy, it has a whole relationship to epilepsy and controlling epileptic seizures, and it can in fact allow people to achieve focus, concentrated brain states. So in the future, I'll do an episode about ketosis and be sure to circle back on how to optimize ketosis for focus and concentration. Although I have to believe that most of the people listening to this are probably not in ketosis or following a ketogenic diet so that's why I mainly focused on fasted states and fed states. And just to make sure that I'm thorough, a fasted state to me would be a state in which you haven't ingested any calories, but may have ingested caffeine or maybe even a small amount of artificial sweetener or something like that, but really haven't ingested any significant number of calories in the previous four to eight or maybe even 12 hours. And again, there's tremendous variation here, depending on how long people have fasted, whether or not we're talking about the state right after people wake up, et cetera. Again, if you're interested in intermittent fasting, both for the sake of mental and physical health and performance, check out our episode on fasting at hubermanlab.com. I also want to touch back on this idea of which foods can increase focus. You know, in the episode on ADHD that I did, I touched on this quite a bit as it relates to elimination diets. There's a whole industry and a ton of interest for obvious reasons into what sorts of things kids and adults should and shouldn't eat in order to reduce symptoms of ADHD. I think that the sum total of those data point to the fact that reducing simple sugar intake and certainly highly processed foods, so ice cream, candy, chips, et cetera, those sorts of things, really does seem to improve symptoms of ADHD in both children and adults. But once you move past that and you start to say, well, which foods can improve concentration and focus? Well, foods that for instance include a lot of tyrosine, which is a precursor to dopamine, and now you know why dopamine is important in this context, are certainly going to increase concentration and focus. So things like Parmesan cheese, certain meats, certain nuts, you can look up which foods contain high amounts of tyrosine. There are also some fruits and vegetables that include high amounts of tyrosine, but to be quite direct, it doesn't matter whether or not you're ingesting foods that are rich in the precursor amino acids to dopamine, acetylcholine, et cetera, if you are consuming large amounts of those foods. That is one can look and see for instance, that a steak includes a lot of the precursors to acetylcholine. It has amino acid precursors to dopamine as well and there are other foods that will do that as well, but if I were to ingest say two ribeye steaks, that's a lot of meat and it will direct a lot of blood to my gut and it will cause me to be sleepy and that will create challenges of me being able to achieve states of focus and concentration. So the simple way to put this is if you eat too much or you eat a very large volume of food, you are going to diminish your focus and concentration. The key is to eat enough that you're nourished for the certain activities, mental and physical that you need to perform, but if you're eating large meals, you are going to diminish your concentration and focus period. I know many people are curious as to whether or not caffeine can improve focus and concentration, and indeed it can. There is an immense amount of data supporting the idea that caffeine, provided its consumed in the appropriate dosages, can improve mental performance and physical performance, and it largely does that through improvements in focus and concentration. The dosage of caffeine of course, is going to depend on how caffeine adapted you are, how much caffeine tolerance you have. And that is going to vary tremendously depending on whether or not you ingest that caffeine with or without food, as I mentioned earlier. But there is a kind of general range in which we can talk about caffeine as being useful for focus and concentration. And the range is basically from 100 milligrams to 400 milligrams. I want to caution everybody out there, if you're somebody who suffers from anxiety or panic attacks, and you're not used to ingesting caffeine and you run out and ingest 400 milligrams of caffeine in the form of espresso or yerba mate or an energy drink or in pill form, that is going to be very uncomfortable for you, you're going to be sweating profusely, your heart rate is going to increase, you're going to be quite panicked in fact or at least anxious. So be cautious with your use and adopting of caffeine if you're not already caffeine adapted, but most people do quite well to ingest 100 to 200 milligrams of caffeine prior to doing some focused work. And again, I recommend delaying your caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes after waking, unless you're using that caffeine to really jolt your system before a workout. Caffeine can of course be ingested in various forms, even pill form, but most people ingest it in the form of coffee or my particular favorite way to ingest caffeine is yerba mate. It is important and I should note that you should actively avoid the smoked versions of yerba mate as they contain a lot of carcinogenic, cancer promoting compounds. There's some great yerba mate brands out there. The most cost effective way to consume it would be to use the loose leaf tea and to pour water over that. There's one particular brand that I like, I don't have any affiliation to them whatsoever, but I've been using it for years, it's Anna Park. It's an organic brand that is sold, I buy mine on Amazon, you can find it elsewhere on the internet as well. Again, I don't have any affiliation to them, it's just very cost effective, very clean, it doesn't have the smoked flavor, at least the one that I buy is not the smoked variety so none of the carcinogenic compounds are in there at least that I'm aware of and I like the way it tastes and it provides a very even lift and stimulant that I think certainly works for me and that a number of people I know that I have suggested to also enjoy. Yerba mate or caffeine also have other additional benefits, in particular, the caffeine in yerba mate and coffee and other sources of caffeine are known to increase the density and efficacy, that is the number and the function of dopamine receptors, and this has been shown in humans several times. So by ingesting caffeine pretty regularly, you're actually increasing the ability of dopamine to have this effect of increasing motivation and drive. I tend to ingest caffeine only early in the day, I tend to cut off my caffeine intake somewhere around one or 2:00 PM to ensure that I can get into a good night's sleep, but I realize that there are people out there that ingest caffeine as late as two or three in the afternoon and can still sleep fine. I will caution those of you that think that you can drink caffeine in the evening or nighttime and still fall asleep. All of the research points to the fact that the architecture of your sleep and the depth of your sleep is disrupted. Even if you're able to fall and stay asleep, the sleep you're getting is simply not as good as the sleep you would get if you were to shut off your caffeine intake at least eight hours before bedtime, and ideally more like 10 or even 12 hours before bedtime. But of course, there are practical constraints as well. Okay so caffeine is increasing dopamine's function by changing the number and efficacy of dopamine receptors, but of course, it also increases our wakefulness, our alertness, and that is largely through the neurochemical systems related to adenosine, which is a molecule that builds up in our brain and body the longer we are awake, it's part of the sleepiness system if you will, it makes us feel fatigued or tired, and caffeine also operates on the epinephrine, the adrenaline system. In fact, if we ingest too much caffeine, we'll sometimes get the jitters. Those jitters are really the sympathetic, as it's called, nervous system's bias toward movement, and our pupils will dilate, they actually get broader. Now somewhat paradoxically, when our pupils get bigger, the pupils of our eyes that is, our visual world actually narrows, it becomes more tunnel-like. A lot of people don't realize this. When our pupils are really small, that means we are relaxed. So if you ever see someone with really tiny or pin size pupils, they're very relaxed. If their pupils are very big, they're very dilated, well then they are very amped up, they are very, very alert. Caffeine increases alertness by increasing epinephrine, adrenaline release both in the brain and within the body. And so that's another way that it facilitates focus and concentration. Now there are other ways to increase epinephrine in the brain and body besides caffeine or other stimulants, and in fact, that has been studied. There's an excellent study that was carried out not that long ago on how stress itself can increase our ability to focus and concentrate, that's right how stress itself can increase focus and concentration. You know, most people think of stress as impairing our ability to focus, but that's actually not true. When we are stressed, it involves the deployment, the release of adrenaline, epinephrine, and that that adrenaline both changes our visual field, in other words, it narrows our vision to a more tunnel-like focus, that is it makes the arrow in our metaphor of the arrow more sharp, and it improves our concentration. And this makes sense given what we know about stress. When we're stressed, we tend to be stressed about a specific thing, we start anticipating or wondering or thinking about what's going to happen next? What led up to this? How is this going to impact me? How do I feel right now? It really narrows the context of our thinking and our behavior. So one of my favorite studies that really illustrates how stress can improve concentration and performance is one that was published not that long ago and I will provide a link to this in the show notes. It's a paper published in the "Journal of Experimental Psychology" in 2020. The title of the paper is, not surprisingly, "Acute stress improves concentration performance", first author DeGroote, d-e-g-r-o-o-t-e. And this study involved taking a number of subjects and stressing them out or not prior to a cognitive or concentration task. And there are a lot of data in this paper, but I'm just going to hone in on one specific set of data. And I should mention as I go there, that they measured things like cortisol, a stress hormone, they measured anxiety, it was a quite thorough study. And what they found was that concentration performance improved manyfold, I should say, from, there was a greater than doubling of concentration and performance in the stress group. And stress in this context was provided using a standard way of inducing stress. What they basically do is they bring subjects into the laboratory and they have to either do something fairly mundane in the control group or they have to do a simulated job interview, an arithmetic task, and they're being evaluated as they're doing this. So this isn't intense psychosocial stress. They're not watching anything disturbing, they're not being traumatized in any kind of way. This is fairly low levels of stress that raised their levels of epinephrine, and we know this from this study, and their levels of cortisol, another stress hormone, modestly within their brain and blood. But that even modest increase in these stress hormones and their reported psychological levels of stress really enhanced their focus and concentration. This may come as surprising 'cause like many people think, gosh, stress really diminishes cognitive performance, but that's absolutely wrong, stress improves cognitive performance. Now of course there are other ways to increase stress levels and to do that in healthy ways to improve concentration and performance and one of the best ways to do that because it's so sure fire and it's generally safe provided you do it safely is deliberate cold exposure. This is something I've talked about on the podcast before, but deliberate cold exposure can be achieved by getting into a cold shower for one to five minutes. If you're not used to it, you probably want to start with one minute, or you can get into an ice bath, and nowadays there are a number of different commercial sources of circulating cold water or if you have access to a body of cold water like a lake or a pool or an ocean. We know that getting into cold water or under cold water greatly increases epinephrine levels and dopamine levels in the brain and blood. There's a beautiful study that was published in the European Journal of Physiology that showed that the increases in dopamine are massive, near doubling or more of dopamine levels that are very long lasting for hours, and epinephrine, and indeed cortisol levels are also increased, and in ways that support not just immune system function because they do that, and mood because it does that, but they can really improve concentration and focus. I touched on this a little bit in an episode about memory that there's an age old practice really dating back to medieval times of putting people into cold water right after they learn something in order to spike, to increase their epinephrine as a way to consolidate those memories. For the sake of today's discussion, if you are interested in ways to improve focus and concentration, you need to increase your epinephrine, your adrenaline levels. Cold water exposure is one of the most efficient ways to do that. This is not a biohack. I don't like the word hack, I know it's commonly used, but a hack is something where you're using one thing for a different purpose than it was originally intended for and here, I'm not referring to the shower or the cold bath, I'm referring to epinephrine. Epinephrine is a neurochemical that will place your vision into more of a tunnel mode, which will allow you to focus on cognitive work or physical work in a more specific way, you're not going to be as distractable, and it's very easy to achieve by getting into a cold shower or a cold body of water for a brief period of time. People always ask how long to get under or into cold water and how cold to make it. Here's the thing, it should be uncomfortably cold, but safe to stay in for one to five minutes. Okay so uncomfortably cold, you really want to get out, but safe to stay in, not so cold that it's going to give you a heart attack and not so warm that it's comfortable that it doesn't create that adrenaline release. Cold water exposure, I should say deliberate, cold water or non deliberate cold water exposure reliably increases epinephrine levels. It is incredibly useful as a tool for this, and it is in fact, zero cost or even negative zero cost. How could it be negative zero cost? Well, you can certainly save on your heating bill by taking a cold shower so that's one way. And for those of you that have access to devices or locations where you can get into cold water, you can submerge, well then that can work. For those of you that don't, maybe you take a cold bath, you get in up to your neck, that's going to be most efficient. For those of you that can't do that, you'll get under a cold shower. Again, it should be comfortably cold to the point where you want to get out, but that you can safely stay in for one to five minutes. How long should you do it before a workout? Well, if you get into really cold water, it's uncomfortably cold and get out after about three minutes, you're probably good to go, dry off and get to work. Some of you might think this is a little bit silly as a tool for focus and concentration, but if you look at the data on epinephrine and how powerfully it can increase focus, I think you'd be very impressed. I mean it certainly can increase one's ability to attend to specific visual stimuli, so for reading or math work, et cetera, it's going to be very useful. And of course you don't want to make it so cold that you're shivering and chattering the whole time. And of course you could, if you like, combine this with 40 HZ binaural beats, there's no reason why you couldn't combine the two protocols. But the point here is that a lot of people would love to and I think ought to leverage the health promoting and powerful effects of increasing epinephrine on focusing concentration and running out and getting stressed by a life event or getting into an argument or something like that simply as a way to increase focus and concentration doesn't seem that adaptive to me. So deliberate cold exposure is a straightforward way to do that, it doesn't involve anyone else, I suppose you could do it with somebody else, but it doesn't require anyone else. And again, there are zero low and even negative cost ways to approach that. If you'd like to know how long the positive effects of epinephrine last toward improving focus and concentration, well, if we look to that study from DeGroote et al, the acute stress improves cognitive performance study, they measured concentration before and 30 minutes after the stress was induced and there does appear to be a quite long lasting, really up to an hour or more effect of increasing epinephrine. So how might you apply these sorts of protocols early in the day or later in the day? Well, one suggestion or one potential protocol would be if you're going to sit down and do some work, if you're already feeling alert and focused, no need to reach to this tool, but if you're feeling like your focus and alertness isn't quite where you'd like it to be, you could take a three minute very cold shower or submerge yourself in cold water for three minutes, you might have a cup of coffee as well and then sit down and do that work, maybe even throw in the 40 HZ binaural beats. All of that would be layering in the different systems, the different neurochemicals, such as acetylcholine, epinephrine and dopamine, that are going to lend themselves to a really terrific 90 minute or less work about. Now I'd like to discuss some of the purely behavioral tools that quality peer reviewed science say can improve focus and concentration significantly. At the beginning of today's episode, I talked about the study from Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab where they explored a 13 minute meditation done every day for a period of eight weeks. That meditation led to significant improvements in focus and concentration ability, as well as other aspects of cognitive performance. It also improved mood and reduced stress. So you might be wondering what exactly is this meditation? The meditation is very simple and it's one that anyone can perform. What you would want to do is set a timer for about 13 minutes, I don't think it has to be exactly 13 minutes, but since that's what they included in the study, you would set a timer for 13 minutes. You would sit or lie down, close your eyes, and you would simply focus on your breathing. Most people are going to benefit from only doing that breathing through their nose, but if you have some sort of obstruction or inability to breathe just through your nose, you could probably also do it by breathing through your nose and mouth or just your mouth. But ideally you would do just nasal breathing for a period of 13 minutes, concentrating on that breathing, and concentrating, meaning bringing your awareness, your so-called interoceptive awareness if you wanted to get really technical about it, your interoceptive awareness to a point just about an inch inside of your forehead. Now, of course, that might sound kind of gory to some of you, you've never actually been inside your forehead, but just about an inch behind your forehead is where you would want to place your concentration while also concentrating on your breathing. Now here's the thing about meditation that all studies of meditation show, which is that unless you are a very experienced meditator, your concentration, your focus will drift away from your breathing and away from that location about an inch inside your head, inside your brain, about just behind your forehead. That will happen maybe every 10 seconds, every 20 seconds, maybe even every five seconds, but an important part of such a meditation practice to improve concentration and focus is that you are continually refocusing back to that specific location and refocusing back on your breath. This is something that again, is not often discussed. People think that if you do a meditation and you're supposed to concentrate on your breath, that if your mind drifts that somehow you failed in that meditation, but actually that's not the case. A huge component of improving your ability to focus and concentrate by way of neuroplasticity, rewiring of the circuits for focus and concentration, is the repeated return to a state of focus from a state of non-focus or diminished focus. So think about it like trying to drive down the freeway and staying between the lane lines, excuse me. And every once in a while, because there's a bit of drift on the vehicle, maybe the wheels aren't aligned correctly or there's something else wrong with the chassis or the steering device, it starts to drift right a little bit, then you hit the rumble strip to go rrrr, and then you pull back to the center. That's really what a focused meditation practice is about as opposed to expecting yourself to stay between the mental lane lines, so to speak. So if you're somebody who's going to do a practice of the sort that I described, 13 minute meditation practice every day, you'd want to sit or lie down, close your eyes, start to concentrate on your breath, focus your attention on a location about an inch behind your forehead, and then fully expect that at some point, you'll be thinking about something else, and that's a cue to focus back to that location just about an inch behind your forehead and back to your breath. By doing that repeatedly over and over, what you're really training up is the network within your brain that indeed includes that prefrontal cortex that you're focusing on as well as some other structures, the inferior temporal cortex, indeed the hippocampus, a structure associated with memory, and other components of the neural circuit that are involved in directing our mental focus and concentration. Again, I can't emphasize the importance of this practice being one of focusing and refocusing. In fact, I would prefer to call such a practice, a refocus focused meditation, or a constantly refocusing, or maybe you all can come up with a better name for it, I'm certainly not that good at naming things, but this sort of meditation practice has been shown in the study by the Suzuki lab and other studies to really improve people's ability to focus and remain focused, so much so that in the beautiful book, "Altered States," they describe a number of different meditation practices, some a little bit longer than the one that I described, one that's 17 minutes, another one that's 30 minutes, some people will meditate as long as 60 minutes a day, although that's quite a long time, in my opinion. The point here isn't how long you focus or somehow trying to achieve total focus for the entire 13 minute or 17 minute or 60 minute about of meditation. While that would be wonderful and I think many people aspire to do that, that's a lot of hard mental work. I think for most people out there, including myself, a relatively short meditation practice of about 13 minutes in which you fully expect your focus and concentration to drift, but that you are continually refocusing is going to be the most effective, yes, indeed, the most effective at teaching yourself to focus and stay concentrated. In fact, I invite you to interpret every time that you focus off that location about one inch behind your forehead, as an opportunity to refocus and think about the refocusing as the trigger for teaching your neural circuits how to focus for extended periods of time. And as a bonus to that sort of meditation practice, the study from Wendy Suzuki's lab also showed that people experience improvements in sleep and improvements in memory, so not just improvements in mood and reduction in stress and improvements in focus and concentration, but all these other positive benefits from just doing that 13 minute a day meditation practice. It's one that I've started to adopt and have felt tremendous benefit from and that I encourage many of you to try as well. The one cautionary note is the one that I mentioned at the beginning of the episode, which is because the refocus as I'll call it, meditation, does involve a significant amount of effort and engagement of these prefrontal cortical circuits, it is disruptive to sleep if performed too closely to sleep. So if you are going to do that practice, I recommend that you not do it within the four hours prior to your bedtime. Earlier I mentioned that I would talk about ways to improve focus if you are sleep deprived. This is something that I'm all too familiar with. I put a lot of effort into optimizing my sleep, that's something that with each passing year, I put more and more effort into, again, because sleep is so vital for mental health, physical health and performance of all kinds, but certainly in my role as a student, in my role as a professor and in my role in life, I've had numerous times in which I simply did not get enough sleep or my sleep was terrible for whatever reason, and yet I still had work demands and social demands, et cetera. One practice that is very effective at allowing you to focus better than you would otherwise under conditions of sleep deprivation is so called non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. This is also referred to sometimes as yoga nidra. Yoga nidra actually means yoga sleep. Yoga nidra is a practice of lying down for about 10 to 30 sometimes even as long as 60 minutes, you listen to a script, it's an audio script, that takes you through a progressive deep relaxation, it involves a body scan, some long exhale breathing. It is very restorative in the sense that one tends to emerge from yoga nidra or NSDR feeling greatly refreshed compared to how you felt prior to it. There is also terrific neuroimaging data from laboratories in Denmark showing that there's a restoration of dopamine levels in the so-called basal ganglia after NSDR AKA yoga nidra. Whether or not you call it yoga nidra or NSDR, which is what I refer to it as, non-sleep deep rest, you can find these scripts at zero cost in multiple places. You can find there are certain apps that are NSDR or yoga nidra apps. There is a NSDR protocol that was put out there by Madefor which is on YouTube that you can access for free. There is a NSDR or I should say a number of NSDR protocols through the Virtusan app. There are, again, number of different places that one can access NSDR protocols. I do NSDR for 10 to 30 minutes per day every single day, not just on days where I'm sleep deprived. If I happen to be sleep deprived, I would extend that NSDR to 30 or 60 minutes. And when you do that NSDR will depend on when you have time for that NSDR. When I haven't slept well, what I'll try and do is find a quiet place where I can do NSDR for 30 or ideally 60 minutes. Sometimes I will fall back asleep during that NSDR, that's fine if you do that, but most people will stay awake during the NSDR, and then I'll emerge from that and go about my day. If in the afternoon, I'm very fatigued because of lack of sleep, I might do another NSDR of 10 to 30 or 60 minutes, and then another work about. Again, NSDR is something I do every day. I talked a lot about this in the episodes related to sleep, because it can help you get better at falling and staying asleep at night in addition to feeling restorative in that immediate timeframe of the day in which you do NSDR, so it's immensely beneficial at various times and for various purposes. But here within the context of trying to concentrate and focus when you're sleep deprived, NSDR, AKA yoga nidra is an immensely beneficial practice. There's growing amounts of quality science pointing to the neurochemical replenishing effects, as I mentioned before, dopamine, but also the potential for NSDR to replace sleep that you've lost. I would never want anyone to try and use NSDR as a total replacement for sleep, but under conditions in which you cannot control your sleep, NSDR is going to be the best way that I am aware of to restore your ability to focus and concentrate for whatever purpose. And if you emerge from your NSDR and then drink some caffeine, you'll notice an even greater capacity for focus and concentration for all the reasons directly related to caffeine. So again, NSDR is a general tool for enhancing your ability to sleep and it's a tool that you can use in order to compensate for, at least to some degree, compensate for lost sleep when you need to focus and concentrate. One thing that really contrasts NSDR and yoga nidra with the sort of focused meditation that I talked about a few minutes ago, the 13 minute meditation, is that during the 13 minute meditation, you're actively trying to refocus and focus, whereas during NSDR and yoga nidra, you're actually trying to defocus. So you can think of the 13 minute meditation for refocusing and focusing as directly tapping into and mediating improvements in the circuitry for focus and concentration whereas you can think of NSDR and yoga nidra as modulating your brain and body state to allow you to focus and concentrate better. Now another tool that you can use to directly tap in to the circuits for focus and concentration and to greatly accelerate neuroplasticity, the improvements, or I should say the changes in those circuits that will allow you to focus and concentrate better is hypnosis. A lot of people hear hypnosis and they think stage hypnosis, you know, people squawking like chickens and doing things against their will, but actually hypnosis is a atypical but highly accessible brain state that's been studied with a lot of rigor at Stanford University School of Medicine by my colleague, Dr. David Spiegel, he's been a guest on this podcast previously. Hypnosis is a unique brain state because it's one in which you are deeply focused and yet deeply relaxed. So to just sort of set up the array of practices here so you can think about them logically, the focus refocus meditation is based on and focused on focus, no pun intended. NSDR and yoga nidra are aimed at deep relaxation. Hypnosis is this atypical, very powerful brain state in which you combine high levels of focus and deep relaxation. Now it's a little bit of a tough one to just take oneself into, but fortunately, there's a tool based on a lot of quality peer-reviewed research from the Spiegel lab and other labs and that is the Reveri app, r-e-v-e-r-i. The Reveri app is available for no cost, at least for a period of time and then I think they place certain elements of it behind a pay wall, but you can try at zero cost, it's available for Apple, soon I think also to be available for Android, and they have specific hypnosis protocols that you listen to, and these are very brief protocols, follow the instructions, you're listening to a particular audio script of David Spiegel himself, and some progressive breathing and actually some eye movements that are directly linked to the neural circuits that allow for these highly focused, deeply relaxed states. And there are components within the Reveri app specifically geared towards improving focus and concentration. So again, there's meditation for focus, there's deliberate decompression, NSDR, yoga nidra, which take you into deep relaxation, and then hypnosis is this very special, very directed state of highly focused and highly relaxed, or I should say deeply relaxed, that allow access to the neural circuits for focus and concentration and allow you to tune those up and to improve those very significantly in a very brief amount of time. And again, some of those hypnosis scripts are as short as eight minutes, some are as long as 13 minutes. So what we're really talking about here are zero cost tools that directly tap into the neural circuits, the components within your brain, that allow for deep relaxation, allow for deep focus, and improve your ability to focus and concentrate over time simply by repeating these. How often do you need to repeat the Reveri hypnosis for focus and concentration before you see benefits? Well, that will vary from person to person. I tend to use it once every third or fourth day and have experienced tremendous benefits from it. I don't think I'm unique in that sense, they have a lot of data to support this Reveri app and the protocols within it. How long do you have to do NSDR before you experience those benefits? There, I would say the first time and every time, because it's so deeply relaxing that you emerge from it feeling quite restored relative to how you went into it. And as I mentioned earlier in the study on meditation, it took about eight weeks to see the effects that they observed in that study, but they didn't observe shorter time points. So I highly encourage people to explore meditation geared towards focus and refocus, also NSDR, nonsleep deep rest, AKA yoga nidra, and the Reveri app, Specifically the hypnosis within the Reveri app, that's geared towards improving focus and concentration. All of these have terrific science to support them, this is not woo science or hacks or just something that people came up with. This is all grounded in work from some of the best universities in the world, from excellent groups who've looked at underlying neural mechanisms and measured things with a lot of rigor, et cetera, et cetera. These tools are available to you, I highly recommend that you use them. And if you're interested in the optimal time of day to do these, we already mentioned that the focus refocus meditation shouldn't be done too close to sleep, the Reveri hypnosis app can be done at any time really, in fact, there's a component of falling back of sleep in there, in other words, a hypnosis specifically geared toward helping people teach themselves to fall back asleep when they wake up in the middle of the night. NSDR, I always say, can be done first thing in the morning, in the afternoon or any time of day, and in fact, I'll sometimes do that in the middle of the night if I happen to wake up and need to get back to sleep. So really these tools can be applied most any time of day, except for that one caveat about the focus refocus meditation not being done too close to sleep. Now there's another set of behavioral tools that can really help enhance one's ability to focus and those are visual based tools. In fact, the tools I'm about to describe are actually being employed in a number of schools in China and elsewhere in order to teach children to focus better and for longer periods of time. The key principle here is that much of our cognitive focus, our ability to think about something in a very specific way and stay focused on it, to read or to follow a line of conversation or math or music, et cetera, is going to be directed by our visual system. Our visual system has two forms of attention and focus. One is overt focus, which is very straightforward. If I'm looking at the tip of my pen, for those of who are listening right now, I'm looking at the tip of my pen, that's overt focus, I'm focusing on it with my eyes, and of course, the rest of my brain then will follow and start to analyze the details of what I'm seeing and the contours of the pen, et cetera. It seems sort of obvious when you first hear it, but our cognitive focus tends to follow our overt visual focus. That's also why they put blinders on horses. That's also why sometimes wearing a hoodie or a hat or limiting your visual field in some way can help you enhance your cognitive focus, it can help limit distraction. You're just not seeing as much. It's also why when we ingest caffeine or any kind of stimulant or we are stressed and our pupils dilate and our vision becomes more tunnel-like, less panoramic, but more tunnel-like, you know they say a soda straw view of the world or you're looking through a tunnel, your focus, your visual focus is actually driving your cognitive focus. Your cognitive focus is narrower than it would be if you were seeing the whole scene that you're in. So when you hear this, it sounds obvious, but for many people, including many scientists, it's just not obvious that this would be the case. However, that is the case, your visual focus drives your cognitive focus. So what is a practice that has been studied in various laboratories and that's being employed in various schools? Is to have children or adults visually focus on one location for a given period of time. How long? Anywhere from 30 seconds to three minutes, and believe it or not, three minutes is a long time to maintain visual focus at one location. If you were to try that right now, you'd probably find it to be a bit of a strain, but if you want to try it, you can. Keep in mind, you yes, are allowed to blink, but also keep in mind that meditation refocusing practice that we talked about earlier, that the refocusing is the key component of teaching yourself or your brain, you are your brain, your brain is you, but to teach yourself how to focus better. So if you're going to incorporate this practice, what you would want to do is pick a location, it could be on a wall, it could be on your computer in front of you, although I would encourage it to not be the contents of your computer screen, you might just want to blank your screen, you might want to put a piece of paper with a crosshatch there, any sort of visual target, or you can imagine a visual target and then focus your visual attention on that target and try to breathe normally, try and stay relaxed, and certainly allow yourself to blink so that your eyes don't try out. This is not a test of how long you can go without blinking. By focusing on that particular location and by forcing yourself to refocus on that location anytime your gaze, your vision drifts from that location, you are encouraging the circuits for focus to get better at focusing for longer and longer and at refocusing when your focus drifts off of that location. This is incorporating neural circuits, including the prefrontal cortex, things like the frontal eye fields. For those of you curious about the underlying biology, this practice is recruiting certain elements of your so-called prefrontal cortex, also the frontal eye fields, which are locations not far from the prefrontal cortex, that are involved in deliberately directing your gaze to particular locations in space, not outer space, although you could do this by focusing on stars I suppose, but in visual space. Now I mentioned before that this is overt visual focus and attention, you are overtly looking at that location, but one also very powerful practice for improving focus and concentration is to use covert focus. Covert focus is where my gaze, my eyes are focused on one location, such as my pen, but my focus is actually directed elsewhere in the room or location that I'm in. My mind and to some extent my peripheral vision is focused in this case on the door just to my left in the room that I'm in. That takes a little bit more effort. This is something that all old world primates, of which we are old world primates, are able to do. And it probably evolved as part of the mechanism by which animals could evaluate their scene, evaluate predators, evaluate other primates while not necessarily staring at them directly so they can obtain information, we can obtain information without having to direct our gaze specifically to one location. Maybe we can obtain information from multiple locations, indeed, we can. Without getting too far down the rabbit hole of how vision and cognition relate, because we've done episodes on that previously, and simply focusing on the tools that can be incorporated to improve focus and concentration, here's what I recommend. Set yourself a low bar at first and set a timer and try to focus on one location for 30 seconds and that's it for that day. The next day, you might add five seconds, and then the next day, five seconds after that. If you miss a day, no big deal, simply do the practice for the same amount of time that you did the last time that you did the practice, and then gradually try and increase the amount of time that you can focus on one visual location overtly by looking directly at that location. If you like, and if you feel you have the ability, you can try and do this through covert attention and focus by looking straight forward for instance, and attending to something in the corner of the room and trying to do that for 30 seconds, you'll find that that's quite a bit harder, and then extending that by five seconds every time you do the practice. This is something that I don't think you necessarily have to build up to being able to do for a full hour in order to extract the benefits. In fact, the best way to think about this practice is as a means to get into a focused state. If you remember back about an hour or so ago, I was talking about how focused states are not a drop all the way in and then exit type phenomenon. We don't just drop into a focused state the same way we don't drop into the peak performance of a workout, we warm up. So what I recommend is having a 30 second to three minute period at the beginning of a about to focus where you're going to do work or physical work and anchoring your vision to one location somewhere in the room or if you want to do it covertly, you can do that, setting a timer and trying to do that for anywhere from 30 seconds to three minutes. What you're doing when you exercise that practice is you are ramping up neural activity within the neural circuits that create focus and concentration. Then, I would stop looking at that location or that covert location and then I would move to the work that you're trying to do, either mental work or physical work. And if about halfway through your 90 minute about or at some point in your 90 minute about of work or exercise, you feel that your concentration is drifting rather than look at your phone and scroll through the thousands of contexts that exists within social media or your phone, try just picking a location again on the wall, focusing back on that location, using that as a ramp up to then direct your focus back towards, if your weight training, sets and reps that you might be performing, if you're running, you might do this, or cycling you might do this by focusing on a particular location and really homing in on that location physically. And this is a practice that a lot of athletes use in fact, and if you're say doing musical practice or math, well then, you'd want to focus on something other than the task that you're trying to perform. But again, using visual focus as a way to ramp up and increase your overall ability to focus and concentrate, and then applying that to whatever it is that you're trying to learn or perform. Next, I'd like to talk about compounds that can improve concentration and focus, and these are most often consumed as supplements, although some of them, I should mention, can also be derived from food. Again, I just want to remind you that there are things, in this case compounds, that can modulate a biological mechanism, that is can modulate focus and concentration, and there are compounds that can mediate, can directly contribute to concentration and focus. One of the key compounds that supports concentration and focus because it generally supports mood, concentration and focus and brain function in general are the omega-3 essential fatty acids. I've talked about the omega-3 essential fatty acids in a variety of contexts, in particular depression, but also ADHD, there are interesting data on that, and it's really clear that getting somewhere between one and three grams of EPA, that is one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acid per day can improve outcomes, that is can improve mood and can improve cognitive function. And while there's some debate about whether or not it can improve cardiac function, it's very clear, at least to me, that ingesting one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acid per day is beneficial. But again, in the context of focus and concentration, it's in modulating the neural circuits and brain function that are going to support focus and concentration. It's not as if taking one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acid per day is going to tap directly into only the circuits for focus and concentration. That said, and as discussed on the episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast with Dr. Rhonda Patrick, and on the episode on ADHD that I did, and on the episode on depression that I did, I make it a point to ingest one to three grams of EPAs per day. You can get those EPAs from other sources besides supplements, of course, but supplements are going to be the easiest way to do that. You could do that through liquid form, fish oil, cod liver oil, some people who are vegan opt for other sources of EPAs, you can find those out there certainly. Some people even use prescription EPAs to get the dosage really high. Dr. Ronda Patrick talked about this in the episode with me, that's actually something that she does. I don't take the prescription form, I get them through pill form through our supplement affiliate, which is Momentous, but there are a number of different quality sources of EPAs out there. And some of those quality sources also include things like fatty fish, algae, and things of that sort. So I'll leave it to you as to whether or not you supplement with omega-3 fatty acids in order to get that one to three grams per day or whether or not you do it through food, but I would encourage you to try and reach that threshold because there are a number of known positive effects for mood and brain function generally. The other thing that can positively modulate brain function and that actually works as a fuel for neurons to function and can improve cognitive performance, and particularly within the brain circuits, such as the prefrontal cortex, that are involved in concentration and focus is creatine. I know many people are familiar with creatine monohydrate for its effects on muscle growth and strength and performance, but it's quite clear that the bulk of scientific studies have examined the role of creatine in the clinical context and as its role in improving cognitive performance. So my read of the literature has led to a practice in which I ingest five grams per day of creatine monohydrate, the sort of standard form that's available in, this is generally available as a powder, that's certainly how I take it. I'll take the creatine powder, I'll mix it with water or with my Athletic Greens or some sort of electrolyte drink, whatever liquid happens to be convenient to ingest that in, the time of day doesn't really seem to be important. Some people are strong believers in consuming creatine post-workout. While that might be beneficial, I simply take it in the morning or post-workout, it sort of depends on when I remember to take it, but that five grams of creatine per day, in my case, really isn't geared towards muscle growth or strength or performance as much as it's geared toward tapping into the creatine phosphate system within the brain and specifically the benefits of creatine for prefrontal cortical networks, again, modulating, not directly mediating, but modulating and generally supporting the brain networks that are going to allow me to generate focus and concentration. So much like sleep, much like omega-3 fatty acids, creatine monohydrate five grams a day seems to generally support brain function, which will generally support concentration and focus. Now in terms of compounds that more specifically mediate concentration and focus, we have to go back to that arrow metaphor model that we talked about at the beginning of the episode, that included epinephrine, adrenaline, acetylcholine, which acts as this attentional spotlight, in fact, acetylcholine and elevated levels of acetylcholine have been shown over and over again through beautiful work from Mike Merzenich's lab at UCSF and the Kilgard Lab down in Houston, and a number of other labs, including Norm Weinberger's lab at UC Irvine, again and again, to improve or even directly gate neuroplasticity by increasing focus directly. That's a lot of word soup, but basically what happens is if acetylcholine transmission is increased even transiently within the brain, there's a greater opportunity for neuroplasticity to take place. And the reason there's a greater opportunity for neuroplasticity, AKA learning to take place, is by way of the increased focus that spiking acetylcholine can provide. As I mentioned earlier, there are a number of different foods which contain choline, you can look those up online, choline acting as an amino acid precursor to acetylcholine, but of course, there are compounds, there are supplements that can further and more acutely increase acetylcholine, and indeed, I use these myself. The most effective one I've found is Alpha-GPC. Alpha-GPC consumed at dosages of 300 milligrams to 600 milligrams prior to a work about or prior to a workout greatly increase one's ability to focus and concentrate, at least that's been my experience, and there are some good data in humans. So how would I use Alpha-GPC? I would use Alpha-GPC by taking it about 10 to 20 minutes prior to any time I want to focus or concentrate very deeply. I've taken as much as 600 milligrams at one time, although I find that 300 milligrams is enough for me, and I tend to be quite sensitive to supplements and caffeine in general, so I'll sometimes take it alongside yerba mate or with yerba mate or with coffee prior to a workout or prior to a about of work in which I'm focusing on mental work. So it could be reading, writing, could be math, could be data analysis, could be anything where I need a lot of focus and concentration. Now a number of people have contacted me about a recent study suggesting that Alpha-GPC when taken chronically over many years could increase one's vulnerability to stroke. I've looked at those data and my read of the data is that they're not very conclusive, although anytime you see something like that, a study that's pointing to the fact that a given compound might increase the propensity for stroke, you obviously want to be concerned. So we have to ask ourselves how, by what mechanism that is, could Alpha-GPC be increasing the susceptibility to stroke? And it seems to be related to increases in TMAO, which is a marker related to the cardiovascular system. And one known way to offset increases in TMAO that are associated either with Alpha-GPC or increases due to other things, so ingestion of particular food compounds actually can increase TMAO, is to offset that by taking 600 milligrams of garlic. Now I've been taking Alpha-GPC pretty consistently for a number of years. I do not take it every day. I would say I take it about four days per week, again, prior to workouts or bouts of cognitive work. I have not seen my TMAO spike and I've evaluated that by way of blood tests, but nonetheless, I take 600 milligrams of garlic in capsule form anytime I eat anyway and I do that for general cardiovascular function and there's some interesting data on immune system function, et cetera for garlic. So I've been consuming 600 milligram capsules of garlic for some period of time. Some days, I'll ingest just one 600 milligram capsule, other times, I'll take two, but based on this recent study and the concerns about TMAO, I make it a point to always ingest a 600 milligram capsule of garlic anytime I take Alpha-GPC, which again for me is about four days per week. So in our model of attention and focus, you can now clearly see why taking Alpha-GPC, which increases acetylcholine transmission would be beneficial for concentration and focus and why taking it with a double espresso or why taking it with yerba mate would further increase concentration and focus because as I mentioned earlier, caffeine is going to increase epinephrine. It's also going to increase the density of dopamine receptors and the Alpha-GPC is going to increase acetylcholine, this spotlighting for cognition, this ability to really amplify the activity of specific neural networks, which is largely what's happening when you're trying to focus and pay attention to something specifically. So if one wants to increase the amount of dopamine transmission in the brain and body for sake of increasing concentration and focus, one of the most efficient ways to do that is by ingestion of the amino acid L-tyrosine. Again, L-tyrosine can be derived from food sources, I invite you to look up those various food sources on the web, simply go to a web browser and put in foods that contain a lot of L-tyrosine and you'll get a rich array of choices to select from. But in my case, I use L-tyrosine in capsule form. I will take 500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPC and a cup of coffee. I'm careful to do this early in the day, certainly not after two or 3:00 PM because I don't want to diminish my ability to fall and stay asleep that night. I'll do this early in the day before a workout or before a about of concentrated mental work. Again, I tend to do this about four days per week, so certainly not every time I sit down to do work. And I should also mention that I still tend to do the behavioral tools. I'll tend to use five minutes of binaural beats or binaural beats throughout the work session, sometimes do a ice bath or a cold shower before. I don't want to give the impression that I combine every tool that I've talked about today for a given workout. I mean, that would be pretty wild to take a cold shower, pop an L-tyrosine, take an Alpha-GPC, drink two espresso, listen to binaural beats. That to me seems like a very inefficient way to go about life. In fact, I make it a point to try and use tools to increase my ability to concentrate and focus, but not to combine more than two or three of them at any one time. And when I say two or three, what I mean is I will use supplements like Alpha-GPC, L-Tyrosine and caffeine together before certain work bouts, I might use the visual practice of focusing on a given location for a minute before I begin that work about, I might combine those. Then another time I might take a cold shower prior to doing some work. Other days, I confess, I've slept very well or my enthusiasm about what I'm about to work on is such that I don't require any of these tools. Again, there's no requirement, there's no pressure to use any of these tools, behavioral, supplement based or otherwise. It's simply a matter of using the tools that are going to allow you to achieve the states you want to achieve and to improve your ability to go into those states without any help at all. And this is what I find particularly attractive about supplements. It's not so much that they put you into the ideal state for that work and then you accomplish that work and then you always rely on those supplements. I prefer to look at supplements of the sort that I just described as a route into a deeper trench of focus and concentration that I use as a tool to teach myself to focus and concentrate more deeply, such that I don't need those tools every single time I try and focus and concentrate. I think this is an important point because I think that many people think of supplements as a crutch or a way of simply getting into a state for which no other tool will suffice or replace. But in that context, I want to remind you of the larger context of pharmacology, which is the vast landscape of prescription pharmacology for ADHD, for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Now I covered that landscape in intense detail on the episode on ADHD and focus. And just to summarize, there is of course, Adderall, Ritalin, Vyvanse, Modafinil, Armodafinil, a number of different compounds, all of which generally increase dopamine transmission in the brain, so increasing dopamine, and all of which generally increase epinephrine, adrenaline transmission in the brain and body. And many of those compounds have been of tremendous benefit to children and even some adults who suffer from ADHD. So properly prescribed at the appropriate dosage, those compounds can really help people with clinically diagnosed ADHD. The way they help those people is a bit surprising, however. You might think, well they turn on the brain chemicals that allow those people to concentrate and focus. That's true, but they also have the benefit of teaching those brain circuits how to engage. And that's one of the reasons why somewhat paradoxically giving a stimulant like Ritalin or Adderall to a kid that legitimately needs it, obviously, you don't want to do this without the oversight and careful evaluation of a psychiatrist, but giving that to a kid who has severe ADHD, you would think would make them more rambunctious, less able to focus and more distractible overall. After all, Ritalin, Modafinil, Armodafinil, all these things are stimulants. So you take a kid who has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and give them these drugs that increase transmission of dopamine and epinephrine and you think, wow, it's going to make them even more distractible and hyperactive and indeed, it has the opposite effect. It doesn't necessarily make them feel calm, but it makes them feel that they can focus, they really can anchor their attention. And the idea is that it's teaching those neural circuits or those neural circuits rather are teaching themselves to engage and to focus and concentrate. And the ideal situation is one in which the total dosage of those compounds, those drugs, can be reduced over time as those circuits learn to come online through purely behavioral tools. Now oftentimes, there's a maintenance of those drugs over long periods of time, although there is a common practice nowadays of trying to diminish the dosage overall. That's in the context of ADHD and prescription medication and I acknowledge that a lot, indeed 80% or more of college students say the statistics are using prescription drugs when they are not in fact prescribed those prescription drugs. So basically what I'm saying is there are a lot of people using drugs designed for ADHD and narcolepsy because those drugs will effectively increase focus and concentration, but I strongly discourage the use of powerful prescription drugs that have not been prescribed to you. First of all, it's illegal. Second of all, it's quite dangerous to hit the accelerator of those neural circuits with such vigor because it can increase dependency and they can have a number of other side effects outside the context of clinically diagnosed and prescribed ADHD medication. But in the context of supplementation, the increase in dopamine, acetylcholine and epinephrine that one can achieve from say 500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPC and a cup of coffee is going to be substantially less than one would see for prescription drugs. So you're getting a modest effect that can similarly teach those brain circuits for focus and concentration how to engage better. But as a general backdrop to all of this, I always say and I'll say it again and again probably until the day I die, which hopefully is a long time from now, but regardless, it'll be the same message, I always believe that behavioral tools should come first, behavioral tools should come first. Then focus on nutrition. In fact, I would say behavioral and nutrition tools, and of course, get excellent sleep. Then focus on supplementation and then, and only if those are failing to bring your brain and body to the state you need to be in to perform well in school and work and life, et cetera do I recommend that people lean on prescription drugs. Now there's a caveat to that, which is in under conditions like severe eating disorders, obsessive compulsive disorder, bipolar disorder, depression where people are truly at risk of suicide or severe mental health effects or behavioral health effects and they're really at, their lives are at risk and their overall mood and wellbeing is at risk, it's often the case that people cannot access the brain states required to shift themselves purely with behavioral tools, nutrition, et cetera. So again, for the typical person who's not suffering from one of the psychiatric disorders that I mentioned before or other psychiatric disorders, schizophrenia, et cetera, I strongly encourage you to look to behavioral tools first, nutrition, then supplementation, then and only if there's a remaining need, to prescription drugs. This contrasts very much with the typical scenario I hear about these days where college students or other people will say, oh yeah, I hear that there's this drug, Ritalin or Vyvanse that can immediately put me into a state of heightened focus and concentration. Now listen, if you have ADHD, by all means, talk to a physician, talk to a great psychiatrist and figure out whether or not that's right for you. But if you don't, again, behavioral tools, nutrition, supplementation, and in particular, those behavioral tools are going to be the ones that are going to allow you to teach your neural circuits how to focus and concentrate better, and I cannot overstate the importance of that, that the behavioral tools, and to some extent the supplementation combined with behavioral tools really allow you to train up your neural circuits so that you can focus and concentrate to the depth and the degree and the duration that's going to best serve your mental and physical goals. Now there's one other compound that I've used from time to time and that I continue to use in order to increase focus and concentration and I will use this in combination with the other supplements I talked about before and that's phenylethylamine. Phenylethylamine is in the dopamine synthesis pathway, so it increases dopamine transmission and tends to function a little bit differently than L-tyrosine. So every once in a while, I'll swap out L-tyrosine and put in 500 milligrams of phenylethylamine or sometimes, if I really want to push a little bit harder on the dopamine system, and I'm going to be doing a long about of intense work, I will take the 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPC, the 500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, I'll generally take that with some caffeine, and I should mention, I don't go past about 100 or 200 milligrams of caffeine 'cause I don't really like feeling too jittery, that's not really my goal, it's the goal to be alert, but not so alert that I really can't focus on anything, I'm not interested in having an anxiety attack after all, but I'll sometimes either swap in or I will add that 500 milligrams of phenylethylamine. Phenylethylamine is in the PEA pathway. I've talked about this in a previous podcast on dopamine motivation and drive, and it's a very short-lived compound. So what I'll tend to do is take it once at the beginning of the workout and sometimes in the middle of the workout, I'll take another 500 milligram capsule. But what I just described with combining all of those compounds, Alpha-GPC, L-tyrosine, phenylethylamine and caffeine, that's a fairly rare occurrence that I'll combine all four and really only under conditions in which I have to do an intensely challenging about of mental or physical work. I would say the frequency at which I combine all four of those things is probably about once every two weeks, and typically more like once a month, again being careful to do that in the early part of the day, certainly before the noon hour, so that I am in no way going to disrupt my sleep. I realize that many of you are probably wondering about or hoping that I'll discuss things like lions mane or the racetams or some of the other compounds that are known to powerfully modulate the dopamine, epinephrine and acetylcholine systems. To be quite direct, there are far too many of these compounds to review in a single episode, and they all generally tap into the same set of processes. Again, epinephrine, that shaft of the arrowhead that we're thinking of as focus, acetylcholine, which is the arrowhead itself, and then dopamine, which is the sort of propeller behind the arrow that allows it to continually drive forward through a about of mental or physical work. There is a wonderful site. I've mentioned it several times before on this podcast. That is examine.com. That wonderful site that is examine.com has recently been updated, they've changed their format. It was terrific before, it provided links to relevant studies, it talked about specific compounds, it talked about the magnitude of effect, it talked about the human effect matrix, it really focused on human studies with links to those studies and on and on. The new revamped version of examine.com is even better, it's really next, next level. I really applaud them for doing such a terrific job in organizing the information. There are a lot of interesting pages that you can read there about different compounds. So you can put in any compound, ginko biloba, phosphatidylserine, Alpha-GPC, and you're going to get a rich array of information about those compounds. And if you were to put in a specific goal state, that is focus or concentration or sleep or hormones, like testosterone, et cetera, you're going to get a rich array of compounds and supplements as well as links to the studies on those compounds and some details about those particular studies. It's an absolutely phenomenal site. It's one that I rely on and that I know thousands, if not millions of other people rely on and I encourage you to check it out. Again, the URL is examine.com. So today we've talked about a number of different tools and to some extent, some mechanisms involved in concentration and focus, and really the goal has been to provide you an understanding of the neurochemical systems and a little bit about the neurocircuits that can allow you to achieve states of attention and focus. In contrast to previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, where I've covered these topics in tremendous depth as it relates to mechanism and also focused on tools, today, I largely focused on tools. So we talked about behavioral tools, like a meditation that's 13 minutes long done daily specifically to improve your ability to focus, and in fact, there are data to support that it will. We talked about hypnosis, we talked about visual focus, overt and covert, we talked about various supplements, such as Alpha-GPC, phenylethylamine, L-tyrosine, supplements that I use to directly modulate the neural circuits for concentration and focus. We also talked about creatine and the omega-3s. We talked about the importance of sleep, which modulates our ability to function mentally and physically overall, so optimize that sleep. And we talked about a number of other protocols that you can incorporate. My hope in giving you all this information in one single location is that you'll be able to pick and choose which of these protocols you would like to incorporate into your attempts to improve your focus and concentration. Again, I don't recommend doing all of these protocols all at once. What I recommend is picking a handful of them, maybe one or two, maybe three or four, and trying them in different combinations at different times of day and for different purposes, for mental work, for physical work, et cetera, and find what is best for you. Once again, the goal is to teach your brain, that is to increase neuroplasticity in the neural circuits that allow you not just to focus, but to refocus your attention. And I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that it's also critical to be able to defocus. I highly encourage people to take a period of time each day to daydream, to walk down the hall without looking at your phone, to not have to incorporate more sensory information, to not place increasing demands on yourself to focus, and see and realize how having a period of deliberate decompression and defocusing can allow your brain to focus so much better when you do decide to return to a about of focus, concentrated work or physical work. So I want to thank you for joining me for this discussion about tools for focus and concentration. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. That's also a zero cost way to support us. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us or comments or suggestions or guests that you'd like us to consider bringing on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put all that in the comment section on YouTube, we do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. During today's episode and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and enhancing focus and hormone augmentation and so forth. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements because they are of the very highest quality, they ship internationally, and they have single ingredient formulations in dosages that will allow you to construct the best, most biologically and cost effective supplementation protocol for your needs. If you're interested in the supplements covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled o-u-s, so livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, we are hubermanlab on Twitter, and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram. Both places, I talk about science and science related tools, some of which overlap with the contents and topics of the Huberman Lab Podcast, much of which is unique from the contents and it's certainly the format covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab on Twitter. The Huberman Lab Podcast has a newsletter in which we provide summaries and essential protocols from the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes. You can access it totally free of charge by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter, provide your email. We do not share your email with anybody and you'll receive our monthly newsletter. There are also examples of previous newsletters there that you can download as PDFs right away without even having to sign up. So thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the mechanisms and especially the tools for enhancing concentration and focus, and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 258 ---
Video ID: 3_auLYOilb8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3_auLYOilb8
Title: LIVE EVENT Q&A: Dr. Andrew Huberman Question & Answer in Portland, OR
Published: 2022-08-31 12:00:03 UTC
Description:
Recently I had the pleasure of hosting two live events, one in Seattle, WA and one in Portland, OR. These events were part of a lecture series called The Brain Body Contract. My favorite part of each evening was the question & answer period, where I had the opportunity to answer questions from the attendees of each event. Included here is the Q&A from our event in Portland, OR. 

Get notified when new live events are announced: https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Thank you to our sponsors
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps
00:00:00 The Brain Body Contract Q&A
00:01:08 Momentous Supplements, InsideTracker
00:01:36 Upcoming Live Events: Los Angeles & New York
00:02:16 What Are the Current Best Practices for Post-TBIs? Thoughts on Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy?
00:08:03 Are There Effective Ways to Decrease Dopamine When You Get Too Much of It?
00:13:50 How and When to Improve Brain Plasticity if You Have 10 Minutes a Day?
00:17:51 How to Use Supplements to Optimize Health When Career Prevents Consistent Routines?
00:21:09 How Is Social Media Changing Our Brains?
00:25:10 What New Piece of Neurological Research Most Excites You?
00:28:35 Do You Believe in the Wim How Method? Does It Work? What's Happening in the Brain?
00:37:08 Can Red Light Therapy Help Treat Exercise Intolerance and Fatigue in Mitochondrial Disease?
00:40:39 Is It Possible to Over Do Ice Baths?
00:46:10 What Are Your Favorite Brain Hacks for Doing Hard Things?
00:48:25 What Do You Fear? How Do You Manage Fear?
00:50:05 Conclusion

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based-tools for everyday life. [light music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology in Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Recently, I had the pleasure of hosting two live events, one in Seattle, Washington, and one in Portland, Oregon, both entitled "The Brain Body Contract," where I discussed science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health and performance. My favorite part of each evening, however, was the question and answer period that followed the lecture. I love the question and answer period because it gives me an opportunity to hear directly from the audience as to what they want to know most, and indeed to get into a bit of dialogue. So we really clarify what are the underlying mechanisms of particular tools, how best to use the tools for things like focus and sleep. We also touched on some things related to mental health and physical health. It was a delight for me, and I like to think that the audience learned a lot. I know that many of you weren't able to attend those events, but we wanted to make the information available to you. Therefore, what follows this is a recording of the question and answer period from the lecture in Portland, Oregon. I hope you'll find it to be both interesting and informative. I'd also like to thank our sponsors of these live events. The first is Momentous Supplements, which is our partner with the "Huberman Lab Podcast," providing supplements that are of the very highest quality that ship international and that are arranged in dosages and single ingredient formulations that make it possible for you to develop the optimal supplement strategy for you. And I'd also like to thank our other sponsor, which is InsideTracker, which provides blood tests and DNA tests so you can monitor your immediate and long-term health progress. I'd also like to announce that there are two new live events scheduled. The first one is going to take place Sunday, October 16th, at The Wiltern Theater in Los Angeles. The other live event will take place Wednesday, November 9th, at the Beacon Theatre in New York City. Tickets to both of those events are now available online at hubermanlab.com/tour. That's hubermanlab.com/tour. I do hope that you learn from and enjoy the recording of the question and answer period that follows this. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light music] "What are the current best practices for post TBIs," traumatic brain injuries for those of you that aren't familiar with TBIs, "Especially long term, multiple," ooh, "et cetera." "Thoughts on hyperbaric O?" I'm so glad you asked this, Danny Morledge, "As treatment for TBIs?" Okay, TBI... Now, one thing about TBI and concussion, everyone thinks football. Guess what? Most of the TBI is not football. There aren't that many football players, they're just large so they stand out. There might be a few here this evening. [audience laughing] Of course, football players are a concern when it comes to TBI. Most head injuries are going to be construction workers. Have you ever seen the hard hats they wear? Those, I don't even know if they are just there for show. It doesn't make sense. And that we actually have a lab at Stanford that's focused very hard on trying to solve this problem. So, construction workers, car accidents, bicycle accidents. Portland, amazing city to cycle; I'm frankly afraid to cycle. You're a small moving object around these big objects and people are staring into their little aperture on their phone while driving. I mean, whatever happened to that by the way, of not texting while driving? Somehow that just disappeared. It's like, it really has just disappeared. There was all this science showing that it's worse than drunk driving. TBI. Well, the basic rules of the "don'ts" apply. If you get a head injury, don't get a second head injury. But that often isn't feasible for people that need to work, continue working in construction, or that are struggling. What do we know? Well, this is a great opportunity for me to distinguish modulatory foundational tools from things that directly change your brain and nervous system the way that you want to. What do I mean by modulatory? We hear so much and there's so many studies showing that great sleep, quality nutrition, good social interactions, avoiding chronic stress, and on and on and on are important for everything; they're related to Alzheimer's, they're related to ADHD. I mean, we could do thousands of podcast episodes just returning to the same 10 things: Sleep, don't stress too much or too long, good social connection, avoid toxic people, eat good food, not too much processed food; We could have an argument all night and I don't want to have one about whether or not it's mainly plants or this. I mean, this is obviously eating high quality food is something that we should all be doing, which foods you select is a topic that is very barbed wire, and I can give only my opinions. All of that modulates your brain function, but it doesn't mediate or change anything directly. It's setting a foundation of what's possible. So we should all be doing those things, and especially people who have TBI. Now, this question relates to hyperbaric chamber. Hyperbaric chamber, there's some very interesting data. It's essentially a hyperoxygenation of the brain for very brief periods of time. I think the data on hyperbaric chamber and TBI are very encouraging. The problem is, much in the way that a few years ago, cryo was only available in a few places. And now people are doing ice baths and cold showers on their own. It's hard to find a hyperbaric chamber. They aren't just laying around, and they don't have them at spas typically, and they are quite expensive. So, yes, there are interesting and important data I think on hyperbaric chamber. You definitely want to work with a physician or somebody who is very skilled, a practitioner who's very skilled in hyperbaric chamber. They do seem to improve brain function by hyperoxygenating the brain for brief periods of time. It seems to improve a number of things, but above all, it seems to improve the quality and duration of sleep, which indirectly allows the brain to repair itself, because as I mentioned earlier, brain change largely occurs in sleep. So if you don't have access to a hyperbaric chamber, but you do have TBI, what are some of the other data? What do those point to? Well, I'd go on and on, and you don't have to get this from supplements, you can get it from food, but this threshold level of these EPA essential fatty acids. There are now so many data, so much data on the valuable role of these essential EPA fatty acids. Thresholds being somewhere between one and two grams per day of the EPA. So much so, actually, that there are now prescription forms of EPA that doctors are starting to prescribe for people with TBI. Although for most people you can get this through... You can look up and we've done podcast episodes about different ways to access this. Also functions as an antidepressant; equally good, believe it or not, in clinical trials to SSRIs once one gets over the one or basically two grams per day of the EPA. The resident expert on the internet about this is pretty extreme about the dosages, and that's Dr. Rhonda Patrick, who by the way, deserves a nod of acknowledgement and support because it turns out that before me or David Sinclair or Matt Walker or any of these guys were blabbing to the world about stuff that they had learned in the archives of science and in their laboratories, the first person in was this woman named Rhonda Patrick. As far as I know, the first public facing formerly trained scientist to start going on all these podcasts and risk her reputation and this kind of stuff that you deal with when you put your neck out there like that. And Rhonda's, I think, terrific. We don't agree on everything and it would be weird if we did, but I think she's really been the proponent of these higher doses of EPAs for TBI and for cognitive function into all ages. "We often hear about ways to increase dopamine. However, are there effective ways to decrease dopamine when you get too much of it for certain behaviors or habits we want to break?" Katie Hamm, I think is the last name. Thank you, Katie, for your question. Yeah, dopamine is a slippery slope. And Dr. Anna Lembke is the expert in this, and we've had a lot of conversations. She's one of my closer friends on the faculty. Unfortunately for her, our coffee discussions often last four hours or more. Her poor patients and family. Here's the thing, when dopamine is higher in your brain and body, when you've deployed it through excitement or pharmacology or otherwise, it tends to narrow your focus and make you seek more of it in that general theme that you happen to be focused on. It could be anything. That's the scary thing about dopamine. What can you do to control it and to reduce it? Well, for those of you that are engaging in habits that are healthy, maybe that doesn't require reducing dopamine. How do you define healthy versus unhealthy? Well, I think the simplest way to define addiction, at least by my mind, is that addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. And a good life is a progressive expansion of the things that bring you pleasure. A rather simple definition, and yet when we think about the biology of dopamine, dopamine is not unique to one pursuit. It's not unique to the pursuit of sex or the pursuit of warmth when you're cold or cool environments when you're too warm or food or social media, it's just a dumb molecule that puts you into this forward state of mass, small visual aperture, and a kind of obsessive-like nature. What can you do to counter that? Well, the best thing to do is to not get into that state too long, but if you do, the best thing you can do is to try and switch off that system, not through pharmacology, but by not pursuing more dopamine. The day after a big event, the so-called postpartum depression, named of course because of true postpartum after the delivery of a child. It's quite common for people to get very, very depressed. There's a lot of neurochemical and hormonal adjustments that are occurring, but different types of postpartum depression occur; after a big party, the Monday blues, the Sunday blues, the post-whatever blues. The four month mark in a relationship is typically when dopamine starts to drop. I always tell people, just wait. I'm telling somebody very close to me right now, just wait four months, four months, four months, and also spend as much time with that person as possible. I don't know what this deal is about not spending as much time with people. I think people are afraid that the dopamine wave pool is just going to pull them both under. I think they've called that the escalator model of relationship, where you just sort of find yourself in the relationship because you went through the stages without actually deciding on them. In any event, four months seems to be the stage in which the dopamine crescendo starts to relax a little bit, not in a long distance relationship, however. We know this, right? Anticipation is dopamine, that positive anticipation, and there's a whole beautiful science of this, and I should say psychology of this. There's a wonderful book actually. The name of the book is embarrassing always, I don't know why, for me to say. It's by a psychologist called "Can Love Last?", which is a psychoanalytic book about this dopamine-serotonin system and the kind of seesawing back and forth. And the fact that in relationships, people often just slam on the dopamine side of things and then they hit a wall and want to break up. Or they go into this like warm, cozy, fuzzy feeling thing, and they go, "Well, I guess the exciting part is over." And this idea that one could actually, or two people or however many people were in Portland could oscillate this seesaw. [audience laughing] I don't think that you want to use pharmacology to turn off the dopamine system, but for people that have a hard time sleeping and that are really in a state of agitation and constantly obsessing, the psychiatrists... One of the oldest and most effective treatments is that the psychiatrists, and this does have to be prescribed, we use a very, very low dose of a dopamine receptor blocker, like Haloperidol, which is used to treat schizophrenia. A very low dose to shut down the obsession component. The smart, well-educated psychiatrists know this as a useful tool, but this is a one time thing with a very low dose because having your dopamine blocked sucks. It does not feel good,. But not being able to sleep and being in an obsessive mode also sucks. So it's actually a very potent clinical tool. So pharmacology is one tool, but really at the far end of things. I believe that one should try and modulate their own dopamine by not rewarding one's self on a regular basis, but only randomly. Random intermittent reward is truly the best schedule of reward, hence slot machines and so on. And you should engage random intermittent reward. And I think this is also the way that we should train kids. I call it training kids. You can tell I don't have kids. [audience laughing] You don't reward them every time. I don't believe everyone should get a trophy every time, nor should you always just reward the winners because those winners often, we see cases of this, high profile cases of this, they often crash and burn. I mean the number of high performers that crash and burn publicly and Lord knows how many do it privately is remarkable. It's 'cause their dopamine system is all messed up. So random intermittent reward is the schedule of reward that we should impart on ourselves. "If you had 10 minutes a day to improve your brain plasticity, what would you do? And when would you do it?" Richard Conlin, thank you. Well, I'm going to say again, I would absolutely anchor my physiology with morning sunlight viewing. I can't help it. Do you know what's interesting? And I'll tell you very briefly, you know what's special about morning sunlight? This low solar angle sunlight. I don't think I've talked about this much on social media or on the podcast. There's a group at the University of Washington, a couple, Jay and Maureen Neitz. They run a lab together. That sounds like a horrible thing, but they do it and they get along very well. And they've discovered that the cells in your eye, the neurons that set your circadian clock make you alert during the day and make you sleepy at night, and so on. Those cells respond best to yellow-blue contrast and orange tones. Now, this is important because when you go out in the morning, even if it's not at sunrise, but it's close to sunrise or you look at the sun in the evening, what you'll see is yellow-blue contrast or orange; yellow, blue, orange, that old thing from kindergarten or first grade. That's not the color of light that you're going to see when the sun is overhead. Now, this also is really interesting because artificial lights, at least to my understanding, even the daylight simulators have not picked up on this. It's just about bright light. Someone ought to design something that can mimic this, but nature has done this beautifully for us. And so viewing low solar angle sunlight in the morning and in the evening is most effective because of those yellow-blue contrasts. Now here's the really wild thing. Those circuits that set your levels of alertness and sleep, yes, they respond best to yellow-blue contrast, but what that tells us is crazy. What that means is that color vision was probably not related to color perception first because all of that is completely subconscious. The pathways that do this are present in people who are pattern vision blind. So, what do I mean? I mean that color vision likely evolved from a need to synchronize your internal state with the external world. And the best stimulus in the outside world to do that is yellow-blue contrast. In other words, our ability to detect color was first and foremost, and we understand this based on evolutionary genomics and so forth, to extract time of day information, not color of fruit or color of skin or anything like that. That's all secondary, which is wild and crazy. And this is yet another example of the way we think things work is not the way they work. It's completely 180 degrees opposite. I'm just going to give you a little teaser. I had a guest on the podcast, we haven't aired the episode yet. His name is Erich Jarvis, he works on speech and language. He also was admitted into Alvin Ailey Dance Company. Again, who are these people? He's a professor at the Rockefeller. Anyway, I learned from Erich, and you'll learn when that episode comes out, that you only find elaborate speech and language in species that also engage in dance and song. And the genomics point to the fact that song and singing came first and language came second. And that led me during that episode of the podcast, I wrote down in my notes, I was listening to him talk and I wrote down in my notebook, it's just scrawled in big letters. It says, "I am so happy right now." I was just blown away. And it makes so much sense when you hear it, that the colors in the sky were what our system is trying to extract, not a perception of those colors in the sky, 'cause they're informing us about time and orienting us in time. That song and the communication of emotional states would be simpler and more foundational than communication about specific patterns of language. When you hear it, suddenly it makes sense. But of course we're human beings, and unless you're Erich Jarvis or Alia Crum or Anna Lembke, you think about all this stuff backwards, as I do. "How can I navigate my way through taking supplements to optimize my health when my career demands, Army infantry, prevent me from being able to establish consistent routines?" Andrew Yagen, well thank you for doing what you do. Andrew, so the consistent routine thing is tough. Here's what I can say without going into a long two and a half hour episode about jet lag and shift work, which we've done. The most powerful way to anchor your brain and body in time is indeed viewing sunlight at consistent times of day. That's not something I made up. We know this based on a lot of work that dates back to the 1930s. The second most powerful stimulus is going to be movement and changes in body temperature. In particular, increases in body temperature tend to make us alert, and decreases in body temperature tend to make us sleepy. Body temperature drops one to three degrees to get us into sleep. Why does a cold shower wake you up? Adrenaline is released and believe it or not, your body is heating up internally to combat that cold, unless you make yourself hypothermic. So, sauna, hot baths to get sleepy, cold showers, ice baths, et cetera to wake up. Sort of obvious when you hear it, but it's counterintuitive because you think, oh, heating up the body to wake up and cooling down the body to go to sleep. So getting into cold ought to cool me down, but your body compensates just like if you threw a cold towel on a thermostat, you'd crank up the temperature in the room and vice versa for heat. Okay, so what do you do? You want to try and use as many of these things, light, temperature, exercise, food. When you eat is typically associated with waking. Very few of us are capable of eating in our sleep. And then the other one is social activity and rhythms. Now the discombobulated person is going to be the person that has not aligned these things in a consistent way. So while schedules vary, and Andrew, I don't know your exact schedule, what I can say is if you suddenly go from daytime behavior and sleeping at night to the so-called vampire shift, as it's called in the military, and suddenly you're up in the middle of the night and you're sleeping during the day, then when you come off that shift, what you want to do is try and combine as many of those same things at one time. So it would be get your sunlight, so go jogging without your sunglasses, drink your coffee, engage with other people and communicate, eat a meal afterwards or as the case may be before. Try and bring as many of those things together at the same time of day for a few days and pretty soon your system will map around that. So the reason I encourage for those of us that are not doing shift work to try and be fairly consistent about sunlight viewing is it sets in motion everything else that's correct, in terms of timing of eating, appetite will follow, when your alert will follow. You'll start to learn your own rhythms. When you can't control your schedule, try and combine as many of those cues; again, light, temperature, exercise, food, social engagement into one period of time and try and lock that into a more or less a one or two hour period or plus or minus one or two hours at a particular time of day for at least two or three days. And your schedule, meaning your internal clocks will lock to that. "How is social media changing our brains?" Thomas Adcock. Well, you hear all the terrible ways in which it's changing our brains. And I think that again, we go back to this thing, is it the aperture that we're looking at? So is it the format that we're engaging in things? Or is it the content? Well, the way I like to think about the phone is the way that we've been engaging with the phone and the laptop for that matter, in staring into the small visual aperture each day is sort of like walking like this all day long, right? We have this amazing ability to shuffle our feet and take small steps or to take big strides, to run, to move... I think that's the sagittal plane for movement. I know it for the brain, but I always mess it. The PTs are vicious people online, by the way. The PTs and nutrition people, I've learned to just not say anything about that. I'm not a PT and I'm not a physical therapist. And they do incredible work, but they're like, it's a very spirited crowd. [audience laughing] And the nutrition thing is really weird. I mean, it's just incredible. People are either throwing liver at you or they're throwing celery at you or they're fasting or they're not fasting. It's nuts. In any case, the social media and staring at a small visual aperture is changing our brains. Here's one way I know in which it's changing our brains and then I'll tell you how to fix it. If you stare or look at something within two feet of you for a certain number of hours each day, your eyeball actually gets longer. And the visual image then is focused in front of your neural retina, not onto your neural retina, and you are becoming myopic; nearsighted. And if you look at things in the distance enough, guess what? Your eyeball changes shape and your lens will focus appropriately the image onto your retina. It takes some work. Kids that look at things up close too much, and adults that look at things up close too much become nearsighted. And there's a beautiful set of clinical trials now where mainly in kids, if kids get outside for two hours a day, getting a lot of this UVB and blue light that we're told is so terrible for us, but they get it from sunlight, they actually can reverse myopia, or reduce the incidence of myopia, maybe even glaucoma. Although that's a big maybe. So, how much staring into a small visual aperture is too much? I don't know. But what we do know is that we are literally becoming myopic in terms of our vision and we're becoming myopic in terms of our cognition. And then there's the whole business of what's actually contained in those Tweets and those social media feeds and those news stories. Which frankly, I feel like you lose either way, whether or not you're in one political camp or another political camp, you're upset about half of the information out there. So I feel like, and I'm not someone who knows how to talk about politics without stumbling, I didn't do well in social studies in this sort of thing. It just never made sense to me. It just felt like the prize goes to the person who can shout the loudest and the most coherently for a moment. But I encourage, of course, people to be politically active. And I vote. [audience laughing] But the content is tricky to navigate. And I can't really speak to that, except that it seems to be bothering everybody on one side or the other or in the middle. And the format is something that we really understand. And again, I don't know of many people that are talking about this narrow visual window format thing. It came up more during the lockdowns when we were all inside a lot and not looking out at a distance. The data say really to try and get at least 10 minutes of long distance viewing, so longer than 10 feet away from us, for every 30 minutes of closeup viewing. And not a lot of us are doing that. If you're walking to your car looking at your phone, you're definitely losing an opportunity. "What new piece of neurological research are you most excited about? Mateo Minato. Ooh. I think the piece of neurological research that I... All right, the weird stuff. I've got this colleague at Stanford, Tony Wyss-Coray, and they're really into literally taking proteins from young blood and young spinal cord cerebral spinal fluid and putting it into older people and animals, and they get younger. That stuff's pretty wild. The fecal transplant stuff is pretty wild. You take the microbiome from one person and as it sounds, you transplant it to somebody else and they take on the physical characteristics of the donor. It's crazy. Until I talk to my [chuckling]... There's some shouts for fecal transplant. Nice. [audience laughing] I have never read the method sections of those papers. I'm actually afraid to read the method sections. I would say this is not neurological, but the work from Chris Gardner and Justin Sonnenburg, also at Stanford, it makes it sound like I just like, "Stanford, Stanford, Stanford." But these are the people I'm closest to and surrounded by. There are excellent places everywhere, of course, including OHSU and I'm not just saying that 'cause I'm here. I actually close colleagues here and friends here at OHSU. Also an amazing, although that tram thing freaks me out, it's like I always just have all these ideas about what's going to happen if that thing breaks. But the microbiome data are really interesting. I never understood why getting your gut microbiome was important. And it turns out it's because your gut actually makes many of the neurotransmitter precursors that your brain uses. So that's pretty cool. And I always thought it would be a complicated thing to get your gut microbiome right, but it turns out that it's fermented foods that seem to have the biggest effect. There was all this argument about fiber and yes, fiber is important and here I'm getting nervous talking about nutrition, 'cause the people are going to come at me with fiber. But it's very clear from Justin and Chris's data that people who are getting four servings a day of fermented foods, whether or not it's kimchi or sauerkraut or kombucha, that stuff actually seems to encourage a healthy gut microbiome and people feel better, and their immune system works better. And I like this because it actually, it resolves an issue which is that high dose probiotics, these very expensive need to be refrigerated things, those actually can create brain fog and other issues there for real severe cases of dysbiosis. So I always like an instance where one can look to foods which are good, 'cause I like to eat, in order to resolve these issues. In terms of other neurologic issues, frankly, I think the stuff on dopamine is fundamentally important. So much addiction, that's a severe case, but also so much waxing and waning of motivation. And once you understand the dopamine system and you say, "What activities am I engaging in or pharmacology am I engaging in? What am I doing to spike dopamine?" You start to go, "Oh, I get it. The waves in this wave pool are too high and that's why I can't do this consistently." And then you do the counterintuitive thing of approaching things with a little less excitement, but then you're able to do them more consistently. It's like, "Ah!" And maybe with some luck, I'll end up finishing this book that I've been working on for four and a half years as a consequence 'cause I can't seem to. "Thinking about the Wim Hof Method. Do you believe it? How is it really working? What process is happening in his brain?" Oh, boy. Madison Cameron and everyone here probably familiar with Wim Hof. Whose occupation on Wikipedia used to be "Daredevil." That was cool. It's like Evel Knievel had it and Wim had it. I got a story about Wim. Actually in 2016, I heard about this guy, Wim Hof, and I got a hold of him, actually his children. And I had one vacation that year and I flew to Spain and I spent some time mountaineering with Wim, which was absolutely terrifying. I almost lost a leg legitimately. I tied in wrong on a bridge sling. He told me it was good for me. He told me to, "Stare into the lizard's eyes." And I stared into the lizard's eyes. I jumped backwards off this homemade bridge sling thing. And I had the rope wrapped through my leg and I came back with basically the tendon on the back of my knee exposed. And sitting next to me on the plane was our Vice Dean of Research at Stanford. And I had to explain to him what I was doing and why. It was very embarrassing. What did we do on that trip? Well, a couple of things that will help me answer your question. First of all, when I arrived, I suffered terribly from jet lag, but the moment I got there, Wim did not say hello. He literally told me to get into the ice bath. And I did 10 minutes in the ice bath not because I'm tough, but because he held me down in the ice bath. He is indeed one of the strongest human beings. He reminds me of the bus driver on "The Simpsons" or the janitor, excuse me. No, Otto is the bus driver, right? The janitor on "The Simpsons," like [grunts] that guy. That's Wim. Incredibly physically strong guy. What do I think's going on with Wim Hof stuff? Well, Wim Hof, whether or not he understands it or not, I always think he's sort of the Bob Dylan of breathwork. Like everything he says seems to have some intuitive sense, but you don't really understand what in the world he's saying. [audience laughing] He's going to come after me now. We've had a good but complicated relationship, I'll just confess. Maybe someday we'll resolve that. No big scandal or story there, just we communicate very differently. Wim has a couple methods. One is to deliberately hyperventilate. This is also called Tummo breathing. My lab actually studies this. We have a paper that I'm happy to share with you the results although they're not published yet, where people do deliberate cyclic hyperventilation. Which as the name suggests, you just breathe really deeply in and really deeply out 25 times. Or if you're Wim, you'd say, "In and out. In and out." I just tell people, here's how it works. You go [deeply breathing]. You do that 25 times and you heat up and you feel really agitated, and that's because of adrenaline. If you throw yourself into an ice bath or a cold shower, adrenaline. If somebody upsets you or you get a triggering text, adrenaline. Adrenaline sounds like a terrible thing, except when you deliberately induce it. As my colleague, David Spiegel says, "There's a big difference between going into a state and you controlling your entry into a state." So it's not just about the state you're in, it's about how you got there and whether or not you had anything to do with it. States of high adrenaline are very powerful. When you self induce adrenaline by cold shower, cyclic hyperventilation, AKA Wim Hof breathing or Tummo breathing, you then have an opportunity to create a very distinct mind-body relationship. We all hear that interoception and the mind-body relationship. Interoception just your ability to sense your heartbeats and what's going on in your body. Powerful, right? Terrible if how you feel sucks. So interoception is wonderful, but when you're anxious it actually is more adaptive to be able to maintain your thinking and get yourself out of that anxious state. So if you're trembling and your body's freaking out and your cheeks are flushing and your brain is following your bodily state, well, that's not good. And if you're somebody and sadly, this happens a lot where you've experienced a lot of trauma or typically this is people that have been bombarded with extreme criticism or physical abuse or other kinds of abuse during development. They actually can seem very calm, but internally they're freaking out in their head. And they're just thinking, just get me through this. And they just go into a state where no one knows they're upset. I've known people like this and it's eerie to me because I've never had that response to stress, but it's very common. And so we should learn and be careful about deciding that people are in one state or another based on their bodily or their mental response. Vim Hof breathing, cold showers, et cetera, are a great practice in my opinion, because they allow you to spike your adrenaline. And you can do that, for instance, by making the water colder if you want more adrenaline, staying in longer if you want more adrenaline, moving your limbs around in the water will give you more adrenaline 'cause it breaks up that thermal layer. It makes it a lot colder. Or doing 50 deep inhales and exhales. That is very useful because then you have the opportunity to use that prefrontal cortex and to stop and sense all that adrenaline in your body and yet maintain clarity of mind. And that's an absolutely powerful tool. I would even call it a power tool. And Wim figured this out. I don't know if you know this, but the way that Wim discovered all this was he was in deep grief about the tragic death of his wife. She committed suicide, jumped off an eight story building. Just truly tragic death. And he was in situation, he had four children at the time. Now, he has five. And he was in a state of depression and he ended up going into the canal in Amsterdam and it was very cold and it shocked his system. And in that shock to his system, which is caused by adrenaline, he somehow was able to anchor his thinking and in kind of genius of sorts, Wim thought, "Wow, I can intervene in my physiology with this strange activity." And then he realized that breathing would do it as well. You didn't have to get into cold water. And then, years later, we discovered, not we meaning my lab, but other labs, that when you get into cold water, even just 60 degree water, that there's a very long lasting increase in dopamine. That is 2.5x above baseline, which is on par with some prescription drugs for increasing dopamine. So when people laugh at me and go, "Oh this cold water thing," I get teased a lot on the internet. I've heard on the internet that I eat sticks of butter, which I never said. I said, "I like butter." [audience laughing] I've been told all sorts of things. I've been told I eat sticks of butter. I don't know why. I've been told that I'm dead. That was an interesting one. That was one of the cooler ones. But when I was going out there as a serious scientist and saying, "Using deliberate cold exposure." You can use all sorts of things. Or if you come to my lab, I'd be happy to put you in VR and expose you to all sorts of scary stuff. Or we can inject you with adrenaline or you can inject yourself with adrenaline and titrate that, adjust the levels of that. So it's a very powerful tool. And I think that Wim and others deserve credit for really tapping into that. And as a last point, there's a beautiful study in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences years ago using this deliberate cyclic hyperventilation thing; 25 breath [deeply breathing]. And then another group meditates. And then they inject them both with E. coli. And the people injected with E. coli who meditate get nauseous, vomit, diarrhea, and they get a fever. And the people who [deeply breathing] first, far fewer symptoms, if any. Why? Because adrenaline actually suppresses a lot of these innate immune responses in a way that's healthy in the short term. This is why you can work, work, work, work, work, where you can study for finals, or you can take care of a loved one and then you finally stop and rest and go on vacation, and then you get sick. Stress activates your nervous system and in doing so, it activates your immune system. Makes perfect sense when you think about it. How would we ever go through famine if you're just getting flus whenever you're stressed? We can deal with a lot. My suggestion is if you're coming off a period of high stress, to do some sort of adrenaline spiking behavior as you taper out of that stressful period, not going strictly to massage, vacation, and yoga nidra all day long, as I would reflexively do. "Can red light therapy help treat exercise intolerance and fatigue in mitochondrial disease?" Allison, I'm glad you brought this up. This is another case where I thought, "Oh no, this red light stuff is crazy." And then I went into the literature and it turns out that in 1908, the Nobel Prize was actually given for phototherapy. So, there we go again. And I have this slide, I chose not to use slides tonight, but I have this slide that shows Ken Kesey and the magic bus and stuff from the 1930s, and psychedelics and people getting into cold water. And then here we are, 2019, 2020, you've got Wim Hof, and Matt Johnson giving people macro doses of psilocybin. We're right back where we were. And one of my major goals is to really try and create some scientific discussion around these things. This stuff is crazy on the face of it, but there are mechanisms that are real that underlie it. Red light, because it's long wavelength light, longer literally as opposed to a short wavelength light, can penetrate through things like skin and can indeed change mitochondria. One of the more impressive results on red light comes from my good friend, Glen Jeffery's Lab at the University College London. I've known Glen for years, and a few years, he was a basic vision scientist. And a few years ago he started using red light. He'd have people look at red light at a distance of about two feet in the morning. So is long wavelength light. And sometimes even just take a flashlight, a torch as they call it in England, and cover it with a red film. And they would look at this stuff for a few minutes each morning, and it can reverse some forms of age-related vision loss and macular degeneration. How we now know it can prove mitochondrial function in photoreceptors by reducing what are called reactive oxygen species. Here's what's interesting, it only seems to work in people older than 40, and it seems to only work if you do it within the first three hours of waking. And the incredible thing is you can do this for one or two minutes a week, and some of the positive effects last as long as three weeks. And it's affecting a very specific form of visual improvement, which is acuity, kind of fine detail stuff in a particular wavelength. So, particular colors and objects and things. Pretty impressive. So, yes, red light can improve mitochondrial function to the photo receptors. If you are going to try and do this stuff, don't put it too close. I don't have any affiliation to any red light panel company. So I can't say anything there. They are rather expensive. Nowadays, people are putting red light everywhere, and I do mean everywhere. People are putting red light on their stomach for improving ovarian function, whether or not it can penetrate isn't clear to me all the way down there. People are trying to do this. I have a friend, I won't name him. Recently, he told me he is really into the red light therapy. He's putting it on his testicles to try and increase testosterone. But he told me that after he handed me the red light. [audience laughing] True story. My team knows who this is. It's no one on my team. Thank goodness. I was like, "Oh, that's super interesting." I actually don't think you want to contact the red lights directly to your skin. So red light is powerful. I don't think we have, aside from the vision protocol, I don't think that it's clear which protocols are best. I will say if you're into red light infrared sauna. Typically those don't get hot enough. Typically if you want to get the benefits of sauna, you want to get between 80 and 100 degrees Celsius, which is 176 to 210 or 208 Fahrenheit. And I don't actually do the conversion in my head. I memorize it. "You mentioned the consequences of blasting your brain with too much dopamine. Is it possible to overdo ice baths while following the same line of thinking? Will you experience an extreme low in dopamine with too many ice baths?" Lucas Ancke, thank you for the question. Any behavior that spikes adrenaline, you will eventually get better at tolerating it. You will become cold adapted and you'll become comfortable at high adrenaline states. And you just have to ask yourself this, it's just like lifting weights in the gym or running. You need to leave some space for improvement. So if you run, as people do, and you do your 5k, then you're 10k, then you're half marathon, maybe a 10k is a half marathon. I don't know. But anyway, then you're doing your marathon. Then you're doing ultras that are 50 miles and 100 miles. I mean, eventually you're going to start doing damage, right? And eventually you look at every ultra runner and typically these are people who are very much on the dopamine pursuit system. I mean, I don't think that he would mind; my good friend and a podcaster who I have tremendous respect for is Rich Roll, amazing human being, and also has an amazing story about addiction. He was an alcoholic. And I'm not sharing anything that he hasn't already shared in his amazing book, "Finding Ultra." He got really into running, running, running all the time and there's a dopamine history there for him. Some of us can use ice baths so consistently and making it so cold and doing them longer and longer that indeed you're playing with the dopamine system. Is it bad? Well, it depends on what you're trading that in for, at the expense of what? Is it giving up cocaine? Yeah, great, stick with the ice bath. But you know, can only make it so cold and you can only stay in there so long before you become Wim Hof, right? And it worked out for Wim, but there's really only one Wim Hof. And in general, that speaks to a larger theme, which is I love the idea of people using tools and understanding mechanism. I mean, of course I love that. It's what I talk about and think about so much in my life. But for most of us, we don't make a living doing those things. And so I do think that the ideal situation is to have behaviors and tools that you intersperse throughout your day and throughout the week. For instance, I think three times a week is fine for the ice bath. No one said you had to do it every day, but you should see sunlight every morning if you can. Just because if you miss a day, your system will be fine, just spend twice as long outside the next day. Seriously, 'cause it's a slow integrating system. But for most of these high intensity things, the less often you do them, the more powerful they are. In fact, if you get into a very hot sauna for four 30 minute sessions on one day. So you go 30 minutes, get out for five minutes. 30 minutes, get out for five minutes. 30 minutes, get out for five. Two hours a day in the sauna, that's a lot of sauna, but the growth hormone release from that type of protocol is a 16x increase in growth hormone. This has been measured in humans. Whereas if you do it every day or three or four times a week, you get diminishing returns on that. So I actually am a big fan of doing really intense stuff only every once in a while. This is also why I only take one long run per week or one long hike. First of all, I don't have time for it. I'm not an ultra runner. I got other things to do. And second of all, it's a strong stimulus. I'm sore until Tuesday, or I don't want to run until Tuesday anyway. I actually think that's fine. And I actually encourage kind of more healthy, rational schedules of these kinds of behaviors. There's no rule that says you have to do something every day, even if you're trying to engage neuroplasticity. You can learn French or an instrument by practicing three times a week. As long as your practice is very focused, right? Daily perhaps would be better, but very few of us have the opportunity to do things every day consistently. And I really want to encourage a more balanced approach. "Before working for Thrasher, what's the best..." Oh, goodness gracious. The skateboarders are always in the house. My first non-biological family was a skateboarding community. When I have great relationship with my parents now, but because there was a time when there was no one to go to soccer games or do any of that stuff, the skateboard community took me in 'cause there were no parents involved. It was great. There were no referees or coaches 'cause I didn't like authority and it was awesome. And there was no nutritional plan. You drank your slurpy and you sat on the curb, and it was fantastic. I don't do that anymore. But the skateboarding community's one that I've remained close with. I did write for Thrasher under a different name while I was a postdoc to make some extra cash. You won't find those articles anywhere, I hope. They're not very good. And the best skate trick? Well, I was involved in it enough that this will only makes sense like three people in the audience, but I had decent heel flip. I could nollie better than I could ollie. And I was never very good. Oh, there's more skateboarders in the audience. What I will say though, is you have to be very careful with skateboarders, 'cause I don't want to claim that I was any good. Any success that I had was out of sympathy of others for letting me hang around. It's a great community. And it gave me great appreciation for indeed communities of kids that don't have structure and sports leagues and teams and all that kind of stuff. Nowadays, it's actually a much different landscape. And I have to also say that it's really amazing to see all the incredible girls and women skateboarders also. There were none. It's an Olympic sport now for women and girls, and it's an Olympic sport for boys of men too. So, it's awesome to see that community. Okay, "What are your favorite brain hacks for doing hard things? Ranging from cold exposure to getting through selection?" Hoby Darling, thanks for the question. Yeah, hard things. Well, I'll be honest. I learned how to hack into my adrenaline system a long time ago through the worst possible mechanism, which is that I would set up battles in my mind. I would get into competition with people, imagined or real, or I would get into states of fearing shame and screwing up. So, this is what a lot of people do I think, you end up scaring yourself into trying to do the hard thing, and it works. The problem is it feels rather like a downward spiral because those negative states of mind work to liberate adrenaline and get you through hard things. So being a kind of rebellious kid, resistance was... If someone told me I couldn't do something, I was like, "Yeah, try me" and this kind of thing. And as I mentioned before, I wasn't crazy about authority. And so, that was the method for a long time. And then, I started reading Oliver Sacks's books and I started learning from people who seemed to access things through this whole love thing. And I tried that love and kindness meditation thing, and that didn't work. And what I started doing was I actually, I'll just tell you before I came out here tonight and before I do anything challenging, I just actually like to imagine the people that have supported me. It's a weird tool. I don't think I've ever shared. I'm actually slightly embarrassed to share this out. 'Cause there are only two things that make me cry, and that's talking about my bulldog and talking about my graduate advisor. And if I talk it about any longer, I'll probably cry. But I think about them a lot because they were kind of similar. They were kind of ornery and they were hard on me, and I adored them both. And so these days I try and think about people that really, that I love. And so I have been trying to do this whole, like, doing things from a place of love thing. And so, for me, that's animals and people that I love. And okay, now, I better move on. Ah, thank you. [audience applauding] Okay, they're telling me one more question. So I'm going to answer one more. "What do I fear? How do you manage your fear?" KB, oh, gosh. This is going to turn into a no one's going to be satisfied until I cry. I get it, I get it. [audience laughing] I do cry, but again about the things I mentioned before. I realized something, by the way. We just recorded an episode on grief. It hasn't come out yet. Fascinating topic. I realized at one point, by the way, I'll just give this away, that I thought I was really sad about losing them. I thought I would tear up really easily because I was sad about them. But then I realized that this, gosh, I can't believe I'm going to do this. But I realized that feeling that I was feeling is the exact same feeling of love that I had when they were alive. So, grief is love. And when you look at the literature, it's basically that, but your brain is freaking out because that map of knowing where people are in space and time, grief is basically a remapping of the space: Where are they? Time: When are they? And then, this kind of abstract map representation that we call closeness. And grief is this process of ripping ourselves off of that. So, in any event, what do I fear? Talking about things like this. What do I fear? Quite honestly, my biggest fear, the thing that would just make me feel just horrible is I fear letting down my friends. I have an amazing... I love my family and they're wonderful, but I have this incredible relationship to friendship, and I adore my friends and I would sooner give up all my limbs and die before I would deliberately let them down. So, there you go, that's what I fear most. [audience applauding] Thank you. Thank you. I also fear I've gone long. And so my team has shut this down. I just want to just briefly, two things. First of all, I of course want to thank everyone for coming here tonight. I realize it's the middle of the week and to commit some hours of your life to thinking about these brain mechanisms, we got pretty nerdy there for a minute, and hopefully the tools redeemed those who were only interested or mostly interested in practical tools, but hopefully some of the insights about how you work were useful as well. I do want to just make brief mention of the sponsors that made this possible, 'cause they did make this possible. And we made every effort to try and keep the ticket prices manageable for people. And thanks to InsideTracker and Momentous for making this possible. And then, of course I would be completely remiss if I didn't say thank you for your interest in science. [audience applauding] [audience cheering] Thank you. Thank you. Oh, wow, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. [light music] Thanks so much. Everyone be sure to get home safely tonight.

========================================

--- Video 259 ---
Video ID: LVxL_p_kToc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LVxL_p_kToc
Title: Dr. Erich Jarvis: The Neuroscience of Speech, Language & Music | Huberman Lab Podcast #87
Published: 2022-08-29 12:00:27 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Erich Jarvis, PhD—Professor and the Head of the Laboratory of Neurogenetics of Language at Rockefeller University and Investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). Dr. Jarvis' research spans the molecular and genetic mechanisms of vocal communication, comparative genomics of speech and language across species and the relationship between speech, language and movement. We discuss the unique ability of humans (and certain animal species) to learn and communicate using complex language, including verbal speech production and the ability to interpret both written and spoken language. We also discuss the connections between language, singing and dance and why song may have evolved before language. Dr. Jarvis also explains some of the underlying biological and genetic components of stutter/speech disorders, non-verbal communication, why it's easiest to learn a language as a child and how individuals can learn multiple languages at any age. This episode ought to be of interest to everyone interested in the origins of human speech, language, music and culture and how newer technology, such as social media and texting, change our brains.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman  
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-hu...
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Erich Jarvis
Dr. Erick Jarvis' Lab: https://www.jarvislab.net 
Rockefeller University: https://www.rockefeller.edu/our-scientists/heads-of-laboratories/1159-erich-d-jarvis
Google Scholar: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=cI-fi9MAAAAJ
Twitter: https://twitter.com/erichjarvis
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/erich_d_jarvis
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/erich-jarvis-ba73624

Other Resources:
Earth Biogenome Project: https://www.earthbiogenome.org 
GenomeArk: https://vgp.github.io/genomeark

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Erich Jarvis & Vocal Communication
00:03:43 Momentous Supplements 
00:04:36 InsideTracker, ROKA, LMNT 
00:08:01 Speech vs. Language, Is There a Difference?  
00:10:55 Animal Communication, Hand Gestures & Language 
00:15:25 Vocalization & Innate Language, Evolution of Modern Language    
00:21:10 Humans & Songbirds, Critical Periods, Genetics, Speech Disorders 
00:27:11 Innate Predisposition to Learn Language, Cultural Hybridization
00:31:34 Genes for Speech & Language
00:35:49 Learning New or Multiple Languages, Critical Periods, Phonemes 
00:41:39 AG1 (Athletic Greens) 
00:42:52 Semantic vs. Effective Communication, Emotion, Singing
00:47:32 Singing, Link Between Dancing & Vocal Learning 
00:52:55 Motor Theory of Vocal Learning, Dance 
00:55:03 Music & Dance, Emotional Bonding, Genetic Predispositions
01:04:11 Facial Expressions & Language, Innate Expressions
01:09:35 Reading & Writing 
01:15:13 Writing by Hand vs. Typing, Thoughts & Writing
01:20:58 Stutter, Neurogenetics, Overcome Stutter, Conversations
01:26:58 Modern Language Evolution: Texting, Social Media & the Future
01:36:26 Movement: The Link to Cognitive Growth 
01:40:21 Comparative Genomics, Earth Biogenome Project, Genome Ark, Conservation
01:48:24 Evolution of Skin & Fur Color
01:51:22 Dr. Erich Jarvis, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter, Huberman Lab Clips

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user's own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [lively music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Erich Jarvis. Dr. Jarvis is a professor at the Rockefeller University in New York City and his laboratory studies, the neurobiology of vocal learning, language, speech disorders, and remarkably, the relationship between language, music and movement, in particular dance. His work spans from genomics, so the very genes that make up our genome and the genomes of other species that speak and have language such as songbirds and parrots all the way up to neural circuits, that is the connections in the brain and body that govern our ability to learn and generate specific sounds and movements coordinated with those sounds, including hand movements and all the way up to cognition, that is our ability to think in specific ways, based on what we are saying and the way that we comprehend what other people are saying, singing and doing. As you'll soon see, I was immediately transfixed and absolutely enchanted by Dr. Jarvis's description of his work and the ways that it impacts all the various aspects of our lives. For instance, I learned from Dr. Jarvis that as we read, we are generating very low-levels of motor activity in our throat. That is, we are speaking the words that we are reading at a level below the perception of sound or our own perception of those words. But if one were to put an amplifier or to measure the firing of those muscles in our vocal chords, we'd find that as we're reading information, we are actually speaking that information. And as I learned, and you'll soon learn, there's a direct link between those species in the world that have song and movement, which many of us would associate with dance and our ability to learn and generate complex language. So for people with speech disorders like stutter, or for people who are interested in multiple language learning, bilingual, trilingual, et cetera, and frankly for anyone who is interested in how we communicate through words, written or spoken, I'm certain today's episode is going to be an especially interesting and important one for you. Dr. Jarvis's work is so pioneering that he has been awarded truly countless awards. I'm not going to take our time to list off all the various important awards that he's received, but I should point out that in addition to being a decorated professor at the Rockefeller University, he is also an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the so-called HHMI. And for those of you that don't know, HHMI investigators are selected on an extremely competitive basis that they have to re-up, that is they have to recompete every five years. They actually receive a grade every five years that dictates whether or not they are no longer a Howard Hughes investigator or whether or not they can advance to another five years of funding for their important research. And indeed, Howard Hughes investigators are selected not just for the rigor of their work, but for their pioneering spirit and their ability to take on high-risk, high-benefit work, which is exactly the kind of work that Dr. Jarvis has been providing for decades now. Again, I think today's episode is one of the more unique and special episodes that we've had on the Huberman Lab Podcast. I single it out because it really spans from the basic to the applied and Dr. Jarvis's story is an especially unique one in terms of how he arrived at becoming a neurobiologist. So for those of you that are interested in personal journey and personal story, Dr. Jarvis's is truly a special and important one. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There, you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA test, you can also get insight into, for example, what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological age. The problem with a lot of DNA tests and blood tests, however, is you get information back about metabolic factors, lipids, and hormones, and so forth, but you don't know what to do with or about that information. InsideTracker solves that problem with a simple platform that allows you to click on any specific factor, learn more about it and what it does in your brain and body, and also the various nutritional supplementation and other types of interventions you can take to bring the levels of that factor into the ranges that are optimal for you and your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. They also have some really unique features that make them especially attractive from the standpoint of aesthetics and performance. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. Initially, the eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed for sport, that is for running and for cycling, et cetera. And indeed, still their eyeglasses and sunglasses are very lightweight and they won't slip off your face if you get sweaty, but they also have a terrific aesthetic. You can wear them to work. You can wear them out to eat. I wear readers at night when I work, or if I drive and I wear sunglasses sometimes during the middle of the day, if it's too bright and I need sunglasses in order to see. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses, or sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's ROKA.com and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA.com and enter the code huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't, meaning no sugar, but plenty of the correct ratios of sodium, magnesium and potassium, and those three electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium are critical for your neuron, your nerve cell function, and for the function of all the cells in your brain and body. I've mentioned this before on the podcast, but I'm a fan of salt, not taking too much salt, but certainly not getting too little salt. LMNT has 1000 milligrams, that is one gram of salt, which might sound like a lot of salt. But for many people, especially people who are following low carbohydrate diets, or who are exercising or sweating a lot, or both, that level of salt can actually help you in many circumstances. Getting the appropriate level of salt, and certainly the appropriate levels of electrolytes will improve your cognitive function and will improve your physical performance. If you'd like to try LMNT you can go to drinklmnt, that's lmnt.com/huberman, and you'll get a free sample pack with your order. That's drinklmnt.com/huberman. And now, for my discussion with Dr. Erich Jarvis. Erich, it's so great to have you here. - Thank you. - Yeah. Very interested in learning from you about speech and language. And even as I ask the question, I realize that a lot of people, including myself, probably don't fully appreciate the distinction between speech and language, right? Speech, I think of as the motor patterns, the production of sound that has meaning, hopefully. And language, of course, comes in various languages and varieties of ways of communicating. But in terms of the study of speech and language, and thinking about how the brain organizes speech and language, what are the similarities? What are the differences? How should we think about speech and language? - Yeah, well, I'm glad you, you know, inviting me here. And I'm also glad to get that first question, which I consider a provocative one. The reason why, I've been struggling, what is the difference with speech and language for many years. And realize, why am I struggling, is because there are behavioral terms, let's call 'em psychologically, psychology developed kind of terms that don't actually align exactly with brain function. All right. And the question is there a distinction between speech and language? And when I look at the brain of work that other people have done, work we have done, also compared it with animal models, like those who can imitate sounds like parrots and songbirds. I start to see there really isn't such a sharp distinction. So, to get at what I think is going on, let me tell you how some people think of it now. That there's a separate language module in the brain that has all the algorithms and computations that influence the speech pathway on how to produce sound and the auditory pathway on how to perceive and interpret it for speech or for, you know, sound that we call speech. And it turns out, I don't think there is any good evidence for a separate language module. Instead, there is a speech production pathway that's controlling our larynx, controlling our jaw muscles that has built within it all the complex algorithms for spoken language. And there's the auditory pathway that has built within it, all the complex algorithms for understanding speech, not separate from a language module. And this speech production pathway is specialized to humans and parrots and songbirds, whereas this auditory perception pathway is more ubiquitous amongst the animal kingdom. And this is why dogs can understand, "sit", "sientese", "come here, boy", "get the ball" and so forth. Dogs can understand several hundred human speech words. Great apes, you can teach them for several thousand, but they can't say a word. - Fascinating. Because you've raised a number of animal species early on here and because I have a, basically an obsession with animals since the time I was very small, I have to ask, which animals have language? Which animals have modes of communication that are sort of like language. - [Erich] Yeah. - You know, I've heard whale songs. I don't know what they're saying. They sound very beautiful, but they could be insulting each other for all I know. - [Erich] Yeah. - And they very well may be. Dolphins, birds, I mean, what do we understand about modes of communication that are like language, but might not be what would classically be called language? - Yes, right. So, modes of communication that people would define as language, more, very, in a very narrow definition, they would say, production of sound, so speech. But what about the hands, the gesturing with the hands? What about a bird who is doing aerial displays in the air, communicating information through body language, right. Well, I'm going to go back to the brain. So what I think is going on is for spoken language, we're using the speech pathway and all the complex algorithms there. Next to the brain regions that are controlling spoken language are the brain regions for gesturing with the hands. And that hand parallel pathway has also complex algorithms that we can utilize. And some species are more advanced in these circuits, whether it's sound or gesturing with hands and some are less advanced. Now, we, humans and a few others are the most advanced for the speech sounds or the spoken language, but a non-human primate can produce gesturing in a more advanced form than they could produce sound. I'm not sure I got that across clearly, just to say that humans are the most advanced at spoken language, but not necessarily as big a difference at gestural language compared to some of the species. - Very clear and very interesting. And immediately prompts the question, have there been brain imaging or other sorts of studies evaluating neural activity in the context of, you know, cultures and languages, at least that I associate with a lot of hand movement, like Italian. - Yep. - Versus, I don't know, maybe you could give us some examples of cultures where language is not associated with as much overt hand movement. - Yes, so as you and I are talking here today and people who are listening, but can't see us, we're actually gesturing with our hands as we talk without knowing it or doing it unconsciously. And if we were talking on a telephone, I would have one hand here and I'd be gesturing with the other hand. [Andrew laughs] Without even you seeing me, right? And so why is that? Some have argued and I would agree, but based upon what we've seen is that there's an evolutionary relationship between the brain pathways that control speech production and gesturing. And the brain regions I mentioned are directly adjacent to each other. And why is that? I think that the brain pathways that control speech evolved out of the brain pathways that control body movement. All right. And that when you talk about Italian, French, English, and so forth, each one of those languages come with a learned set of gestures that you can communicate with. Now, how is that related to other animals? Well, Cocoa, a gorilla who is raised with humans for 39 years or more, learned how to do gesture communication, learned how to sign language, so to speak, right? But Cocoa couldn't produce those sounds. Cocoa could understand them as well by seeing somebody sign or hearing somebody produce speech, but Cocoa couldn't produce it with her voice. And so, what's going on there is that a number of species, not all of them, a number of species have motor pathways in the brain where you can do learn gesturing, rudimentary language, if you wanted, say with your limbs, even if it's not as advanced as humans. But they don't have this extra brain pathway for the sound. So they can't gesture with their voice in the way that they gesture with their hands. - I see. One thing that I've wondered about for a very long time is whether or not primitive emotions and primitive sounds are the early substrate of language. And whether or not there's a bridge that we can draw between those in terms of just the basic respiration systems associated with different extreme feelings. Here's the way I'm imagining this might work. When I smell something delicious, I typically inhale more. - Hmm hmm. - And I might say, mmm, or something like that. Whereas if I smell something putrid, I typically turn away, and I wince and I will exhale [exhales], you know or sort of kind of like turn away, trying to not ingest those molecules or inhale those molecules. I could imagine that these are the basic dark and light contrasts of the language system. And as I say that, I'm saying that from the orientation of a vision scientist who thinks of all visual images built up in a very basic way of a hierarchical map model of the ability to see dark and light. So I could imagine this kind of primitive to more sophisticated pyramid of sound to language. Is this a crazy idea? Do we have any evidence this is the way it works? - No, it's not a crazy idea. And in fact, you hit upon one of the key distinctions in the field of research that I started out in, which is vocal learning research. So for vocal communication, you have most vertebrate species vocalize, but most of them are producing innate sounds that they're born with producing, that is babies crying, for example, or dogs barking. And only a few species have learned vocal communication, the ability to imitate sounds. And that is what makes spoken language special. When people think of what's special about language, it's the learned vocalizations. That is what's rare. And so, this distinction between innateness and learned is more of a bigger dichotomy when it comes to vocalizations than for other behaviors in the animal kingdom. And when you go in the brain, you see it there as well. And so all the things you talked about, the breathing, the grunting and so forth, a lot of that is handled by the brain stem circuits, you know, right around the level of your neck and below. Like a reflex kind of thing. So, or even some emotional aspects of your behavior in the hypothalamus and so forth. But for a learned behavior, learning how to speak, learning how to play the piano, teaching a dog to learn how to do tricks is using the forebrain circuits. And what has happened is that there's a lot of forebrain circuits that are controlling, learning how to move body parts in these species, but not for the vocalizations. But in humans and in parrots and in some other species, somehow, we acquired circuits where the forebrain has taken over the brain stem and now using that brain stem, not only to produce the innate behaviors or vocal behaviors, but the learned ones as well. - Do we have any sense of when modern or sophisticated language evolved? You know, thinking back to the species that we evolved from, and even within Homo sapiens, has there been an evolution of language? Has there been a devolution of language? [laughs] - Yeah. Yeah, I would say, and to be able to answer that question, it does come with the caveat that I think we humans overrate ourselves compared to other species. And so it makes even scientists go astray in trying to hypothesize when, you especially don't find fossil evidence of language that easily out there in terms of what happened in the past. Amongst the primates, which we humans belong to, we are the only ones that have this advanced vocal learning ability. Now, it was assumed that it was only Homo sapiens, then you can go back in time now based upon genomic data, not only of us living humans, but of the fossils that have been found for Homo sapiens, of Neanderthals, of Denisovan individuals and discover that our ancestor, our human ancestors, supposedly hybridized with these other hominid species. And it was assumed that these other hominid species don't learn how to imitate sounds. I don't know of any species today that's a vocal learner that can have children with a non-vocal learning species. I don't see it. Doesn't mean it didn't exist. And when we look at the genetic data from these ancestral hominids, that, you know, where we can look at genes that are involved in learned vocal communication, they have the same sequence as we humans do for genes that function in speech circuits. So I think Neanderthals had spoken language. I'm not going to say it's as advanced as what it is in humans. I don't know. But I think it's been there for at least between 500,000 to a million years that our ancestors had this ability and that we've been coming more and more advanced with it culturally and possibly genetically. But I think it's evolved sometime in the last 500,000 to a million years. - Incredible. Maybe we could talk a little bit more about the overlap between brain circuits that control language and speech in humans and other animals. I was weaned in the neuroscience era where birdsong and the ability of birds to learn their tooter song was and still is a prominent field, subfield of neuroscience. And then of course, neuroimaging of humans speaking and learning, et cetera, and this notion of a critical period, a time in which language is learned more easily than it is later in life. And the names of the different brain areas were quite different. If one opens the textbooks, we hear Wernicke's and Broca's for the humans. And you look at the birds of it, I remember, you know. - HVC. - Robustus, striatum. Area X. - That's right. That's right, yes. - Et cetera. But for most of our listeners, those names won't mean a whole lot, but in terms of homologies between areas in terms of function, what do we know? And how similar or different are the brain areas controlling speech and language in say a songbird and a young human child? - Yeah, so, going back to the 1950s or even a little earlier, and Peter Muller and others who got involved in neurotology, the study of neurobiology of behavior in a natural way, right. You know, they start to find that behaviorally, there are these species of birds like songbirds and parrots, and now we also know hummingbirds, just three of them out of the 40-something bird groups out there on the planet, orders, that they can imitate sounds like we do. And so that was a similarity. In other words, they had this kind of behavior that's more similar to us than chimpanzees have with us or than chickens have with them, right, their closer relatives. And then they discovered even more similarities, these critical periods that if you remove a child, you know, this unfortunately happens where a child is feral and is not raised with human and goes through their puberty phase of growth, it becomes hard for them to learn a language as an adult. So there's this critical period where you learn best. And even later on, when you're in regular society, it's hard to learn. Well, the birds undergo these same thing. And then it was discovered that if they become deaf, we humans become deaf, our speech starts to deteriorate without any kind of therapy. If a non-human primate or, you know, or let's say a chicken becomes deaf, their vocalizations don't deteriorate. very little at least. Well, this happens in the vocal learning birds. So there were all these behavioral parallels that came along with a package, and then people looked into the brain. Fernando Nottebohm, my former PhD advisor, and began to discover the Area X you talked about, the robust nucleus of the archipallium. And these brain pathways were not found in the species who couldn't imitate so there was a parallel here. And then jumping many years later, you know, I started to dig down into these brain circuits to discover that these brain circuits had parallel functions with the brain circuits for humans, even though they're by a different name, like Broca's laryngeal motor cortex. And most recently, we discovered not only the actual circuitry and the connectivity are similar, but the underlying genes that are expressed in these brain regions in a specialized way, different from the rest of the brain, are also similar between humans, and songbirds and parrots. So all the way down to the genes. And now we're finding the specific mutations are also similar, not always identical, but similar, which indicates remarkable convergence for a so-called complex behavior in species separated by 300 million years from a common ancestor. And not only that, we are discovering that mutations in these genes that cause speech deficits in humans, like in FOXP2, if you put those same mutations or similar type of deficits in these vocal learning birds, you get similar deficits. So convergence of the behavior is associated with similar genetic disorders of the behavior. - Incredible. I have to ask, do hummingbird sing, or do they hum? - Hummingbirds hum with their wings and sing with their syrinx. - In a coordinated way? - In a coordinated way. There's some species of hummingbirds that actually will, Doug Ashler showed this, that will flap their wings and create a slapping sound with their wings that's in unison with their song and you would not know it, but it sounds like a particular syllable in their songs, even though it's their wings and their voice at the same time. - Hummingbirds are clapping to their song? - Clapping with their, they're snapping their wings together in unison with a song to make it like, if I'm going ba, da, da, da [bangs], but, da [bangs] and I banged on the table except they make it almost sound like their voice with their wings. - Incredible. - Yes. - I, I'm... - And they got some of the smallest brains around. - As the kids would say mind blown, right? - Yes. Yes. - Incredible. - Yes. - Incredible, I love hummingbirds. And I always feel like it's such a special thing to get a moment to see one because they move around so fast and they fled away so fast in these ballistic trajectories. - [Erich] Yep. - That when you get to see one stationary for a moment, or even just hovering there, you feel like you're extracting so much from their little microcosm of life, but now I realize they're playing music essentially. - Right, exactly. And what's amazing about hummingbirds and I'm going to say, vocal learning species in general, is that for whatever reason, they seem to evolve multiple complex traits. You know, this idea that the evolving language, spoken language in particular, comes along with a set of specializations. - Incredible. - Yeah. - When I was coming up in neuroscience, I learned that I think it was the work of Peter Muller that young birds learn, songbirds learned their tooter song and learn it quite well, but that they could learn the song of another tooter. In other words, they could learn a different, and for the listeners, I'm doing air quotes here, "a different language", "a different bird song", different than their own species song. But never as well as they could learn their own natural genetically linked song. - Yes. - Genetically linked, meaning that it would be like me being raised in a different culture, and that I would learn the other language, but not as well as I would have learned English. This is the idea. - Yes. - Is that true? - That is true, yes. And that's what I learned growing up as well. And talked to Peter Muller himself about before he passed. Yeah, he used to call it the innate predisposition to learn. All right. So which would be kind of the equivalent in the linguistic community of universal grammar. There is something genetically influencing our vocal communication on top of what we learned culturally. And so there's this balance between the genetic control of speech or a song in these birds and the learned cultural control. And so, yes, if you were to take, you know, I mean, in this case, we actually tried this at Rockefeller later on. Take a zebra finch and raise it with a canary, it would sing a song that was sort of like a hybrid in between. We call it a can-inch, right? [both laughing] And vice versa for the canary, because there's something different about their vocal musculature or the circuitry in the brain. And with a zebra finch, even with a closely related species, if you would take a zebra finch, a young animal, and in one cage next to it placed its own species, adult male, right. And in the other cage placed a Bengalese finch next to it, it would preferably learn the song from its own species neighbor. But if you remove its neighbor, it would learn that Bengalese finch very well. - [Andrew] Fantastic. - It has something to do with also the social bonding with your own species. - Incredible. That raises a question that I, based on something I also heard, but I don't have any scientific peer-reviewed publication to point to, which is this idea of Pidgin not the bird, but this idea of when multiple cultures and languages converge in a given geographic area, that the children of all the different native languages will come up with their own language. I think this was in island culture, maybe in Hawaii, called Pidgin, which is sort of a hybrid of the various languages that their parents speak at home and that they themselves speak. And that somehow Pidgin again, not the bird, but a language called Pidgin, for reasons, I don't know, harbors certain basic elements of all language. Is that true? Is that not true? - I would say, I haven't studied enough myself in terms of Pidgin, specifically, but in terms of cultural evolution of language and hybridization between different cultures and so forth, even amongst birds with different dialects and you bring them together, you know, what is going on here is cultural evolution remarkably tracks genetic evolution. So if you bring people from two separate populations together that have been in their separate populations, evolutionarily, at least for hundreds of generations, so someone's speaking Chinese, someone's speaking English, and that child is then learning from both of them. Yes, that child's going to be able to pick up and merge phonemes and words together in a way that an adult wouldn't, because, why? They're experiencing both languages at the same time during their critical period years, in a way that adults would not be able to experience. And so you get a hybrid. And the lowest common denominator is going to be what they share. And so the phonemes that they've re retained in each of their languages is what's going to be, I imagine, used the most. - Interesting. So we've got brain circuits in songbirds and in humans that in many ways are similar, perhaps not in their exact wiring, but in their basic contour of wiring. And genes that are expressed in both sets of neural circuits in very distinct species that are responsible for these phenomenon we're calling speech and language. What sorts of things are those genes controlling? I could imagine they were controlling the wiring of connections between brain areas. You know, essentially a map of, you know, of a circuit, basically like an engineer would design a circuit for speech and language, nature designed the circuit for speech and language, but presumably other things too. Like the ability to connect motor patterns within the throat of muscles within the throat, or in the control of the tongue. I mean, what are these genes doing? - You're pretty good, yeah. You've made some very good guesses there that makes sense. So, yes, one of the things that differ in the speech pathways of us and these song pathways of birds is some of the connections are fundamentally different than the surrounding circuits, like a direct cortical connection from the areas that control vocalizations in the cortex or the motor neurons that control the larynx, in humans or the syrinx in birds. And so we actually made a prediction that since some of these connections differ, we're going to find genes that control neural connectivity, and that specialize in that function, that differ. And that's exactly what we found. Genes that control what we call axon guidance and form neuronal connections, and what was interesting, it was sort of in the opposite direction that we expected. That is, some of these genes, actually, a number of them that control neural connectivity were turned off in the speech circuit, all right. And it didn't make sense to us at first until we started to realize the function of these genes are to repel connections from forming, so repulsive molecules. And so when you turn them off, they allow certain connections to form that normally would have not formed. So by turning it off, you gain a function for speech, right? Other genes that surprised us were genes involved in calcium buffering neuroprotection, like Parvalbumin or heat-shock proteins, so when your brain gets hot, these proteins turn on. And we couldn't figure out for a long time, why is that the case? And then the idea popped to me one day and said, ah, when I heard the larynx is the fastest firing muscles in the body, all right. In order to vibrate sound and modulate sound in the way we do, you have to control, you have to move those muscles, you know, three to four to five times faster than just regular walking or running. And so when you stick electrodes in the brain areas that control learned vocalizations in these birds and I think in humans as well, those neurons are firing at a higher rate to control these muscles. And so what is that going to do? You're going to have lots of toxicity in those neurons, unless you upregulate molecules that take out the extra load that is needed to control the larynx. And then finally, a third set of genes that are specialized in these speech circuit are involved in neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, meaning allowing the brain circuits to be more flexible so you can learn better. And why is that? I think learning how to produce speech is a more complex learning ability than say learning how to walk or learning how to do tricks and jumps and so forth that dogs do. - Yeah, it's interesting as you say that, because I realize that many aspects of speech are sort of reflexive. I'm not thinking about each word I'm going to say, they just sort of roll out of my mouth, hopefully with some forethought. We both know people that seem to speak, think less, fewer synapses between their brain and their mouth than others, right. - Yes. - A lot of examples out there, and some people are very deliberate in their speech, but nonetheless, that much of speech has to be precise. And some of it less precise. In terms of plasticity of speech and the ability to learn multiple languages, but even just one language, what's going on in the critical period, the so-called critical period? - Yeah. - Why is it that, so my niece speaks Spanish. She's Guatemalan and speaks Spanish and English incredibly well. She's 14-years-old. I've struggled with Spanish my whole life. My father is bilingual. My mother is not. I've tried to learn Spanish as an adult. It's really challenging. I'm told that had I learned it when I was eight, I would be better off. - That's right. - Or it would be installed within me. So the first question is, is it easier to learn multiple languages without an accent early in life? And if so, why? And then the second question is if one can already speak more than one language as a consequence of childhood learning, is it easier to acquire new languages later on? - So, the answer to both of those questions is yes, in that, but to explain this, I need to let you know, actually the entire brain is undergoing a critical period development, not just the speech pathways. And so it's easier to learn how to play a piano. It's easier to learn how to ride a bike for the first time and so forth as a young child than it is later in life. What I mean easier in terms of when you start from first principles of learning something. So the very first time, if you're going to learn Chinese as a child versus the very first time you learn Chinese as an adult or learning to play piano as a child versus an adult. But the speech pathways, or let's say speech behavior, I think has a stronger critical period change to it than other circuits. And why, what's going on there in general? Why do you need a critical period to make you more stable, to make you more stubborn, so to speak? The reason I believe is that the brain is not for, the brain can only hold so much information. And if you are undergoing rapid learning to learn, to acquire new knowledge, you also have to, you know, dumb stuff. Put in memory or information in the trash, like in a computer. You only have so many gigabases of memory. And so therefore, plus also for survival, you don't want to keep forgetting things. And so the brain is designed, I believe, to undergo this critical period and solidify the circuits with what you learned as a child and you use that for the rest of your life. And we humans stay even more plastic in our brain functions controlled by a gene called srGAP2. We have an extra copy of it that leads our speech circuit and other brain regions in a more immature state throughout life compared to other animals. So we're more immature. We're still juvenile like compared to other animals. - I knew it. - But we still go through the critical periods like they all do. And now the question you asked about, if you learn more languages as a child, is it easier to learn as an adult? And that's a common finding out there in the literature. There's some that argue against it. But for those that support it, the idea there is, you are born with a set of innate sounds you can produce of phonemes. And you narrow that down because not all languages use all of them. And so you narrow down the ones you use to string the phonemes together, in words that you learn and you maintain those phonemes as an adult. And here comes along another language that's using those phonemes or in different combinations you're not used to. And therefore, it's like starting from first principles, but if you already have them in multiple languages that you're using, then it makes it easier to use them in another third or fourth language. - I see, incredible. - So, it's not like your brain has maintained greater plasticity, it's your brain has maintained greater ability to produce different sounds that then allows you to learn another language faster. - Got it. Are the hand gestures associated with sounds or with meanings of words? - I think the hand gestures are associated with both the sounds and the meaning. When I say sound like if you are really angry, right, and you are making a loud screaming noise, right, you may make hand gestures that look like you're going to beat the wall, right? Because you're making loud sounds and loud gestures, right. But if you want to explain something like, come over here, what I just do now to you for those who can't see me, I swung my hand towards you and swung it here to me. That has a meaning to it, to come here. So just like with the voice, the hand gestures are producing both, you know, both qualities of sound. - And for people that speak multiple languages, especially those that learn those multiple languages early in development, do they switch their patterns of motor movements according to let's say, going from Italian to Arabic or from Arabic to French in a way that matches the precision of language that they're speaking? - You know what? You just asked me a question, I don't know the answer to. I would imagine that would make sense because of switching in terms of sometimes people might call this code switching, even different dialects of the same language. Could you do that with your gestures? I imagine so, but I really don't know if that's true or not. - Okay, well, I certainly don't know from my own experience because I only speak one language. [both laughing] Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens, aka AGI, is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin mineral needs and it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system and it also supports the so-called gut brain access, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with every order. And of course, vitamin D3 K2 are vital for all sorts of things like hormone health and metabolic health and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. To go a little bit into the abstract, but not too far, what about modes of speech and language that seem to have a depth of emotionality and meaning, but for which it departs from structured language. Here's what I mean, poetry. - Hmm hmm. - I think of musicians, like there's some Bob Dylan songs that, to me, I understand the individual words. I like to think there's an emotion associated with it. at least, I experience some sort of emotion and I have a guess about what he was experiencing. But if I were to just read it linearly without the music and without him singing it, or somebody singing it like him, it wouldn't hold any meaning. So in other words, words that seem to have meaning, but not associated with language, but somehow tap into an emotionality. - Yep, absolutely. So, we call this difference semantic communication, communication with meaning and effective communication, communication that has more of an emotional feeling content to it, you know, but not with, you know, the semantics. And the two can be mixed up, like with singing words that have meaning, but also have this effect of emotional, you just love the sound of the singer that you're hearing. And initially, you know, psychologists, scientists, in general, thought that these were going to be controlled by different brain circuits. And it is the case. There are emotional brain centers in the hypothalamus, in the cingulate cortex and so forth, that do give tone to the sounds. But I believe, you know, based upon imaging work and work we see in birds, when birds are communicating semantic information in their sounds, which is not too often, but it happens, versus effective communication, sing because I'm trying to attract the mate, my courtship song or defend my territory, it's the same brain circuits. It's the same speech-like or song, circuits are being used in different ways. - A friend of mine, who's also a therapist, said to me, you know, it's possible to say, I love you with intense hatred than to say, I hate you with intense love. - [Eric] Right. - And reminding me that it's possible to hear both of those statements in either way. So I guess it's not just limited to song or poetry. It also, there's something about the intention and the emotional context in which something spoken that it can heavily shape the way that we interpret what we hear. - That's right. And I consider all of that actually, meaning, even though I defined it as, people commonly do semantic and effective communication. Effective communication to say, I hate you, but meant love, right, does have emotional meaning to it, you know? And so, you know, one's more like an object kind of meaning or an abstract kind of meaning. There's several other points here I think it's important for those listening out there to hear is that when I say also this effective and semantic communication being used by similar brain circuits, it also matters, the side of the brain. In birds and in humans, there's left-right dominance for learned communication, learned sound communication. So the left in us humans is more dominant for speech, but the right has a more balance for singing or processing musical sounds as opposed to processing speech. Both get used for both reasons. And so when people say your right brain is your artistic brain and your left brain is your thinking brain, this is what they're referring to. And so that's another distinction. A second thing that's useful to know is that all vocal learning species use their learned sounds for this emotional effective kind of communication, but only a few of them like humans and some parrots and dolphins use it for the semantic kind of communication, we're calling speech. And that has led a number of people to hypothesize that the evolution of spoken language, of speech, evolved first for singing, for this more like emotional kind of mate attraction like the Jennifer Lopez, the Ricky Martin kind of songs and so forth. And then later on, it became used for abstract communication like we're doing now. - Oh, interesting. Well, that's a perfect segue for me to be able to ask you about your background and motor control, not only of the hands but of the body. So you have a number of important distinctions to your name, but one of them is that you were a member of the Alvin Ailey Dance School, School of Dance. - That's right. That's right, hmm hmm. - So you're an accomplished and quite able dancer, right? Tell us a little bit about your background in the world of dance and how it informs your interest in neuroscience, [clears throat], excuse me, and perhaps even how it relates specifically to your work on speech and language. - Yes, well, it's interesting. And then this kind of history even goes before my time. So in my family, my mother and father's side, they both went to the High School of Music and Art here in New York City. And particularly, in my mother's family, going back multiple generations, they were singers. And I even did my family genealogy and found out not only, you know, we have some relationships to some well-known singers, distant relationships like Thelonious Monk, but going back to the plantations in North Carolina and so forth, my ancestors were singers in the church for the, you know, the towns and so forth. And this somehow got passed on multiple generations to my family. And I thought I was going to grow up and be a famous singer, right. And me and my brothers and sister formed a band when we were kids and so forth. But it turned out that I didn't inherit the singing talents of some of my other family members, even though, you know, I was, you know, okay. You know, but not like my brother, or not like my mother or my aunts and my cousin Pura Fe', who's now a talented Native American singer. And so, that then influenced me to do other things. And I started, you know, competing in dance contests, you know, actually this is around the time of Saturday Night Fever and I was as a teenager. And I started winning dance contests. And I thought, oh, I can dance. And I auditioned for the High School of Performing Arts. And I got in, here in New York City, and got into ballet dance and got in, right. And thought, if I learned ballet, I can learn everything else. It I that idea, if you learn something classical, it can teach for everything else. And I was, yeah, at Alvin Ailey Dance School, Joffrey Ballet Dance School. And at the end of my senior concert, I had this opportunity to audition for the Alvin Ailey Dance Company. And I had an opportunity to go to college. And I also fell in love with another passion that my father had, which was science. And so I liked science in high school. And I found an overlap also between the arts and sciences, you know, both required creativity, hard work, discipline, you know, new discovery, both weren't boring to me. And the one decision I made at that senior dance concert was, you know, when talking to the Alvin Ailey recruiter and thinking about it, I have to make a decision. And I thought something my mother taught me because she was growing up in the 1960s cultural revolution, "Do something that has a positive impact on society." And I thought that I could do that better as a dancer than a scientist. So now jump, I get into college, undergraduate school, I major in molecular biology and mathematics. I decide I want to be a biologist, got into graduate school, wanted to study the brain at, you know, at the Rockefeller University. So I went from Hunter College to Rockefeller University. And so now I got to the brain and why did I choose the brain is because it controls dancing. [laughs] But there wasn't anybody studying dancing. And I wanted study the brain, something that it does that's really interesting and complex. And I thought, ah, language is what it does. You couldn't study that in mice. You couldn't study in non-human primates. But these birds do this wonderful thing that Fernando Nottebohm was studying at Rockefeller. And so that's what got me into the birds. And then jumping now, 15 years later, you know, yeah, that's right. Even after I'm into now having my own lab, studying vocal learning in these birds as a model for language and humans, it turns out that, you know, Ani Patel and, you know, others, have discovered that only vocal learning species can learn how to dance. - Is that right? - That's right, yes. - So I've seen these just scrolling through the files here in my mind. I think about, every once in a while someone will, I love parrots. - Yes. - So every once in a while, someone will send me one of these little Instagram or Twitter videos of a parrot doing what looks to me like dance, typically it's a cockatoo. - That's right. - Right. - That's right. - Even foot stomping to the sound and- - Famous one called Snowball out there, but there are many Snowballs out there. [laughs] - All the dancing birds are named Snowball? That's an interesting tactic. So only animals with language dance? - Yeah, vocal learning in particular, the ability to imitate sounds, yes. - Incredible. - Yes. And this now is bringing my life full circle, right. And so when that was discovered in 2009, at that same time in my lab at Duke, we had discovered that vocal learning brain pathways in songbirds, as well as in humans and in parrots, right, like Snowball, are embedded within circuits that control learning how to move. And that led us to a theory called the Brain Pathway or Motor Theory of Vocal Learning Origin where the brain pathways for vocal learning and speech evolved by a whole duplication of the surrounding motor circuits involving learning how to move. Now, how does that explain dance, right? Well, when Snowball, the cockatoos, are dancing, they're using the brain regions around their speech-like circuits to do this dancing behavior. And so what's going on there? What we hypothesize and now like to test is that when this, when speech evolved in humans and the equivalent behavior and parrots and songbirds, it required a very tight integration in the brain regions that can hear sound with the brain regions that control your muscles from moving your larynx and tongue and so forth for producing sound. And that tight auditory motor integration, we argue, then contaminated the surrounding brain regions. And that contamination of the surrounding brain regions now allows us humans, in particular, and parrots. to coordinate our muscle movements of the rest of the body with sound in the same way we do for speech sounds. - [Andrew] Well. - So we're speaking with our bodies when we dance. - Incredible. And I have to say that as poor as I am at speaking multiple languages, I'm even worse at dancing, so. - But I guarantee you're better than a monkey. - But not Snowball, the cockatoo? - No, maybe not Snowball. On YouTube, we have a video where there's some scientists dancing with Snowball and you'll see Snowballs doing better than some of the scientists. - Okay, well, as long as I'm not the worst of all scientists dancing. - I don't think so. - There's always a neuroplasticity. May it save me someday. You said something incredible that I completely believe even though I have minimum to, let's just say minimum dancing ability. Okay, I can get by at a party or wedding without complete embarrassment, but I don't have any structured training. So the body clearly can communicate with movement. As a trained dancer and knowing other trained dancers, I always think of dance and bodily movement and communication through bodily movement as a form of wordlessness, like a state of wordlessness. In fact, the few times when I think that maybe I'm actually dancing modestly well for the context that I'm in, or I see other people dancing and they seem to just be very much in the movement, it's almost like a state of non-language, non-spoken language. - Hmm hmm. - And yet what you're telling me is that there's a direct bridge at some level between the movement of the body and language. So is there a language of the body that is distinct from the language of speech? And if so, or if not, how do those map onto one another? What does that Venn diagram look like? - Yeah, yeah. So, let me define first dance in this context of vocal learning species. This is the kind of dancing that we are specialized in doing and the vocal learning species are specialized in doing is synchronizing body movements of muscles to the rhythmic beats of music. And for some reason, we like doing that. We like synchronizing to sound and doing it together as a group of people. And that kind of communication amongst ourselves is more like the effective kind of communication I mentioned earlier, unlike the semantic kind. So we, humans, are using our voices more for the semantic, abstract communication, but we're using learned dance for the effective emotional bonding kind of communication. It doesn't mean we can't communicate semantic information in dance, and we do it, but it's not as popular. You know, like a ballet that, you know, in the Nutcracker, it is popular, you know, where they are communicating, you know, the Arabian guy comes out, which I was the Arabian guy in the ballet Nutcracker. That's how I remember. - Oh, yeah? - Yeah, for the Westchester Ballet Company, when I was a teenager. You know, we're trying to communicate meaning and our ballet dancing, it can go on with a whole story and so forth. But people don't interpret that as clearly as speech. You know, they're seeing the ballet with semantic communication, with a lot of emotional content, whereas you go out to a club, you know, yeah, you're not communicating, okay, how you're feeling today? Tell me about your day and so forth. You're trying to synchronize with other people in an effective way. And I think that's because, the dance brain circuit inherited the more ancient part of the speech circuit, which was for singing. - I always had the feeling that with certain forms of music, in particular opera, but any kind of music where there's some long notes sung that at some level, there was a literal resonance created between the singer and the listener. Or I think of like the deep voice of a Johnny Cash or where at some level, you can almost feel the voice in your own body. And in theory, that could be the vibration of the or the firing of the phrenic nerve controlling the diaphragm for all I know. Is there any evidence that there's a coordination between performer and audience at the level of mind and body? - I'm going to say, possibly, yes. And the reason why is because I just came back from a conference on the neurobiology of dance- - Clearly, I'm going to the wrong meetings. - Yeah, a colleague invited me. - You know, vision science sounds be so boring. - Yes, well, one of my colleagues, Tecumseh Fitch and Jonathan Fritz, they organized, well, a particular section on this conference in Virginia. And this is the first time I was in the room with so many neuroscientists studying the neurobiology of dance. It's a new field now, in the last five years. And there was one lab where they were putting EEG electrodes on the dancers, on two different dancers partnering with each other, as well as the audience, you know, seeing the dance and some, you know, argued, okay, if you're listening to the music as well, how are you responding 'cause you're asking a question about music and I'm giving you an answer about dance. And what they found is that, you know, the dancers, when they resonated with each other during the dance, or the audience listening to the dancers and the music, there's some resonance going on there that they've score as higher resonance. Their brain activity with these wireless EEG signals are showing something different. And so that's why I say possibly, yes. It needs more rigorous study and you know, this is some stuff they publish, but it's not prime time yet, but they're trying to figure this out. - Love it. So at least if I can't dance well, maybe I can hear and feel what it is to dance in a certain way. - Yes, that's right. And this will be, some people will think that they, even songs that they hear and they can almost sing to themselves in their own head and they know what they want it to sound like. And you know when it really sounds good, what it sounds like, but they can't get their voice to do it. - I'm raising, for those listening, I'm raising my hand. No musical ability. Others in my household have tremendous musical ability with instruments and with voice, but not me. - Yeah, well, and so this is one of my selfish goals of trying to find the genetics of why can some people who sing really well and some not. Is there some genetic predisposition to that? And then can I modify my own muscles of brain circuits to sing better? - You're still after the sing. I guess this is what happens when siblings vary in proficiency is that competitiveness amongst brothers and sisters never goes away. - I've been trying to be as good as my brother, Mark and Victor, you know, for my entire life. - Well, watch out, Mark and Victor, he's coming for you with neuroscience to back him. Earlier, you said that you discovered that you could dance. That caught my ear. It sounds like you didn't actually have to, I'm not suggesting you didn't work hard at it. But at the moment where you discovered it, it just sort of was a skill that you had, that up until that point, you didn't target a life in the world of dance, but the fact that you quote, unquote, "discovered that you could dance really well" and then went to this incredible school of dance and did well, tells me that perhaps there is an ability that was built up in childhood and or that perhaps we do all have different genetic leanings for different motor functions. - Yeah, well, for me, there could be, both explanations could be possible. For the first, yeah, I grew up in a family, listening to Motown songs, you know, dancing, you know, at parties and so forth, family parties and, you know, an African American family, basically. And so I grew up dancing from a young child, but this discovery, you know, maybe dancing even moreso, in terms of a talent, it could, the genetic component, if it really exists, I don't know. You know, with my 23andMe results, you know, it says I have the genetic substitutions that are associated with, you know, high intensity athletes and fast twitch muscles. And who knows. Maybe that could have something to do with me being able to synchronize my body to rhythmic sounds, maybe, maybe, better than some others. It turns out that my genetics also show that I have a genetic substitute that makes it hard for me to sing on pitch. And so that does correlate with my, you know, even though I can sing on this pitch, especially if I hear a piano or, you know, kind of playing it, but, you know, maybe that's why my siblings, you know, who didn't have that genetic predisposition in his 23andMe results, you know, it could go along with the genetic component, as well. - I'm imagining family gatherings with 23andMe data and intense arguments about it, innate and learned ability. - Yes. - Fun. Love to be an attendant. I'm not inviting myself to your Thanksgiving dinner by the way, but I suppose I am. - You're welcome to. - Thank you. I'll bring my 23andMe data. I'd love to chat a moment about facial expression because that's a form of motor pattern that, you know, I think for most people out there just think about smiling and frowning, but there are, of course, you know, thousands, if not millions of micro expressions and things of that sort, many of which are subconscious. And we are all familiar with the fact that when what somebody says doesn't match some specific feature of their facial expression that it can call, you know, that mismatch can cue our attention, especially among people that know each other very well. Like somebody will say, well, you said that, but your right eye twitched to the, you know, a little bit in a way that tells me that you didn't really mean that, these kinds of things. Or when, in the opposite example, when the emotionality and the content of our speech is matched to a facial expression, there's something that's just so wonderful about that, because it seems like everything's aligned. - [Erich] Yeah. - So how does the motor circuitry that controls facial expression map onto the brain circuits that control language, speech, and even bodily and hand movements? - Yeah, and you ask a great question because we both know some colleagues like Winrich Freiwald at Rockefeller University who study facial expression and the neurology behind it. And now we both share some students that we're co-mentoring. And talk about this same question that you brought up. And what I'm learning a lot is that non-human primates have a lot of diversity in their facial expression like we humans do. And what we know about the neurobiology of brain regions controlling those muscles of the face is that these non-human primates and some other species that don't learn how to imitate vocalizations, they have strong connections from the cortical regions to the motor neurons that control facial expressions, but absent connections or weak connections to the motor neurons that control the voice. So I think our diverse facial expression, even though it's more diverse in these non-human primates, there was already a preexisting diversity of communication, whether it's intentional or unconscious through facial expression in our ancestors. And on top of that, we humans now add the voice along with those facial expressions. - I see. And in terms of language learning when we're kids, I mean, children, fortunately are not told to fake their expressions or to smile when they say I'm happy. So at some point, everybody learns, for better or for worse, how to untangle these different components of hand movement, body posture, speech, and facial expression. - [Erich] Yes. - But in their best form, I would say, assuming that the best form is always, I guess there are instances where, you know, for safety reasons, one might need to fain some of these aspects of language. But in most cases, when those are aligned, it seems like that could reflect that all the different circuitries are operating in parallel, but that the ability to misalign these is also a powerful aspect to our maturation. I can think of theater, for instance, where deliberate disentangling of these areas is important. But also we know when an actor, when it feels real. - Yep. - And when it looks like, when bad acting is oftentimes when the facial expression or body posture just doesn't quite match what we're hearing. - [Erich] Yeah. - So are these skills that people, that learn and acquire according to adaptability and profession? Or do you think that all children and all adults eventually learn how to couple and uncouple these circuits a little bit? - Yeah, I think it's this similar argument I mentioned earlier about the innate and learned for the vocalizations. And by the way, when I say, we humans have facial expressions associated with our vocalizations in a different way than primates, non-human primates, it's the learned vocalizations I'm talking about. So there is a common view out there that facial expressions in non-human species like nonhuman primates, or you can have them in birds, too, are innate, all right. And so they're reflexive and controlled. I don't believe that. I think there's some learned component to it. And I think we have more learning component to it as well, but we also have an innate component. And so if you try to put your hands behind your back and hold your fist, or even just not, and try to speak and try to communicate, it's actually harder to do. You have to force yourself or put it by your side. This comes naturally. Facial expressions comes naturally because there's an innate component. And yes, you have to learn how to dissociate the two, communicate something angry with your hands or with your face, but, you know, politely with your voice. It's very hard to separate those two, because there is that innate component that brings them together. So it's like an email, too. You're emailing and someone says something by email, someone can interpret that angrily or gently, and it becomes ambiguous. The facial expressions get rid of that ambiguity. - So glad you brought that up because my next question was, and is about written language. The first question I'll ask is when you write, either type or write things out by hand, do you hear the content of what you want to write in your head? Just, you personally. - Yes, I do. Yeah, and I know that I do, because I was trying to figure out a debate about this issue and trying to resolve the debate with my own self experimentation on me. - I asked that because, a quite well-known colleague of ours, Karl Deisseroth at Stanford, who's been on this podcast, you know, his optogenetics fame and psychiatry fame, et cetera. - Yeah, I know him. - Yeah, he sends his regards. - Okay. [laughs] - Told me that his practice for writing and for thinking involves a quite painful process of forcing himself to sit completely still and think in complete sentences, to force thinking in complete sentences. And when he told me that, I decided to try this exercise and it's quite difficult. First of all, it's difficult for the reason that you mentioned, which is that with many thoughts, I want to look around and I start to gesticulate with my hands, right? So there it is, again, the connection between language and hand movement, even if one isn't speaking. And the other part that's challenging is I realize that while we write in complete sentences, most of the time, we'll talk about how that's changing now. - Right. - In texting, et cetera. That we don't often think in complete sentences, and specifically in simple declarative sentences, that a lot of our thoughts would be, if they were written out onto a page would look pretty much like passive language that a good copy editor or a good editor would say, ugh, like we need to cross this out, make this simple and declarative. So what I'm getting at here is what is the process of going from a thought to language, to written word? And I also wanted to touch on handwritten versus typed, but thought to language, to written word. What's going on there? What do we know about the neural circuitry? And I was going to ask, why is it so hard? But now I want to ask why is this even possible? It seems like a very challenging neural computational problem. - Yeah, yeah. And coming from the linguistic world, and even just the regular neurobiology world, going back to something I said before about a separate language module in the brain. You know, there was this thought or hypothesis that this language module has all these complex algorithms to them. And they're signaling to the speech circuit, how to produce the sounds, the hand circuit, how to write them or gesture, the visual pathway on how to interpret them from reading and the auditory pathway for listening. I don't think that's the case, all right. And you know, that this thinking where there's this internal speech going on. What I think is going on is to explain what you're asking is about, that I'm going to take it from the perspective, reading something. You read something on a paper. The signal from the paper goes through your eyes. It goes to the back of your brain, to your visual cortical regions eventually. And then you now got to interpret that signal in your visual pathway of what you're reading. How are you going to do that in terms of speech? That visual signal then goes to your speech pathway in the motor cortex in front here, in Broca's area. And you silently speak what you read in your brain without moving your muscles. And sometimes actually, if you put electrodes, EEG, EMG electrodes on your laryngeal muscles, even on birds, you can do this, you'll see activity there while reading or trying to speak silently, even though no sound's coming out. And so your speech pathway is now speaking what you're reading. Now to finish it off, that signal is sent to your auditory pathways so you can hear what you're speaking in your own head. - That's incredible. - And this is why it's complicated because you're using like three different pathways, the visual, the speaking motor one, and the auditory to read. Oh, and then you got to write, right? Okay, here comes the fourth one. Now the hand areas next to your speech pathway has got to take that auditory signal or even the adjacent motor signals for speaking and translate it into a visual signal on paper. So, you're using at least four brain circuits, which includes the speech production and the speech perception pathways to write. - Incredible. And finally, explain to me why, so I was weaned teaching undergraduates, graduate students and medical students and I've observed that when I'm teaching, I have to stop speaking if I'm going to write something on the board. I just have to stop all speaking completely. - [Erich] Right. - It turns out this is an advantage to catch because it allows me to catch my voice. It allows me to slow down a bit, you know, breathe and inhale some oxygen and so on because I tend to speak quickly if I'm not writing something out. So there's a break in the circuitry for me, or at least they are distinct enough that I have to stop and then write something out. - Yes, that does imply competing brain circuits for your conscious attention. - We have colleagues up at Columbia Med who are known, at least in our circles, for voice dictating their papers, not writing them out, but just speaking into a voice recorder. I've written papers that way. It doesn't feel quite as natural for me as writing things out. - Yeah. - But not because I can go quickly from thought to language to typing. I type reasonably fast. I can touch type now. I don't think I ever taught my, I think I taught myself. I never took a touch typing course. But it just sort of happened. Now, I think, my motor system seems to know where the keys are with enough accuracy, that it works. This is remarkable to me that any of us can do this. But when it comes to writing, what I've found is that if my rate of thought and my rate of writing are aligned nicely, things go well. However, if I'm thinking much faster than I can write, that's a problem. And certainly, if I'm thinking more slowly than I want to write, that's also a problem. And the solution for me has been to write with a pen. I'm in love with these. And I have no relationship to the company, at least not now, although if they want to come, you know, if they want to work with us, I love these Pilot V5, V7's because not necessarily because of the ink or the feel, although I like that as well. But because of the rate that it allows me to write, they write very well slowly, and they write very well quickly. And so I have this theory, supported only by my own anecdata, no peer reviewed study, that writing by hand is fundamentally different than typing out information. Is there any evidence that this motor pathway for writing is better or somehow different than the motor pathway for typing? - Yeah, that's interesting. And I don't know of any studies. I have my own personal experience as well, but trying to put this into the context, if I had to, you know, design an experiment to test the hypothesis here that, you know, to explain your experience and mine, is that writing by hand, I would argue, requires a different set of less skills with the fingers than typing. So you have to coordinate your fingers more in opposite directions and so forth with typing, but also writing by hand requires more arm movement. And so therefore, I would argue that the difficulty there could be in the types of muscles and the fine motor control you need of those muscles along with speaking in your brain at the same time. - So basically, I'm a course, I'm a brute. So it makes sense that I would have, a more primitive writing device would work. - That's right, yes. But, let me answer this in terms of my own personal experience, right. What I find is I can write something faster by hand for a short period of time, compared to typing. And that is because I think I run out of the energy in my arm movements faster than I run out of muscle energy in my finger movements. And I think it takes longer time for us to write words with our fingers, because, and in terms of the speech. So I think your writing, whether it's by hand or typing and your speech, they only will align very well if you can type as fast as you can speak or write as fast as you can speak in your head. - I love it. So what you've done, if I understand correctly, is created a bridge between thought and writing, and that bridge is speech. - That bridge is speech, that's right. That's right. When you're writing something out, you're speaking it to yourself. And if you're speaking faster than you can type, you've got a problem. - Interesting. I do a number of podcast episodes that are not with guests, but solo episodes. And as listeners know, these are very long episodes, often two or more hours. And we joke around the podcast studio that I will get locked into a mode of speech where some of it is more collaborative and anecdotal and then I'll punch out simple declarative sentences. I find it very hard to switch from one module to the next. The thing that I have done in order to make that transition more fluid and prep for those podcast episodes is actually to read the lyrics of songs and to sing them in my head as a way of warming up my vocal chords. But luckily for those around me, when I do that, I'm not actually singing out loud. And so this, what you're telling me supports this idea that even when we are imagining singing or writing in our mind, we are exercising our vocal chords. - You're actually getting little low potentials of electrical currents reaching your muscles there, which also means you're exercising your speech brain circuits too, without actually, you know, going with the full-blown activity in the muscles. - Incredible. - Yeah. And this idea of singing helps you as well. Even with Parkinson's patients and so forth, when they want to say something, singing or listening to music helps them move better. And the idea there is that the brain circuits for singing, or let's say the function of the brain circuits for speech being used for singing first is the more ancestral trait. And that's why it's easier to do things with singing sometimes than it is with speaking. - I love it. Stutter is a particularly interesting case and one that every once in a while, I'll get questions about this from our audience. Stutter is complicated in a number of ways, but culturally, and my understanding from these emails that I receive is that stutter can often cause people to hide and speak less because it can be embarrassing. And we are often not patient with stutter. We also have the assumption that if somebody's stuttering, that they're thinking is slow, but it turns out there are many examples, historically of people who could not speak well, but who were brilliant thinkers. I don't know how well they could write, but they found other modes of communication. I realize that you're not a speech pathologist or therapist, but what is the current neurobiological understanding of stutter and, or what's being developed in terms of treatments for stutter? - Yeah, so we actually accidentally came across stuttering in songbirds. And we've published several papers on this to try to figure out the neurobiological basis. The first study we had was a brain area called the basal ganglio, or the striatum part of the basal ganglia involved in coordinating movements, learning how to make movements, when it was damaged in a speech-like pathway in these birds, what we found is that they started to stutter as the brain region recovered. And unlike humans, they actually recovered after three or four months. And why is that the case? Because bird brains undergoes new neurogenesis in a way that human or mammal brains don't. And it was the new neurons that were coming in into the circuit, but not quite, you know, with the right proper activity was resulting in this stuttering, in these birds. And after it was repaired, not exactly the old song came back after the repair, but still it recovered a lot better. And it's now known, they call this neurogenic stuttering in humans, damage to the basal ganglia or some type of disruption to the basal ganglia at a young age, also causes stuttering in humans. And even those who are born with stuttering, it's often the basal ganglia that's disrupted than some other brain circuit and we think the speech part of the basal ganglia. - Can adults who maintain a stutter from childhood repair that stutter? - They can repair it with therapy, with learning how to speak slower, learning how to tap out a rhythm. And yeah, I'm not a speech pathologist, but I started reading this literature and talking to others, that you know, colleagues who actually study stuttering. So yes, there are ways to overcome the stuttering through, you know, behavioral therapy. And I think all of the tools out there have something to do with sensory motor integration, controlling what you hear with what you output in a thoughtful controlled way helps reduce the stuttering. - There are a couple examples from real life that I want to touch on, and one is somewhat facetious, but now I realize, is a serious neurobiological issue, serious meaning I think interesting. Which is that every once in a while, I will have a conversation with somebody who says the last word of the sentence along with me. And it seems annoying in some instances, but I'm guessing this is just a breakthrough of the motor pattern that they're hearing what I'm saying very well. So I'm going to interpret this kindly and think they're hearing what I'm saying. They're literally hearing it in their mind and they're getting that low-level electrical activity to their throat. And they're just joining me in the enunciation of what I'm saying, probably without realizing it. Can we assume that that might be the case? - Well, I wouldn't be surprised so that, you know, the motor theory of speech perception where this idea originally came, what you hear is going through your speech circuit and then also activating those muscles slightly. So yes, so one might argue, okay, is that speech circuit now interpreting what that person is speaking? Now, you're listening to me and is going to finish it off because it's already going through their brain and they can predict it? That would be one theory. And I don't think the verdict out there is known, but that's one. The other is synchronizing turn-taking in the conversation where you're acknowledging that we understand each other by finishing off what I say. And it's almost like a social bonding kind of thing. The other could be, I want the person to shut up so I can speak as well and take that turn. And each pair of people have a rhythm to their conversation. And if you have somebody who's over talkative versus under talkative of vice versa, that rhythm can be lost in them finishing ideas and going back and forth. But I think having something to do with turn-taking, as well, makes a lot of sense. - I have a colleague at Stanford who says that interruption is a sign of interest. [Erich laughs] I'm not sure that everyone agrees. I think it's highly contextual. - [Erich] Yes. - But there is this form of a verbal nod of saying, hmm hmm or things of that sort. And they're many of these. And I'm often told by my audience, you know, that I interrupt my guests and things of that sort. Oftentimes, I'll just get caught in the natural flow of the conversation, but. - Right. Well, I think we've had pretty good turn-taking here, I hope. - So far so good. - I feel that way. - I'm glad you feel that way, because especially in the context of a discussion about language. - Yes. - It seems important. Texting is a very, very interesting evolution of language because what you've told us is that we have a thought, it's translated into language. It might not be complete sentences, but texting, I have to imagine this is the first time in human evolution where we've written with our thumbs. So I don't know, it seems more primitive to me than typing with fingers or writing with hands, but hey, who am I to judge the evolution of our species in one direction or the other? But the shorthand grammatically, often grammatically deficient incomplete sentence form of texting is an incredible thing to see. Early in relationships, romantic relationships, people will often evaluate the others text and their ability to use proper grammar and spelling, et cetera. This often quickly degrades. And there's an acceptance that we're just trying to communicate through shorthand, almost military like shorthand, but with internally consistent between people, but there's no general consensus of what things mean, but, you know, WTFs and like, and OMGs and all sorts of things. - [Erich] Right. - I wonder sometimes whether or not we are getting less proficient at speech because we are not required to write and think in complete sentences. - Hmm hmm. - I'm not being judgemental here. I see this in my colleagues. I see this in myself. This is not a judgment of the younger generation. I also know that slang has existed for decades, if not hundreds of years. But I also know that I don't speak the same way that I did when I was a teenager, because I've suppressed a lot of that slang, not because it's inappropriate or offensive, although some of it was, frankly, but because it's out of context. So what do you think's happening to language? Are we getting better at speaking, worse at speaking? And what do you think the role of things like texting and tweeting and shorthand communication, hashtagging, what's that doing to the way that our brains work? - Yeah, I think that, well, one, in terms of, you know, measuring your level of sophistication and intelligence when you say OMG, right. I think that also could be a cultural thing that, ah, you belong to the next generation. If you're an, you know, or you're being cool, if you're an older person, you know, using OMG and other things that the, you know, younger generation would use. But if I really think about it clearly, texting actually has allowed for more rapid communication amongst people. I think, without the invention of the phone before then, or, you know, texting back and forth, you had to wait days for a letter to show up. You couldn't call somebody on the phone and talk as well, you know? And so this rapid communication in terms of the rapid communication of writing in this case. So I think actually, it's more like a use it or lose it kind of a thing with the brain. The more you use a particular brain region or circuit, the more enhanced. It's like a muscle. The more you exercise it, the more healthier it is, the bigger it becomes and the more space it takes and the more you lose something else. So I think texting is not decreasing the speech prowess, or the intellectual prowess of speech. It's converting it and using it a lot in a different way, in a way that may not be as rich in regular writing, because you can only communicate so much nuance in short-term writing, but whatever is being done, you got people texting hours and hours and hours on the phone. So whatever, your thumb circuit is going to get pretty big, actually. [laughs] - I do wonder whether, you know, many people have lost their jobs based on tweets. - [Erich] Hmm hmm. - The short latency between thought and action and distribution of one's thoughts is incredible. - Yes. - And I'm not just talking about people who apparently would have poor prefrontal top-down control. This is geek speak by the way, for people that lack impulse control. But high-level academics, I'm not going to point fingers at anyone. But examples of where you see these tweets and you go, what were they thinking? - Yep. - So presumably, there's an optimal strategy between the thought speech motor pathway, especially when the motor pathway engages communication with hundreds of thousands of people and retweets in particular and the cut and paste function and the screenshot function are often the reason why speech propagates. - [Erich] Yep. - So to me, it's a little eerie that, just that the neural circuitry can do this and that we are catching up a little bit more slowly to the technology, and you've got these casualties of that mismatch. - I think that's a good adjective used, the casualties, you know, of what's going on, because yes, it is the case with texting, what you're really losing there is less so the ability to write, but more the ability to interpret what is being written. And you can over or under interpret something that somebody means. On the flip side of that, you know, if somebody's writing something very quick, they could be writing instinctually, more instinctually, their true meaning, and they don't have time to modify and color code what they're trying to say. And that's what they really feel and as opposed to saying it in a more nuanced way. So I think both sides of that casualty are present. And that's a downturn, you know, unintended negative consequence of short-term, I mean, short-word communications. - Yeah, I agree that this whole phenomenon could be netting people that normally would only say these things out loud once inside the door of their own home. - Right. - Or not at all. - [Erich] Right. - It's an interesting time that we're in. These are these speech and language and motor patterns. - So part of the human evolution for language, I think this is all part of our evolution. - That's right. - Yeah. - So for those of you thinking terrible thoughts, please put them in the world and be a casualty. And for those of you that are not, please be very careful with how proficient your thought to language to motor action goes. - [Erich] Yes. [laughs] - Maybe the technology companies should install some buffers, some AI-based buffers. - Right, that's taking some EEG signals from your brain while you're texting to say, okay, this is not a great thought, slow down. - Right, or this doesn't reflect your best state. That brings me to what was going to be the next question anyway, which is we are quickly moving toward a time where there will be an even faster transition from thought to speech, to motor output, and maybe won't require motor output. What I'm referring to here is some of the incredible work of our colleagues, Eddie Chang at UCSF and others who are taking paralyzed human beings and learning to translate the electrical signals of neurons in various areas, including speech and language areas, to computer screens that type out what these people are thinking. In other words, paralyzed people can put their thoughts into writing. That's a pretty extreme and wonderful example of recovery of function. - Hmm hmm. - That is sure to continue to evolve. But I think we are headed toward a time, not too long from now where my thoughts can be translated into words on a page if I allow that to happen. - Yeah so, and Eddie Chang's work, which I admire quite a bit and cite in my papers, I think he's really one of those at the leading edge of trying to understand within humans, the neurobiology of speech. And he may not say it directly, but you know, I talked to him about this. It supports this idea that the speech circuit and the separate language module, I don't really think that there's a separation there. So with that knowledge, yes, and putting electrodes into human brain and then translating those electrical signals to speech currents. Yeah, we can start to tell what is that person thinking? Why, because we often think in terms of speech. And without saying words. And that's a scary thought. And now imagine if you can now translate those into a signal that transmits something wirelessly and someone from some distant part of the planet is hearing your speech from a wireless signal without you speaking. So probably that won't be done in an ethical way, who knows, you know? But I mean, the ethics of doing that probably, you know, might not happen, but who knows? We have these songbirds, you know. If we apply the same technique to them, we can start to hear what they're singing in their dreams or whatever, even though they don't produce sound so we can find out by testing on them. - It's coming. - Yes. - One way or another, it's coming. For those listening who are interested in getting better at speaking and understanding languages, are there any tools that you recommend? And here again, I realize you're not a speech therapist, but here I'm not thinking about ameliorating any kind of speech deficiency. I'm thinking, for instance, do you recommend that people read different types of writing? Would you recommend that people learn how to dance in order to become better at expressing themselves verbally? You know, and feel free to have some degrees of freedom in this answer. These are obviously not peer-reviewed studies that we're referring to, although there may be, but I'm struck by the number of things that you do exceedingly well, and I can't help but ask, well, the singing, which I realize it may, your brother didn't pay me to say this, may not be quite as good as your brothers yet, but is getting, you'll surpass him, I'm guessing at some point. ♪ Getting there ♪ - Getting there. [both laughing] Exactly, there you go. You know, should kids learn how to dance and read hard books and simple books? What do you recommend? Should adults learn how to do that? Everyone wants to know how to keep their brain working better, so to speak. But also I think people want to be able to speak well and people want to be able to understand well. - Yeah, so what I've discovered personally, right, is that, so when I switched from pursuing a career in science from a career in dance, I thought one day I would stop dancing, but I haven't because I find it fulfilling for me, you know, just as a life experience. So ever since I started college, you know, my late teens and early twenties, I kept dancing even till this day. And there've been periods of time, like during the pandemic where I slowed down on dancing and so forth. And when you do that, you realize, okay, there are parts of your body where your muscle tone decreases a little bit and somewhat, or you could start to gain weight. I somehow don't gain weight that easily. And I think it's related to my dance, if that's meaningful to your audience. But what I found is, you know, in science, we like to think of a separation between movement and action and cognition. And there is a separation for you between perception and production, cognition being perception, production being moving, right. But if the speech pathways is next to the movement pathways, what I discover is by dancing, it is helping me think. It is helping keeping my brain fresh. It's not just moving my muscles, I'm moving or using the circuitry in my brain to control a whole big body. You need a lot of brain tissue to do that. And so I argue, if you want to stay cognitively intact into your old age, you better be moving and you better be doing it consistently, whether it's dancing, walking, running, and also practicing speech, oratory speech and so forth or singing, is controlling the brain circuits that are moving your facial musculature. And it's going to keep your cognitive circuits also in tune. And I'm convinced of that from my own personal experience. - Yeah, for me, long, slow runs are a wonderful way to kind of loosen the joints for long podcasts, especially the solo podcast, which can take many hours to record. And without those long slow runs, at least the day before, or even the morning of, I don't think I could do it, at least not as well. - All right, well, you're experiencing something similar. So that's an N of two. - Yeah, N of two. I'm tempted to learn how to dance because there are a lot of reasons to learn how to dance. - [Erich] Yes. - And people can use their imagination. I definitely want to get the opportunity to talk about some of the newer work that you're into right now about genomes of animals. As you perhaps can tell from my quite authentic facial expressions, I adore the animal kingdom. I just find it amazing. And it's the reason I went into neurobiology, in part. So many animals, so many different patterns of movement, so many body plans, so many specializations, what is the value of learning the genomes of all these animals? You know, I can think of conservation-based, you know, schemes of trying to preserve these precious critters, but what are you doing with the genomes of these animals? What do you want to understand about their brain circuits? And how does this relate to some of the discussion we've have been having up until now? - Yeah, I've gotten very heavily involved in genomes, you know, not just to get at an individual gene involved in the trade of interest, like spoken language, but I realize that, you know, nature has done natural experiments for us with all these species out there with these various traits and the one that I'm studying, like vocal learning, has evolved multiple times among the animal kingdom, even if it's rare, it's multiple times. And the similar genetic changes occurred in those species. But to find out what those genetic changes that are associated with the trait of interests and not some other trait like flying in birds, as opposed to singing, you have to do what's called comparative genomics, even in the context of studying the brain. And you need their genomes to compare the genomes and do like a GWA, a genome-wide association study, not just within a species like humans, but across species. And so you need good genomes to do that. Plus, I've discovered I'm also interested in evolution and origins. How did these species come about a similar trait in last, you know, 300 million years or 60 million years, depending who you're talking about. And you need a good phylogenetic tree to do that, and to get a good phylogenetic tree, you also need their genomes. And so, because of this, I got involved in large scale consortiums to produce genomes of many different species, including my vocal learners and their closest relatives that I'm fans of. But I couldn't convince the funding agencies to gimme the money to do that just for my own project. But when you get a whole bunch of people together who want to study various traits, you know, heart disease, or loss and gain in flight and so forth, suddenly we all need lots of genomes to do this. And so now that got me into a project to lead something called the Vertebrate Genomes Project to eventually sequence all 70,000 species on the planet. And Earth BioGenome Project, all eukaryotic species, all two million of them. And to no longer be in a situation where I wish I had this genome. Now we have the genetic code of all life on the planet, create a database of all their traits and find the genetic association with everything out there that makes a difference from one species to another. One more piece of the equation to add to this story is what I didn't realize as a neuroscientist were that these genomes are not only incomplete, but have lots of errors in them, false gene duplications, where mother and father chromosomes were so different from each other, that the genome algorithm, assembly algorithms treated them as two different genes in this part of the chromosome. So there are a lot of these false duplicated genes that people thought were real, but were not or missing parts of the genome because the enzymes used to sequence the DNA couldn't get through this regulatory region that folded up on itself and made it hard to sequence. And so I ended up in these consortiums pulling in the genome sequencing companies, developing the technology to work with us to improve it further and the computer science guys who then take that data and that technology, and try to make the complete genomes and make the algorithms better to produce what we now just did recently led by an effort by Adam Phillippy is the first human Telomere-to-Telomere Genome with no errors, all complete, no missing sequence. And now we're trying to do the same thing with vertebrates and other species. Actually, we improved that before we got to the, what we call telomere-to-telomere, from one end of the chromosome to another. And what we're discovering is in this dark matter of the genome that was missing before, turns out to be some regulatory regions that are specialized in vocal learning species and we think are involved in developing speech circuits. - Incredible. Well, so much to learn. And we're going to learn from this information. Early on in these genome projects and connectome projects, I confess I was a little bit cynical. This would be about 10, 15 years ago. I thought, okay, necessary, but not sufficient for anything. We need it, but it's not clear what's going to happen, but you just gave a very clear example of what we stand to learn from this kind of information. And I know from the conservation side, there's a huge interest in this because even though we would prefer to keep all these species alive rather than clone them, these sorts of projects do offer the possibility of potentially recreating species that were lost. - [Erich] Right. - Due to our own ignorance or missteps, or what have you. - Yes, and along those lines, because, you know, we got involved in genomics, some of the first species that we start working on are critically endangered species. And I'm doing that not only for, you know, perspectives to understand their brains and the genes involved in their brain function, but I feel like it's a moral duty. So the fact that now I become more involved in genome biology and have helped develop these tools for more complete genomes, let's capture their genetic code now, before they're gone. And could we use that information to resurrect the species at some future time, if not in my lifetime, in some time in the future and generations ahead of us. And so, in anticipation of that, we create a database, we call the GenomeArk and no pun intended like Noah's Ark, meant to store the genetic code as complete genome assemblies as possible for all species on the planet to be used for basic science, but also some point in the future. And because of that, funding agencies or private foundations that are interested in conservation have been reaching out to me now, a neuroscientist, to help them out in producing high quality genome data of endangered species that they can use, like Revive & Restore, who want to resurrect the passenger pigeon or Colossal, who wants to resurrect the wooly mammoth. And so we're producing high quality genomes for these groups, for the conservation projects. - What a terrific and important initiative. And I think for those listening today, they now certainly understand the value of deeply understanding the brain structures and genomes of different species. Because I confess, even though I knew a bit of the songbird literature, and I certainly understand that humans have speech and language, I had no idea that there was so much convergence of function, structure and genomes. And to me, you know, I feel a lot more like an ape than I do a songbird. - Right. - And yet here we are with the understanding that there's a lot more similarity between songbirds and humans than I certainly ever thought before. - Yeah, something very close to home for us humans, I can give you an example of is evolution of skin color. And skin color, we use it unfortunately, for racism and so forth. We use it also for good things to let in more light or let out less light depending on the part of the planet, you know, our population evolved in. And most people think dark-skinned people all evolved from the same dark-skinned person and light-skinned people all evolved from the same light-skinned person, but that's not the case. Dark skin and light skin amongst humans has evolved independently multiple times, like in, you know, the Pacific islands versus Africa. And it's just depending on the angle of light hitting the Earth as to whether you need more protection from the sun or less protection, that's also associated with Vitamin D synthesis in the skin. And so, and each time, where darker or lighter skin evolved independently, it hit the same gene, you know, the mela [finger snaps]. - Melanin. - Melanin receptors. That's right, yes, yeah. Genes that are involved in melanin in formation. And so those genes evolve some of the same mutations, even in different species. It's not just humans. In equatorial regions, they are darker-skinned animals than going away from the equator. - Oh, right, I think of Arctic foxes and things of that sort. - Yep, that's right. That's right, polar bears, you know, and so some of the same genes are used in evolutionary perspective to evolve in a similar way within and across species. - Incredible. - Yeah. And that's same thing happening in the brain too. Language is no exception. - Well, I have to say, as somebody who is a, you know, career neuroscientist, but as I mentioned several times now, who also adores the animal kingdom, but is also obsessed with speech and language, at a distance not as a practitioner of music and dance, this has been an incredible conversation and opportunity for me to learn. And I know I speak for a tremendous number of people and I just really want to say, thank you for joining us today. You are incredibly busy. It's clear from your description of your science and your knowledge base, that you are involved in a huge number of things, very busy, so thank you for taking the time to speak to all of us. Thank you for the work that you're doing, both on speech and language, but also this important work on genomes and conservation of endangered species and far more. And I have to say, if you would agree to come back and speak to us again sometime, I'm certain that if we were to sit down even six months or a year from now, there's going to be a lot more to come. - Yeah, we have some things cooking and thank you for inviting me here to get the word out to the community of what's going on in the science world. - Well, we're honored and very grateful to you, Erich. Thank you. - You're welcome. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Erich Jarvis. If you'd like to learn more about his laboratory's work, you can go to Jarvis Lab, spelled J-A-R-V-I-S lab, all one word, jarvislab.net. And there you can learn about all the various studies taking place in his laboratory, as well as some of the larger overarching themes that are driving those studies, including studies on human genomics and animal genomics that surely are going to lead to the next stage discoveries of how we learn and think about, and indeed use language. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a simple zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover, or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those comments and we do take them to heart. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. And check out Momentous supplements, our new partners in the supplement space. And check out Athletic Greens. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so. We are hubermanlab on Twitter, and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram. In both places, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab on Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes. It also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter. You go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to newsletter. You supply your email, but we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the Neural Network Newsletter. I'd also like to point out that the Huberman Lab Podcast has a clips channel. So these are brief clips anywhere from three to 10 minutes, that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols related to sleep, to focus, interviews with various guests. We talk about things like caffeine, when to drink caffeine relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how, and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on, all the things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube, look for Huberman Lab Clips in the search area, and it will take you there, subscribe, and we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes, or you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab Podcast, which admittedly can be rather long. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [lively music]

========================================

--- Video 260 ---
Video ID: DkS1pkKpILY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DkS1pkKpILY
Title: What Alcohol Does to Your Body, Brain & Health
Published: 2022-08-22 12:00:08 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the physiological effects that drinking alcohol has on the brain and body at different levels of consumption and over time. I also describe genetic differences that predispose certain individuals to alcoholism, binge and habit-drinking. I explain alcohol metabolism in simple terms and how it effectively acts as a poison, leading to cellular stress and damage. I then explain that it impacts neuronal function and changes our thinking and behavior – hallmarks of inebriation. I also discuss how alcohol consumption of different amounts impacts inflammation, stress, neurodegeneration, and cancer risk and negatively impacts the gut microbiome, brain thickness, hormone balance, mood and feelings of motivation. Additionally, I discuss the biology of hangovers and describe science-based strategies to mitigate the severity of a hangover. Since alcohol is one of the most widely consumed recreational substances, this episode ought to be of relevance to everyone.  Indeed, even low-to-moderate alcohol consumption negatively impacts the brain and body in direct ways. The goal of this episode is to help people make informed decisions about their alcohol consumption that are in keeping with their mental and physical health goals. 

Access the full show notes for this episode: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/what-alcohol-does-to-your-body-brain-health

Use Ask Huberman Lab, our new AI-powered platform, for a summary, clips, and insights from this episode: https://ai.hubermanlab.com

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Timestamps
00:00:00 Effects of Alcohol Consumption
00:02:25 Momentous Supplements 
00:03:19 Low to Moderate Alcohol Consumption & Neurodegeneration 
00:06:52 Levels, Eight Sleep, ROKA 
00:10:46 Historical Context & Uses of Alcohol 
00:13:28 Alcohol Metabolism, “Empty Calories” 
00:18:23 Inebriation: Top-Down Inhibition, Impulsivity & Memory Formation
00:24:23 Long-Lasting Effects & Impulsivity, Neuroplasticity & Reversibility 
00:27:55 Food & Alcohol Absorption
00:30:07 Alcohol & Serotonin, SSRIs & Depression, Risk for Alcoholism, Blackouts
00:37:39 Predisposition for Alcoholism; Chronic Consumption, Cortisol & Stress
00:44:53 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:46:07 Genetic Predisposition for Alcoholism, Consuming Alcohol Too Young
00:52:27 Gut-Liver-Brain Axis: Alcohol, Gut Microbiome, Inflammation & Leaky Gut 
00:59:46 Tool: Improving/Replenishing Gut Microbiome 
01:02:44 Reducing Alcohol Consumption & Stress 
01:04:25 Hangover: Alcohol & Sleep, Anxiety, Headache
01:12:11 Hangover Recovery, Adrenaline & Deliberate Cold Exposure 
01:17:16 Hangover Recovery, Dehydration & Electrolytes
01:20:45 Types of Alcohol & Hangover Severity, Congeners  
01:25:25 Alcohol Tolerance, Dopamine & Serotonin, Pleasure-Pain Balance   
01:33:36 Are There Any Positive Effects of Alcohol?, Resveratrol 
01:35:42 Alcohol & Brain Thickness 
01:37:11 Alcohol & Cancer Risk: DNA Methylation, Breast Cancer Risk 
01:44:31 Mitigating Cancer Risk, Folate, B Vitamins 
01:46:54 Alcohol & Pregnancy, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
01:50:58 Hormones: Testosterone & Estrogen Balance
01:55:09 Negative Effects of Alcohol Consumption 
01:58:35 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter, Huberman Lab Clips

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're discussing alcohol, one of the most commonly consumed substances on the planet Earth. I should mention that both humans and non-human animals consume alcohol either for recreational purposes because they like the feeling that it gives them or for medicinal purposes or for other purposes that we'll discuss. We are, of course, going to discuss the effects of alcohol on our biology, ranging from its effects on individual cells, on organs and organ systems in our brain and body. We are also going to discuss the effects of the effects of alcohol, that is, what being inebriated really does to our thinking and our behavior and how it does it. And we are going to address what seems to be one of the more common questions out there, which is whether or not low to moderate amounts of drinking are better for our health than zero alcohol consumption at all. And of course we will talk about severe alcohol intake, binge drinking. We will also talk about hangover and what science says about ways to reduce the effects of hangover, either by doing things that are inoculatory, meaning before you drink or while you drink, as well as things to do if you happen to have a hangover. We will discuss some of the genetic differences for alcohol and alcoholism, and we will discuss alcohol consumption in young people and how that can be especially detrimental for reasons that I think are going to be quite surprising to most of you. My goal is that by the end of today's episode, you will have a thorough understanding of what alcohol does to your brain and body and that you will be able to make informed decisions as to whether or not you should be consuming zero, absolutely no alcohol, small to moderate amounts of alcohol, and, again, we'll define exactly what that means, small to moderate amounts, and if you or somebody else that you know is consuming excessive amounts of alcohol that are clearly detrimental to your health, some of the better routes and resources that you can use in order to remove that dependence and/or consumption. I'd like to preface all of that by saying that today's discussion is really geared toward giving you information. It is not about judging alcohol intake or lack of alcohol intake. I just want you to be able to make the most informed decision about alcohol possible. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. We've partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single-ingredient supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There, you'll see those supplements, and just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we get into today's content in detail, I just want to answer a commonly asked question about alcohol consumption and the brain, and the question that so often comes up is whether or not low to moderate amounts of alcohol, so maybe one drink a day or one or two drinks a day kind of thing, whether or not that is bad for your brain, in particular, whether or not it causes degeneration of neurons or nerve cells. Now, the reason that question comes up so often is because, for many years, it's been known that high levels of alcohol consumption, so 12 to 24 drinks per week or more, is certainly causing neurodegeneration, in particular of the so-called neocortex, the outer layers of the brain that house associative memories, that house our ability to think and plan, that house our ability to regulate our more primitive drives according to context, et cetera. So to make very clear, drinking a lot, so having, you know, three or four drinks per night every night of the week, is clearly bad for the brain. A recent study, however, finally addressed the question of whether or not low to moderate amounts of alcohol consumption can cause brain degeneration. The title of the study is Associations between alcohol consumption and gray and white matter volumes in the UK Biobank, the United Kingdom Biobank. First of all, gray matter are the neurons, it's the so-called cell bodies that house the genome of the cells, et cetera, and white matter is the connections, the fibers, the so-called axons of neurons, and it's called white matter because that tissue is surrounded by a fatty tissue called myelin, which allows nerve cells to communicate with each other very quickly. So what this study did is it looked at the brains, both the gray matter and the white matter, of more than 30,000, and even more than 35,000 generally healthy middle-aged and older adults in the United Kingdom who were drinking various amounts of alcohol. What they found was that even for people that were drinking low to moderate amounts of alcohol, so one or two drinks per day, there was evidence of thinning of the neocortex, so loss of neurons in the neocortex, and other brain regions. And I don't say this in order to cause alarm. I tell you this because they are important data because they reveal and indeed answer the question that has been burning for so long as to whether or not chronic alcohol intake can disrupt the brain even if the chronic intake is very low. Now, we should talk about what the word chronic means because many people, when they hear the word chronic, think high levels of whatever intake, okay? So they think 5 drinks a night or 10 drinks a night or people drinking every night. Now, in this study, they looked at people who, on average, were drinking one or two drinks per night. So that could be 14 drinks on the weekend, it could be one drink per night. it could be seven drinks on Friday, in other words, on average, one or two drinks per night. And I think many people out there are drinking somewhere between one and two drinks per night or day of the week on average, so that would be 7 to 14 drinks per week. So this is an important study because it says that if you're consuming even just seven glasses of wine across the week, it's likely that there is going to be some degeneration of your brain in response to that alcohol intake. Although, as mentioned earlier, we will talk about some of the things that can inoculate against some of that neuronal loss. For those of you that are interested in reading the study in more detail, we've put a link to it in the show note captions. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Levels. Levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor. One of the most important features of our immediate feelings of well-being and our ability to focus and think and move and have energy, as well as our long-term health, are our blood glucose levels. That is, our blood sugar levels. And that's because all the cells and tissues of our body and especially neurons, nerve cells, rely on glucose for fuel. I realize some of you out there are ketogenic, and, yes, you can use ketones for fuel, but the vast majority of people are using glucose for fuel in their cells. If you want to maintain energy and focus throughout the day, you want to keep that blood glucose steady and you don't want it ever to spike or to drop too much, so you need to understand how different foods and indeed how different activities impact your blood glucose. I started using Levels about a year ago as a way to understand how different foods and exercise and supplements and combinations of food and exercise and even sequencing, like when I do what, how that affects my blood glucose levels. It's been tremendously informative. It's completely reshaped when I exercise, how I exercise, when I eat relative to exercise, et cetera. So if you're interested in learning more about Levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself, go to levels.link/huberman. Again, that's levels.link/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've talked many times on the podcast about the fact that getting a great night's sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and all forms of performance. And one of the key variables in getting a great night's sleep is making sure that your sleeping environment is the right temperature. Indeed, your brain and body have to drop by one to three degrees in order to get into sleep and to stay in deep sleep throughout the night. If your room is too hot or if you're running too warm, you will wake up. In fact, that is why you wake up in the morning. With Eight Sleep, you can adjust the temperature of your mattress and your overall sleeping environment and customize that to you. I started using Eight Sleep some time ago and it's just been a total game changer. I program mine so that there's a subtle drop in the temperature of my mattress at the beginning of the night and then it gets progressively cooler and then it heats up toward morning. It even has this nice little vibrate feature so it wakes me up by vibrating the mattress a little bit. And, of course, that mattress is warming and warming is the way that we wake up. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, go to eightsleep.com/huberman. Check out their Pro Pod Cover and save up to $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality, and they also have some unique characteristics. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses can be worn while running or cycling. If you get sweaty, they won't fall off your face, and they're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I can't even remember that I'm wearing them. I wear ROKA eyeglasses when I read at night, so I wear their readers, and I wear sunglasses at various times throughout the day. The great thing about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is that even though they were designed for athletic performance, they have a terrific aesthetic. So unlike a lot of so-called performance glasses that make people look like cyborgs, in my opinion, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are the sort that you could wear out to dinner or that you could wear to work. They have a terrific aesthetic. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com, and enter the code huberman at checkout. Let's talk about alcohol, and let's just acknowledge that human beings have been consuming alcohol for thousands of years. If you look at the archeological evidence from Mesopotamia, you'll find that 5,000 years ago, people had wine vessels. Or if you want to know when people first started distilling alcohol, much to people's surprise, that did not first take place in Ireland, and that's not a joke about the Irish. You'll see a lot of claims online that the Irish were the first to distill alcohol, but, in fact, they were not. It was the Chinese that were the first to distill alcohol, and that took place in China in the first century. Alcohol has been used for nutritional purposes, so there are cultures that believe, and indeed still believe, that the calories in alcohol are useful, although later we'll talk about how alcohol calories are indeed empty calories and what an empty calorie really is, why it's called empty. Alcohol has been used for medicinal purposes because indeed it does kill bacteria, and, as you'll soon find out, the fact that it kills bacteria, because that is absolutely true, it also kills the good bacteria in your gut, and the destruction of that good bacteria in your gut can lead to things like leaky gut syndrome and has all sorts of issues, and there are ways to deal with those issues and we'll talk about those. So alcohol has been used for medicinal purposes, it's been used to clean surfaces, it's used in my laboratory in order to make up so-called reagents to do our experiments, but most humans have been consuming alcohol in order to change their internal state, in order to feel differently than they would otherwise. That feeling of being drunk or inebriated or tipsy or lightheaded is something that many, not all, but many humans seem to enjoy and pursue even though, typically, it leads to a feeling of being less happy, less motivated, more stressed, et cetera, when the alcohol wears off. That's pretty incredible, right? I mean, we're talking about a substance that people have been highly motivated to pursue, that are still highly motivated to pursue, to create and to consume, that they'll spend money on, and that's despite the fact that it makes them feel good and then it makes them feel lousy. Now, some of you might be saying, "Well, I drink, but I don't drink to excess and, therefore, I don't feel lousy. I feel good when I drink and then it wears off and it allows me to get through my evening, and then the next morning I'm ready to go." Okay, that very well may be true, I believe those people, and, as I mentioned in the beginning of the episode, I'm not here to demonize alcohol in any way. But I do want to point out what alcohol is and how it creates the effects that it does, and then I want to talk about what those effects are when you engage in consuming alcohol even as often as one or two nights per week, or let's say you're just somebody who has a drink or two on Friday, maybe a few more on Saturday, or maybe you're somebody who consumes all your alcohol one night per week or one night per month. We'll talk about how that's affecting your biology. So let's address what alcohol is and how it affects the cells and tissues and organs of your body. Then we'll take a look at some of the epidemiology, that is, how many people are consuming alcohol and how much they're drinking. And then you will be able, I think, to get a good sense of how the alcohol that you're drinking, if you're drinking any at all, is impacting your brain and body and the choices you might want to make about how and when to drink alcohol, or even if you want to eliminate alcohol altogether. Okay, so some basic chemistry and biology of alcohol, and, again, I'll make this very clear even if you don't have a chemistry and biology background. Because of the structure of alcohol, it is what's called both water-soluble and fat-soluble. Translated into what's meaningful for you, what that means is when you drink alcohol, it can pass into all the cells and tissues of your body. It has no trouble just passing right into those cells. So unlike a lot of substances and drugs that actually attach to the surface of cells, to receptors, as they're called, little parking spots, and then trigger a bunch of downstreams, like, domino cascades of effects, alcohol actually has its own direct effects on cells because it can really just pass into those cells. So it's water- and fat-soluble, and the fact that it can pass into so many organs and cells so easily is really what explains its damaging effects. I should mention that there are three main types of alcohol. There's isopropyl, methyl, and ethyl alcohol, and only the last one, ethyl alcohol or ethanol, is fit for human consumption. However, it is still toxic, okay? It produces substantial stress and damage to cells. I'd love to be able to tell you otherwise, but that's just a fact. Ethanol produces substantial damage to cells, and it does that because when you ingest ethanol, it has to be converted into something else because it is toxic to the body. And there's a molecule inside of all of us called NAD, and you may have heard of NAD because it's quite popular, there's a lot of discussion about NAD in the longevity literature right now. NAD is present in all our cells from birth until death. The levels of NAD tend to go down across the lifespan. There are ideas that increasing levels of NAD may extend lifespan. A lot of that is still controversial, or, at least we should say, is ongoing in terms of the research. But nonetheless, when you ingest ethanol, NAD and related biochemical pathways are involved in converting that ethanol into something called acetaldehyde, it's broken down into acetaldehyde. And if you thought ethanol was bad, acetaldehyde is particularly bad. Acetaldehyde is poison. It will kill cells. It damages and kills cells and it is indiscriminate as to which cells it damages and kills. Now, that's a problem, obviously, and the body deals with that problem by using another component of the NAD biochemical pathway to convert acetaldehyde into something called acetate. Acetate is actually something that your body can use as fuel. And that process of going from ethanol to acetaldehyde to acetate does involve the production of a toxic molecule, right? Again, acetaldehyde is really toxic. And NAD, and if we want to get technical, it's the NAD-to-NADH ratio, and that chemical step is the rate-limiting step to ethanol's metabolism. What does that mean for you? What that means is that if your body can't do this conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde to acetate fast enough, well, acetaldehyde will build up in your body and cause more damage, so it's important that your body be able to do this conversion very quickly. And the place where it does that is within the liver, and cells within the liver are very good at this conversion process, but they are cells and they are exposed to the acetaldehyde in the conversion process, and so cells within the liver really take a beating in the alcohol metabolism events. So the key thing to understand here is that when you ingest alcohol, you are, yes, ingesting a poison, and that poison is converted into an even worse poison in your body, and some percentage of that worse poison is converted into a form of calories that you can use to generate energy, generate ATP. And the reason why alcohol is considered empty calories is because that entire process is very metabolically costly, but there's no real nutritive value of the calories that it creates. You can use it for immediate energy, but it can't be stored in any kind of meaningful or beneficial way. It doesn't provide any vitamins, it doesn't provide any amino acids, it doesn't provide any fatty acids, it's truly empty calories. I know some people talk about sugar is empty calories, but sugar actually is a far better fuel source than alcohol or acetate. But nonetheless, when you ingest alcohol, some percentage is being shuttled into a worse poison and some is being shuttled into a fuel source. Now, the important thing to understand is that it is the poison, the acetaldehyde itself, that leads to the effect of being inebriated or drunk. I think most people don't realize that, that being drunk is actually a poison-induced disruption in the way that your neural circuits work. And so we should ask ourselves, like, which neural circuits, what brain areas, what body areas are involved in feeling drunk or inebriated? Now, in thinking about this state of being tipsy or happy or really drunk or a little bit drunk, I want to mention something that I think most people aren't aware of, and that's the fact that for people that are regular drinkers or that have a genetic predisposition to alcoholism, when they drink, they tend to feel very energized and very good for longer periods of time. Again, people who have a genetic predisposition to alcohol or people who are chronic drinkers or even just, if you recall, chronic doesn't have to mean a ton of alcohol but they're drinking one or two per night or they're every other night type drinkers or Thursday through Sunday drinkers, those people typically experience an increase in alertness and mood when they drink, whereas occasional drinkers will have a briefer, meaning less long-lasting, period of feeling good when they drink and then more quickly transition into a state in which they're tired or they start losing motor skills, they start slurring their speech. I also want to emphasize this is distinct from tolerance. We'll talk about tolerance later and exactly what tolerance means. But I really want to highlight the fact that when people ingest this poison, 'cause indeed it is poison, the range of effects is very different, and you can reliably predict who are the people with a predisposition to alcoholism and who are the people who are more regular drinkers by the contour or the timing of the different effects. And, again, people who tend to feel more alert and excited every time they drink, they tend to get a real lift, they become kind of the life of the party and that lasts a long while, those people are the ones that really have to be careful about predisposition for alcoholism. And those people also need to be careful about their drinking and the amount of drinking that they're doing, even if they're not full-blown alcoholics. Now, of course, people who are ingesting alcohol who are not accustomed to drink alcohol have to be concerned about drinking alcohol for other reasons, because it can impair motor function and judgment, et cetera. But in thinking about the biochemical effects of alcohol and what it's doing to the body, what it's doing in all cases is it's consumed into the gut, right? Goes into the stomach, the liver immediately starts this conversion that we talked about before of ethanol to acetaldehyde to acetate, and some amount of acetaldehyde and acetate are making it into the brain, it crosses the blood-brain barrier. Again, the brain has this fence around it that we call the blood-brain barrier or the BBB. Many things, most things, thankfully, can't pass across the blood-brain barrier, but alcohol, because it's water- and fat-soluble, just cruises right across this fence and into the milieu, the environment of the brain, which is made up of a couple different major cell types, neurons, nerve cells, and so-called glial cells, which are in between the nerve cells, and we'll talk about the effects on each of those soon. So what happens when alcohol gets into the brain that makes us feel tipsy or drunk and, in some people, makes people feel really especially energized and happy? Well, alcohol is indiscriminate in terms of which brain areas it goes to. Again, it doesn't bind to particular receptors, but it does seem to have a propensity or an affinity for particular brain areas that are involved in certain kinds of thinking and behavior. So one of the first things that happens is that there's a slight, at least after the first drink or second drink, there's a slight suppression in the activity of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. This is an area of your neocortex that's involved in thinking and planning and, perhaps above all, in suppression of impulsive behavior. So if you go to a party and they're serving alcohol and people are consuming drinks, what you'll notice is that a few minutes into that party, the volume of people's voices will increase, and that's because people are simply not paying attention to their voice modulation, and as other people start speaking more loudly, other people are speaking more loudly. We've all had this experience, right, of going to a party and then you step outside for a moment and you go, "Oh, my goodness, I was shouting." You come home, the next day, you've got a sore throat. It might be that you picked up some sort of bug, some virus or something, but oftentimes it's just the fact that you've been shouting all night just to be heard because as the prefrontal cortex shuts down, people stop modulating their level of speech quite as much. You also notice that people start gesticulating more, people will start standing up and sitting down more, they'll start walking around more, if there's music on, people might spontaneously start dancing. All of this is because these areas of the prefrontal cortex normally are providing what's called top-down inhibition. They are releasing a neurotransmitter called GABA onto various parts of the brain that are involved in impulsive motor behavior and thought patterns, and as you shut down the prefrontal cortex, that GABAergic suppression of impulses starts to be released, so people will say things that they want to say without so much forethought about what they're saying, or they might do things that they want to do without really thinking it through quite as much or they might not even remember thinking it through at all, or experience, I should say, thinking it through at all. We haven't talked about blacking out yet and the effects of alcohol on memory, but as long as we're there, I'll just tell you that alcohol has a very strong effect in suppressing the neural networks that are involved in memory formation and storage. This is why oftentimes we forget the events of a night out if we've been drinking. One of the more important things to know about the effects of alcohol in the brain is this disruption in top-down inhibition, but, also, that areas of the brain that are involved in flexible behavior, sort of considering different options, like I could do A or I could do B, I could say this to them or I could say that, I could say it in that way or I could say it in this way, this might be a little more tactful, those brain areas basically shut down entirely and people just tend to say what they want to say. So the key thing to understand is that when people drink, the prefrontal cortex and top-down inhibition is diminished, that is, habitual behavior and impulsive behavior starts to increase. Now, what's interesting is this is true in the short term, so after people have one or two, maybe three or four drinks, but it's also true that the more often that people drink, there are changes in the very circuits that underlie habitual and impulsive behavior. This is really important to highlight, so much so that I want to drill into it a bit more deeply. For the person that drinks, say, every Thursday night or every Friday night or goes out only on Saturdays but every Saturday, there's evidence that there are changes in the neural circuits of the brain that control habitual behavior and impulsive behavior, and they are modified and strengthened in ways that make those people more habitual and more impulsive outside the times in which they are drinking, and when they drink, impulsive and habitual behavior tends to increase even further. This is something that's not often talked about when discussing the effects of alcohol. I mean, we all know the effects of being drunk can be bad, right? Can be bad in terms of judgment, motor coordination, certainly driving drunk is a terrible thing, get you or other people killed and so on. But rarely do we hear about the changes in neural circuits from just one or two nights of regular drinking. Again, chronic drinking doesn't necessarily mean every day and every night. It could be the person that simply drinks every Thursday or every Friday or just once a week has three or four drinks or maybe even a few more. That person is going to experience a decrease in this top-down inhibition, so an increase in impulsivity and habitual behavior, because the brake on those behaviors has been removed while they're drinking, but also changes in the very neural circuits that allow habitual and impulsive behavior to occur more readily even when they're not drinking. And if you want to know the actual substrate for that, the cellular substrate, I can briefly describe it. It's really interesting. Again, you don't need to know any biology to understand this. What it does is it increases the number of synapses, the actual points of connection in the neural circuits that control habitual behavior. So there's literally a growth of the neural circuits in your brain that lead to existing habit execution, all right, the performance of things you already know how to do, and a reduction in the neural circuits, or I should say a reduction in the number of synapses, of the contacts, within the neural circuits that are controlling behavior. So this, again, is a not often discussed aspect of alcohol intake. Fortunately, it is reversible. So in animals or humans that undertake a period of abstinence of anywhere from two to six months, these neural circuits return to normal except in cases where people have been chronically drinking large volumes of alcohol for many, many years. And in those cases, while there is some recovery of brain circuitry after people get sober, meaning completely sober, they stop drinking entirely, there is evidence of long-lasting impact of heavy alcohol usage throughout the lifespan. But, of course, this doesn't mean that anyone that's suffering from alcoholism or that used to should not continue to focus on their health. You absolutely should. All is not lost. But for people that have been drinking for a lot of years, maybe you went to college and you drank a lot in those years and your neural circuits changed, if there's a period in which you don't drink alcohol, again, from two to six months and ideally longer, those neural circuits can then be remodified back to their original state. So let's consider some of the other neurochemical effects of alcohol in the brain and body. And, again, for right now, we're confining the conversation to people that are drinking, on average, one or two drinks per night. Now, some people might think that two drinks per night is a lot, and a lot of that will depend on body weight. So for instance, people who weigh 110 pounds, for them to ingest two alcoholic drinks is going to be substantially different in terms of the biochemical effects than somebody who weighs 220 pounds. Of course tolerance will also factor into this, genetic background will also factor into this, and indeed whether or not people have eaten will factor into this, so there are a lot of factors and we'll talk about that. For the time being, if you're curious about how food impacts the effects of alcohol and your feelings of being drunk, you may have heard, for instance, that if somebody's inebriated and they want to sober up, they should eat something. Turns out that does not work. Here's how it does work, however. If you eat something prior to drinking alcohol or while ingesting alcohol, it will slow the absorption of alcohol into the bloodstream. In other words, you won't feel as drunk as fast, for many of you, this probably comes as no surprise, in particular, if that meal includes carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, okay?. The inclusion of all three major macronutrients seems to slow the absorption of alcohol into the bloodstream far more than having any one of those or two of those macronutrients present. Now, if you are already inebriated or you've had a glass of wine or a beer and you eat something, chances are that alcohol has already made it into your bloodstream because it moves into the bloodstream so quickly. Again, it's fat-soluble and water-soluble, so within minutes, right? If you have an empty stomach, within five to 10 minutes, that alcohol is going to be within your bloodstream and distributed throughout your body, maybe even faster depending on the type of alcohol and your metabolism. But if you're already drunk and you eat something, it's not going to sober you up more quickly, but it certainly will blunt the effects of any additional alcohol that you might consume. And if you're somebody who is concerned about getting too drunk too quick, even from a small amount of alcohol, having some food in your gut can certainly be beneficial. Now, that's food and alcohol and the absorption of alcohol, but let's go back to talking about the biochemical and neurochemical effects of alcohol on the brain. We talked about top-down inhibition, and we talked about habitual and impulsive behavior circuitry. There are also dramatic changes in the activity of neurons that control the release of so-called serotonin. Serotonin is a neuromodulator. It changes the activity of neural circuits and many neural circuits, in particular, those involved in mood and feelings of well-being. Recently, there's been a lot of interest in serotonin because of a study that was released that showed pretty conclusively that serotonin levels can't really explain depression and depression-like symptoms. I want to make it very clear that although that study did show that serotonin levels are not necessarily associated with depression, the study was interpreted by many to mean that SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, which have the net effect of increasing serotonins, these are things like Prozac, et cetera, that those drugs are somehow not helpful because they increase serotonin and serotonin isn't involved in depression. That logic doesn't really hold together so I'm going to use this as an opportunity to just clarify what really occurred there, and then we'll talk about how serotonin relates to alcohol consumption in things like feeling good and in depression. The key thing is this, SSRIs can help alleviate depression. That's right. SSRIs can help alleviate depression. They are often, not always, associated with side effects, dosage is very important, et cetera. But they probably support relief from depression by changing neural circuits, not necessarily by increasing serotonin itself. That is, increasing serotonin with these drugs likely changed the neural circuits involved in mood, allowing people to feel better through so-called neuroplasticity, which is the brain's ability to change itself in response to experience. So there's a bit of confusion, and, again, I'm using this episode on alcohol to highlight some of the confusion because I think it's timely, because the study just came out and there's a lot of chatter about this out there that when people are depressed, it's not necessarily because serotonin levels are low. However, if serotonin levels are increased with things like Prozac, Zoloft, and other SSRIs, oftentimes there is, yes, a relief from depression, but that's probably not because of restoring serotonin levels, per se. It's probably because serotonin facilitates the changes in neural circuits that need to occur in order for people to feel elevated mood, okay? So, again, that's a bit of a tangent and aside, but I do think it's a vital one for people to know about. Again, if you're thinking about taking SSRIs or you're currently taking them and you've heard this news, definitely talk to your doctor. Again, there is great utility for some of these SSRIs, and, also, in conditions like OCD, they've been shown to be very beneficial, so we really don't want to throw SSRIs out as a potentially valuable treatment. Getting back to the effects of alcohol on serotonin, it's very clear, beyond any doubt, that many of the circuits in the brain that are involved in mood and feelings of well-being and also sort of self-image and how we see ourselves employ the neuromodulator serotonin, and alcohol, when we ingest it and it's converted into acetaldehyde, it goes and that acetaldehyde acts as a toxin at the very synapses, the connections between these serotonergic neurons and lots of other neurons. In other words, when we ingest alcohol, the toxic effects of alcohol disrupt those mood circuitries, at first making them hyperactive. That's right, making them hyperactive. This is why people become really talkative, people start to feel really good after a few sips of alcohol, at least most people do. And then as they ingest more alcohol or as that alcohol wears off, serotonin levels and the activity of those circuits really starts to drop, and that's why people feel less good. And typically what they do, they go and get another drink and they attempt to kind of restore that feeling of well-being and mood. Now, typically what happens is that as people ingest the third and fourth, maybe even the fifth drink, there's an absolute zero chance of them recovering that energized mood, right? Most people, as they drink more and more, will now start to feel more and more suppressed. The forebrain is now shutting down quite a lot, a lot of the motor cortical areas that control coordinated movement and deliberate movement start to shut down, so people start to slur their speech, people start to shuffle their feet, people forget their posture, people start to lean on things, people start passing out on couches. There's a great depression, not depression of the psychiatric depression sort, but a depression of alertness and arousal, and eventually people will pass out. Now, I said most people because there's a subset of people that have gene variants or who are chronic drinkers or who are chronic drinkers and have gene variants that, as they ingest the third and fourth and fifth drink, what happens? They become more alert, they start talking more, they feel great, they have all sorts of ideas about the fun they could have that night. And they're the ones that, if you've ever fallen asleep at a party for whatever reason, or you're getting tired and you're yawning, you're looking around the room and, like, these people are still drinking and partying and they're having what seems to be this amazing time, often, not always, those are the future alcoholics in the room, or those are the people that have a genetic predisposition for alcoholism, or those are the chronic drinkers, the people who have built up enough of a tolerance or who have the chemical genetic makeup such that increasing amounts of alcohol make them feel better and better and better. And of course, they, too, have a threshold beyond which their nervous system will start to get diminished and they'll pass out, fall over, et cetera, but that threshold is way, way higher than it is for most people. Now, this is important to understand, and it's important to understand because I think everyone should know and recognize their own predisposition and kind of risk in terms of developing alcoholism. It's also important to understand because it relates to the phenomenon of blackout. Many people think that blacking out is passing out, but blackout drunk is when people drink and they're talking and doing things, sometimes, sadly or tragically, they'll often drive home or walk home or they'll hop on a bicycle and ride home or they'll go swimming in the ocean, all, of course, very dangerous activities to do when people are really drunk, or even a little bit drunk in some cases. So these people will do these sorts of things and they do them because they have the energy to do them and they feel good while doing them, but they are doing them while the activity of neurons in the hippocampus, which is involved in memory formation, are completely shut off. And this is why the next day, you tell them, "Hey, maybe we should talk about what happened last night." Like, "What happened last night?" You said, "Well, do you remember going to the party?" "Yeah, I know, it was great. We did this, we did this." "And then what?" And it's very clear all of a sudden that they have no recollection of all the things they were doing despite being awake. Now, I wish I could tell you that there's some sort of blood test or other biomarker or even a fingerprint test that would allow you to determine whether or not you have a propensity to be one of these drinkers that has a predisposition for alcoholism. And if you've ever been blackout drunk, and certainly if you've been blackout drunk more than a few times, you should be quite concerned. And as we talk more about the more chronic effects and long-lasting effects of alcohol consumption a little bit later in the episode, I think it'll become clear as to why you should be concerned. But in any case, there is something that can tell you whether or not you might be in that category versus likely not in that category, and I alluded to this a couple of times already, but I want to be really clear that when people drink, no matter who you are, initially, there's that shutting down of those prefrontal cortical circuits, there's a gradual shutting down of the circuits that control memory, but then people divide into these two bins. And these two bins are the people who, after more than a couple of drinks, start to feel sedated, and the people who, after more than a few drinks, do not start to feel sedated. Now, of course there's going to be differences created by how quickly people are drinking, whether or not they're combining different types of alcohol, the types of alcohol, et cetera, but in general, that can predict whether or not you're somebody who has a predisposition for alcoholism or not. One also very interesting finding is that alcohol changes the relationship between what's called the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland and the adrenals. Now, the hypothalamus is a small collection of neurons about the size of a large gumball that sits above the roof of your mouth, and it houses neurons that are responsible for some incredible aspects of our behavior and our mindset, things like rage, things like sex drive, things like temperature regulation, very primitive functions, including appetite, thirst, et cetera. Alcohol, because it can go anywhere in the brain, remember it's water- and fat-soluble, has effects on the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus normally provides very specific signals to what's called the pituitary gland. This is a little gland that actually sticks out of the brain, but it receives instructions from the hypothalamus. And then the pituitary releases hormones into the bloodstream that go and talk to your adrenals, and your adrenal gland sit right above your kidneys in your lower back. And the adrenals release, as the name suggests, adrenaline, also called epinephrine, and also a molecule called cortisol, which is involved in the kind of longer-term stress response and it has some healthy effects, too, on the immune system. Okay, so the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, I know that's a mouthful, you don't need to remember the names, but the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis maintains your physiological balance of what you perceive as stressful and what you don't perceive as stressful. People who drink regularly, so this, again, could be just one or two drinks per night or it could be somebody that drinks just on Fridays or just on Saturdays or maybe just on the weekend, two to four drinks, well, those people experience changes in their hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis that result in more cortisol, more of this so-called stress hormone, being released at baseline, when they are not drinking. This is really important. People who drink a bit, and when I say a bit, I don't mean one or two sips or even a glass of wine every once in a while. I mean, again, people that are maybe having one drink a night with dinner and maybe on the weekend a few more. Again, I offer a bunch of different patterns to explain how it could also be two or three drinks on Friday or six drinks only on Saturday. Well, all of those groups experience increases in cortisol release from their adrenal glands when they are not drinking, and as a consequence, they feel more stressed and more anxiety when they aren't drinking. This is a seldom talked about effect of alcohol because so often we hear about the immediate effects of alcohol, right? And we've been talking about some of those effects, effects like reducing the amount of stress. I mean, how many times have we heard somebody say, "Ugh, I need a drink." And then they have a drink and they're, like, calmed down, now they can shake off the thoughts about the day's work they can start to think about things in a maybe more grounded or rational way, or at least they believe that, or they can somehow just relax themselves. Well, while that very well may be true, that it can relax them, when they are not drinking, that level of cortisol that's released at baseline has increased substantially. Again, this relates to a defined neural circuit between brain and body, and it has to do with the ratio of cortisol to some of the other hormones involved in the stress response. We'll provide a reference to the study that describes how all of this works for those of you that really want to delve into it, but let's go back to this issue of those who are prone to alcoholism versus those who are not. Remember, there are people who have genetic variants, meaning genes that they inherited from their parents, that make it more likely that they will become alcoholics. But there are also people who drink often who start to experience this increase in alertness the longer they drink across the night. Part of that effect, we think, is because of changes in this hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. So alcohol is kind of a double hit in this sense. It's causing changes in our brain circuitry and neurochemistry that, at the time in which we're inebriated, are detrimental, and it's causing changes in neural circuitry that persist long past the time in which we're experiencing the feeling of being tipsy or drunk. Now, again, I don't want to demonize alcohol. I'm not saying, oh, you know, if you have a glass of wine now and again or you drink a beer now and again or even have, you know, a mixed drink now and again or a shot that that's necessarily terrible for you. I certainly do not want that to be the message. What I'm saying is that if people are ingesting alcohol chronically, even if it's not every night, there are well-recognized changes in neural circuits, there are well-recognized changes in neurochemistry within the brain, and there are well-recognized changes in the brain-to-body stress system that generally point in three directions, increased stress when people are not drinking, diminished mood and feelings of well-being when people are not drinking, and, as you'll soon learn, changes in the neural circuitry that cause people to want to drink even more in order to get just back to baseline or the place that they were in terms of their stress modulation and in terms of their feelings of mood before they ever started drinking in the first place. So again, I don't want to demonize alcohol, but I do want to emphasize that there are long-term plastic changes, meaning changes in neural circuitry and hormone circuitry, that, across a period of several months and certainly across a period of years of the sorts of drinking patterns I described, which I think, for most people, are going to sound, like, pretty typical, right? I mean, nothing that I described so far was about drinking a case a night or about binging on alcohol in the way that we often hear about it in the news. These are pretty common patterns of alcohol consumption. I mean, all you have to do is board a transatlantic flight or actually go to an airport on a Sunday afternoon in a sunny area of the US and, you know, people are having three, four, five, six beers, et cetera. Again, personal choice is personal choice. I'm not telling you what to do. But it's very clear that those sorts of drinking patterns are changing neural circuitry and they're changing hormone circuitry, and I'd love to be able to tell you that they're changing them for the better, but they simply are not. They're actually changing them for the worse, and worse is defined as making people less resilient to stress, higher levels of baseline stress, and lower mood overall. Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens, AKA AG1, is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin and mineral needs, and it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system. It also supports the so-called gut-brain axis, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus, and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 with every order. And, of course, vitamin D3 K2 are vital for all sorts of things like hormone health and metabolic health and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. Now, I've been talking a little bit about genetic predisposition, but there are a couple of important points I'd like to make about that. First of all, what sorts of genes are involved in setting someone down the path of alcoholism or not? Well, it should come as no surprise that the genes that chronic alcohol usage modifies, they tend to fall primarily in the pathways related to genetic control over serotonin receptors, GABA receptors, remember that top-down inhibition and the involvement of GABA, and, no surprise, the HPA, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. All of those, of course combined with environment, they combine with patterns of abuse, right, we know that if you're in a social setting where a lot of people are drinking, the likelihood that you're going to drink is much higher, social pressures, trauma, right? Some people will use alcohol to self-medicate to try and turn off their thinking or to deal with trauma, et cetera. So they combine with the environment, but the genes that are in the serotonin synthesis and receptor synthesis pathway, GABA and HPA axis, combine with environmental pressures to give rise to alcohol use disorders. So there's a fairly coherent picture that we have here, right? This is not a case where, for instance, people that have a lot of the enzyme for metabolizing alcohol, which we'll talk about in a minute, alcohol dehydrogenase, it's not like they are necessarily the people that become alcoholics, whereas certainly in certain cultures, certain Asian cultures in particular, there are gene differences that lead them to have low levels of alcohol dehydrogenase. There are actually people who have so little alcohol dehydrogenase that when they ingest alcohol, they get very red and they just feel sick. So if you're somebody that has a sip of alcohol and you just feel horrible, it makes you feel nauseous, chances are you have gene variants that create a situation where you're not making very much alcohol dehydrogenase. You just simply can't metabolize alcohol so you just get a rapid buildup of the toxic effects of alcohol, the acetaldehyde, you're not converting it into those empty calories. But in cultures where you have a lot of genetic variants and genes expressed in people where they have a lot of alcohol dehydrogenase, sure, they can drink more, and they're converting more of that alcohol from its toxic form to a non-toxic form, and, yes, of course, you will observe more alcoholism in those communities because they're drinking more, but I do want to emphasize that the environmental factors are playing a strong role there, too, because if you can drink more, you're likely to drink more. If you're somebody that feels sick immediately from drinking, it's likely that you're not going to engage in alcohol consumption, especially if these things are genetically related, and, of course, genes and culture and location in the world tend to run together. So do you have the gene for alcoholism? Well, there isn't one single gene. Chances are if you have an immediate relative who's a chronic abuser of alcohol or several relatives who are chronic abusers of alcohol, well, that's going to predispose you to be an alcoholic. But since you don't know which genes you express unless you do genetic testing, and those things are available but most people aren't doing that, this assay, if you will, and it's not an assay, as we say, an assay is a test that you run in the lab to determine something, and it's not one that I recommend that you go drink in order to do, but if you've noticed that you or somebody else is somebody who can drink a lot throughout the night and have increased energy and can just drink and drink and drink, and especially if there's blackout episodes, not remembering things the next day despite being alert throughout the entire night and so on, well, then I would be very concerned that you might actually have a genetic variant predisposing you to alcoholism. The other thing that predisposes people to abuse of alcohol is age. People who start drinking at younger ages are greatly predisposed to developing alcohol dependence regardless of your family history of alcoholism. Okay, so I'm going to repeat that. People who start drinking younger are at great risk for developing alcoholism even if they don't have alcoholism in their family. Now, of course, you don't have to be an epidemiologist to understand that if you grow up in a family of drinkers and alcohol is everywhere, and especially if there's peer pressure or lack of oversight, then there's going to be a higher tendency, or a higher probability, I should say, that you will start drinking at a younger age. However, even people that grow up nowhere near their relatives, if they start drinking at a young age, so for instance, at 13 or younger or 14 or 15, there's a much higher probability that they're going to develop a long-lasting dependence on alcohol. People who take their first sip of alcohol later, 15, 16, or one would hope even later, I can say one would hope 'cause I'm now of that, you know, age and generation where, you know, you think about all the things that young people do, and you go, "Oh, gosh, if they only would wait or if they only would abstain." You know? It's just what happens. I don't know, there's some neural circuit for that that I can't explain yet. But people who, for instance, drink only once they reach legal age of drinking, which in the US, I believe in every state is 21 years old, if they take their first drink at 21, the probability that they'll go on to develop full-blown alcohol dependence or alcohol use disorder, as it's called, AUD, is very low. Now, a subset of them will because they have such a strong genetic predisposition or maybe life circumstances create a pattern in which they become a chronic drinker. But I found this very interesting. Genes matter, but also the age in which somebody starts drinking really matters. Now, whether or not that's because there are changes in neural circuitry as a consequence of that drinking that make people want to seek out more and more alcohol, or whether or not there's some other effect, maybe it's a change in hormones, et cetera, that predisposes those young drinkers to become chronic drinkers or even full-blown alcoholics, certainly developing alcohol use disorder. There's a definition for that. We can talk about it. It involves the amount of drinking over a certain period of time, et cetera. So it's very clear that drinking early in life creates a propensity for the development of alcohol use disorder later in life. And while there is a genetic component to developing alcohol use disorder, I find it very interesting that if people who have those gene variants delay their onset of drinking, well, then the probability that they'll develop full-blown alcohol use disorder drops as well. So again, it's genes and environments. It's not an either/or and there's no single gene for alcoholism. Well, I promise you I will also talk about some of the documented positive effects of alcohol. Although they are very few and far between, they do exist. But before I do that, I would be remiss if I didn't emphasize some more of the terrible things that alcohol does and the way that it does it. And for those of you that enjoy alcohol, again, I'd like to say I feel guilty about telling you this because I know how much some people enjoy a good drink every once in a while, and I say a good drink because some people do like the taste of alcohol. I suppose I lucked out in that I don't really like the taste of alcohol and that it just puts me to sleep, but I know that people do enjoy it. And I do want to point out that there is zero evidence that, you know, provided somebody is of drinking age, certainly not in the stage of brain development, that having one drink or two drinks every now and again, meaning every three or four weeks or once a month, that is not going to cause major health concerns or major health issues for most people. I suppose if you have zero or very little alcohol dehydrogenase, it might make you feel sick, but then you're probably not the kind of person that's going to be drinking at all. So, again, if you enjoy alcoholic drinks, I'm not trying to take them away from you by any means, but you should know what drinking does if you're consuming it in this kind of typical chronic pattern, as we can now refer to it, which is that one or two a night or a few stacked up on Friday and maybe three or four on Saturday, this kind of pattern of drinking, which is quite common. And one of the more serious effects that we should think about is the impact on the so-called gut-brain axis, or for sake of today's discussion, the gut-liver-brain axis. I don't think the gut-liver-brain axis has ever been discussed on this podcast, maybe any podcast. Although at the moment I say that, you know, the gut-liver-brain axis, people are going to come after me with, I suppose, gut, liver, and brains. In any event, you have a brain. You have a gut. That gut runs from your throat down to the end of your intestine. Your gut and your brain communicate by way of nerve cells, neurons and nerve connections, the vagus nerve in particular, and by way of chemical signaling. Your gut also communicates by way of chemical signaling and, believe it or not, by way of neural signaling, too, to your liver. And, as we talked about earlier, the liver is the first site in which alcohol is broken down or metabolized into its component parts. The liver is also communicating with the brain through chemical signaling and neural signaling, so we have the gut-liver-brain axis. And what you find is that people who ingest alcohol at any amount are inducing a disruption in the so-called gut microbiome, the trillions of little microbacteria that take resident in your gut and that live inside you all the time and that help support your immune system and that literally signal by way of electrical signals and chemical signals to your brain to increase the release of things like serotonin and dopamine and regulate your mood generally in positive ways. Well, alcohol really disrupts those bacteria, and this should come as no surprise. I mean, earlier, we talked about this and it's well known, if you want to, you know, sterilize something, you want to kill the bacteria, you pour alcohol on it. And I can remember scraping myself or cutting myself or I was always injuring myself when I was a kid, and, you know, the moment they take out the peroxide, you're like, "Oh, boy, here it comes." But if there's no peroxide around and you've got a wound there and you need to clean it out, yeah, they'll use alcohol, which I do not recommend, by the way. That's one of the harshest ways to clean a wound. But for centuries, thousands of years really, alcohol has been used in order to clean things and kill bacteria. So alcohol kills bacteria and it is indiscriminate with respect to which bacteria it kills, so when we ingest alcohol and it goes into our gut, it kills a lot of the healthy gut microbiota. At the same time, the metabolism of alcohol in the liver, which you now understand, that pathway involving NAD, acetaldehyde, and acetate, that pathway is proinflammatory, so it's increasing the release of inflammatory cytokines, things like IL-6, et cetera, tumor necrosis factor alpha. If you'd like to learn more about the immune system, we did an episode all about the immune system. You can find it at hubermanlab.com. It'll teach you all the basics of what are cytokines, what are mast cells, et cetera. In any event, all these proinflammatory molecules, those are being released. You've now got disruption of the gut microbiota. As a consequence, the lining of the gut is disrupted, and you develop, at least transiently, leaky gut. That is, bacteria that exists in the gut which are bad bacteria can now pass out of the gut into the bloodstream, so you've got a two-hit kind of model here. In biology, we talk about two-hit models, that is, it's kind of a one plus one equals four, and it's generally when you hear two-hit, it's not a good thing. So you've got bad bacteria from partially broken down food moving out of the gut, the good bacteria in the gut have been killed. You might say, why doesn't the alcohol kill the bad bacteria in the gut? Well, the bad bacteria that are from partially digested food oftentimes escape the gut before the alcohol can disrupt them, and so now you've got leaks in the gut wall, you've got the release of this bad bacteria, you've got inflammatory cytokines and other things being released from the liver, and they are able to get into the brain through what's called a neuroimmune signaling. And what's really bizarre, in terms of the way that this manifests in the brain, I mean, it's not the way I would've done it, but then again, as I always say, I wasn't consulted at the design phase, and anyone who says they did, you should be very skeptical of them. The net effect of this is actually to disrupt the neural circuits that control regulation of alcohol intake, and the net effect of that is increased alcohol consumption. So this is just terrible, right? I mean, so you take in something that disrupts two systems, the gut microbiota, and it disrupts in two ways, it's killing the good gut microbiota and it's allowing the bad bacteria to move from the gut into the bloodstream, you've also got proinflammatory cytokines coming from the liver, and those converge or arrive in the brain and create a system in which the neural circuits cause more drinking. That's a bad situation. And this is why people who drink regularly, even if it's not a ton of alcohol, again, of the sorts of patterns of drinking I talked about before, and certainly for those that are chronic heavy drinkers, what you end up with is a situation in which you have inflammation in multiple places in the brain and body and the desire to drink even more and to further exacerbate that inflammation and the gut leakiness. So this is basically a terrible scenario for the gut-liver-brain axis, and it's especially prevalent in so-called alcohol use disorder, again, people that are ingesting somewhere between 12 and 24 drinks per week. For those of you that are interested in learning more about the gut-liver-brain axis and, in particular, alcohol use disorder, I'll provide a link in the show note captions. There's a wonderful review on this that details that. But on the positive side, it points to the possibility that at least some, again, at least some, of the negative effects of alcohol consumption, whether or not you're somebody who's currently ingesting alcohol or who used to ingest alcohol and is trying to so-called repair these systems of the brain and body, whether or not replenishing the gut microbiota is going to be beneficial. And we know that there are ways to do that, and we know that there's at least some promise for the ability for this system to repair itself. How does one do that? Well, I've talked before about this on the podcast, but studies done by colleagues of mine at Stanford, Justin Sonnenburg, who's been on this podcast as a guest, an amazing episode all about the gut microbiome, and his collaborator, Chris Gardner, also at Stanford School of Medicine, have explored not alcoholism, but what are ways to improve the gut microbiota, in particular, to reduce the production of inflammatory cytokines and to adjust what's called the inflammatome. You've heard of the genome and the proteome, et cetera. Well, the inflammatome is the total array or at least the near-total array of genes and proteins that control inflammation. How can you reduce inflammation and make that inflammatome healthier? Well, they've shown that two to four servings of fermented foods per day, and here, I'm not referring to fermented alcohol. I'm talking about low-sugar fermented foods, so things like kimchi, sauerkraut, natto, for those of you that like Japanese food. There are others, I know, things like kefir or things like yogurts that have a lot of active bacteria, again, low-sugar varieties of all these things. Those are terrific at reducing inflammatory markers and at improving the gut microbiome. One could imagine that either inoculating oneself from some of the effects of alcohol, although I'd prefer that people just not drink alcohol chronically, frankly, or if somebody's trying to repair their gut microbiome because they ingested a lot of alcohol or because they had a lot of these inflammatory cytokines for many years or even a short period of time, regular ingestion of two to four servings of these fermented foods can be quite beneficial. I want to make it clear, that has not been examined specifically in the context of alcohol use disorder, but because a huge component of the negative effects of alcohol use disorder are based in this gut-liver-brain axis and disruption of the gut microbiome and the inflammatory cytokines, it stands to reason that things that are well-established to improve inflammation status, in other words, reduce inflammation, such as ingesting two to four servings of low-sugar fermented foods per day, makes sense in terms of trying to repair or replenish the system. One could also imagine taking probiotics or prebiotics. Certainly that would work as well, although I've sort of favored the discussion around fermented foods and replenishment of the gut microbiome mostly because there are more studies that have examined that in humans and because of the direct relationship that's been established between doing that and reducing negative markers within the inflammatome. And I should mention, along the lines of repair and recovery, I put out a question on Twitter the other day. I said, "What do you want to know about alcohol?" I got more than 1,000 questions and I'll take some more of those questions a little later in the episode. But one of the things I noticed is that many of the questions, hundreds, in fact, related to the question of, well, if I drank a lot previously, am I doomed? Can I reverse the negative effects? Or, you know, I'm trying to drink less and I'm trying to improve my health as I do that. What should I do? Well, certainly focusing a bit on the gut microbiome ought to be useful. The other thing I should mention is as people wean themselves off alcohol, even if they're not full-blown alcoholics or have alcohol use disorder, they should understand that that increase in cortisol that we talked about earlier that leads to lower stress threshold and greater feelings of anxiety and stress, that's going to be present and it's going to take some time to dissipate. So for some people, it might even just be helpful to realize that as you try and wean yourself off alcohol or maybe you even go cold turkey, that increased anxiety and feelings of stress should be expected. And in that case, I would point you to an episode that we did on master stress. You can find that, again, at hubermanlab.com. It's got a ton of behavioral, nutritional, supplementation-based, exercise-based, I suppose, exercise is behavioral, but a lot of tools. You can navigate to those easily 'cause we have timestamps so you can go right to the topic of interest. Those tools are going to be very useful in trying to clamp or control your stress. And the point here is just that some increase in stress should be expected, and it should be expected because of that increase in cortisol that occurs with even low-level consumption yet chronic alcohol consumption. Now I'd like to talk about a fairly common phenomenon, which is post-alcohol consumption malaise, also referred to as hangover. Hangover is a constellation of effects ranging from headache to nausea to what's sometimes called hangxiety, which is anxiety that follows a day of drinking. Hangxiety, I think we can understand physiologically if we think about that process of alcohol intake increasing the amount of cortisol and the ratio of cortisol to some other stress hormones. That well explains why some people wake up the day after or even the day the day after a night drinking and feel anxious and not well and stressed for reasons they don't understand. So if you're somebody who experiences hangxiety, then, again, I refer you to the master stress episode that we put out some time ago, and you can find that at hubermanlab.com, tools to deal with anxiety, tools to deal with stress, ranging, again, from behavioral to nutritional and supplement-based, et cetera. That, of course, is not justification for going out and drinking so much that you get hangxiety-induced hangover, but for those of you that are experiencing post-alcohol consumption hangxiety, as it were, that could be a useful resource because I certainly don't want anyone experiencing uncomfortable amounts of anxiety, and there are great tools and resources for that. Now, the other aspects of hangover, such as the stomachache or headache or feelings of malaise or fogginess, those could be related to a number of different things and probably are related to a number of different things. First of all, the sleep that one gets after even just one, yes, even just one glass of wine or a beer is not the same sleep that you get when you don't have alcohol circulating in your system. And not trying to be a downer here, but this was discussed in the Huberman Lab Podcast episode where I had Dr. Matthew Walker from UC Berkeley on. And, of course, Dr. Walker is a world expert in sleep, runs one of the preeminent laboratories studying sleep and its effects, wrote the incredible book, "Why We Sleep," and so on. Dr. Walker told me, and it certainly is supported by lots and lots of quality peer-reviewed studies in animals and in humans, that when alcohol is present in the brain and bloodstream that the architecture of sleep is disrupted. Slow-wave sleep, deep sleep, and rapid eye movement sleep, all of which are essential for getting a restorative night's sleep, are all disrupted. So for those of you that are drinking a glass or two of wine or having a hard liquor drink or a beer in order to fall asleep, the sleep you're getting is simply not high-quality sleep, or certainly not as high-quality as the sleep you'd be getting if you did not have alcohol in your system, Of course, when we're talking about hangover, we're talking generally about the consumption of more than just one or two drinks. Of course, for some people, one or two drinks is probably sufficient to induce hangover, but for most people it's going to be having three or four, exceeding their typical limit, as it's called. Again, not the legal limit, that's a whole other business. But when one ingests too much alcohol for them, one of the reasons they feel terrible the next day is because their sleep isn't really good sleep. In fact, it's not even sleep. It's often considered pseudosleep, or at least that's what it's called in the sleep science field, because people are in kind of a low-level, hypnotic kind of trance, it's not real sleep, there are multiple bouts of waking up, they may not even realize they're waking up multiple times. Okay, so there's the sleep-induced effects. Then there are the disrupted gut microbiome effects, some of which we talked about earlier so now you understand the mechanism of alcohol destroying good, healthy gut microbiota, which then leads to leaky gut and things of that sort. But one could imagine, again, could imagine, and there is some evidence starting to support this, that, again, ingesting low-sugar fermented foods or maybe even prebiotic or probiotics to support the gut microbiome might assist in some of the gut-related malaise associated with hangover. In other words, get those gut microbiota healthy again as quickly as possible, or maybe even before you drink, have those gut microbiota healthy. I would hope that you'd do that. I think everybody should be doing something to support their gut microbiome, whether or not it's the ingestion of low-sugar fermented foods daily or at least on a regular basis or ingestion of probiotic or prebiotic. The gut microbiome is so important for so many different things. In terms of hangover and headache, we know that that's caused by vasoconstriction, the constriction of blood vessels that tends to occur as a rebound after a night of drinking. Alcohol can act as a vasodilator, it can dilate the blood vessels. Part of that is associated with the increase in so-called parasympathetic tone. We have an autonomic nervous system and it's got a sympathetic component. These are neurons that make us more alert, and if they're very active, they make us very stressed. There's also the parasympathetic aspect of the autonomic nervous system. This is all just fancy geek speak for the parts of your brain and body, the nerve cells that make you very relaxed. When you're very relaxed, there tends to be vasodilation. It allows for more movement of blood and other things through the bloodstream, and alcohol tends to induce some vasodilation, at least in some of the capillary beds. And then when the alcohol wears off, there's vasoconstriction and people get brutal headaches. That's why some people will take aspirin or Tylenol or Advil or things like that, the sort of non-steroid anti-inflammatories. I should mention, there is a lot of literature coming out that some of these non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs are not good for us for a number of different reasons, the way they impact the liver, the way they impact the immune system, and, no surprise, the way they impact the gut microbiome. So I'm not one to tell you what medications to take or not take, but you certainly would want to do a quick web search of effects of non-steroid anti-inflammatories and aspirin before you start taking those, or stop taking those, for that matter. Generally, they will alleviate headache, but they can often have other issues, including liver issues. And keep in mind, the night after drinking, your liver has already taken a beating because of the need of the liver to convert alcohol from acetaldehyde into acetate, which is now a pathway that you well understand. So I'm not certain and, in fact, I believe it's not the greatest idea to burden your liver further through the use of things that are going to cause it to have to work harder and metabolize things if the goal is simply to alleviate a headache. There's a lot of kind of lore, old school lore about how to relieve a hangover. We already talked about how eating food won't do that but eating food will prevent the rapid absorption of even more alcohol into the bloodstream. There's the lore that one should simply ingest more alcohol. What terrible advice that is. That's just going to delay an even worse hangover. However, I'd be remiss if I didn't say that the reason that that myth came to be, or that, I should say, that truth came to be, because indeed ingesting more alcohol will alleviate a hangover but then a worse hangover will show up, the reason that came to be is because ingestion of more alcohol will cause those constricted vessels that are giving the headache to dilate again. But, of course, ingesting more alcohol to relieve a hangover is simply a bad idea. Just don't do it. I think this is called the hair of the dog approach. Maybe someone can put in the show note captions on YouTube why it's called the hair of the dog. I can come up with a few ideas but they're not going to be very good ones, and some of them would probably even be outright ridiculous. So do not ingest more alcohol simply to try and recover from a hangover. I know many people have tried that one before but that's a terrible idea. Now, one thing that you'll also hear out there is that deliberate cold exposure, for instance, taking a cold shower, might relieve hangover. I find this one particularly interesting because we've done episodes on the benefits of deliberate cold exposure. We have an entire episode about that. You can find it, again, hubermanlab.com. There are direct links to some of the tools related to deliberate cold exposure and we have an entire newsletter on deliberate cold exposure protocols that you can find on hubermanlab.com, go to our Neural Network newsletter. So those of you that are interested in ice baths and cold showers and ways to leverage those, you can find that there. What you won't find there is a description of how to use deliberate cold exposure for sake of treating hangover. But here, I went into the literature and I found something kind of interesting. There is some evidence that increasing levels of epinephrine in the bloodstream can actually help with alcohol clearance. That was very surprising to me, and I want to point out this is not a large and robust literature, but there's some evidence pointing to the fact that when levels of epinephrine, adrenaline, are raised in the brain and bloodstream, that some of the components of alcohol metabolism can be accelerated and some of the inebriating effects of alcohol can be reduced, so maybe this old school lore of taking a cold shower actually has something to it. So in thinking about the use of deliberate cold exposure in order to reduce the effects of hangover or to more rapidly clear alcohol from the brain and bloodstream, I want to be very clear and I want to emphasize your safety. The way to do that is to understand that alcohol lowers core body temperature, okay? It can make people slightly hypothermic. It's going to drop core body temperature. So if you were inebriated and you went and got into a body of water, right, a pool or a lake or something, first of all, that's extremely dangerous to do while you're inebriated, right? People drown all the time. People drown, they die as a consequence of doing that, so please don't do that. But also, if it's very cold water, your core body temperature is going to drop even further. Now, if you've heard the episodes that I've done on deliberate cold exposure previously, I've talked about how normally, when people are not ingesting alcohol, they get into an ice bath or a cold shower and their body temperature initially dips but then it rebounds and increases. That's a process that's going to occur when people do not have alcohol in their system. When you have alcohol in your system, one of the reasons that you become hypothermic is because there's a disruption in those hypothalamic brain areas, in particular, the brain area called the medial preoptic area that regulates core body temperature. So it's not so much that alcohol makes you cold, it's that alcohol disrupts the central command centers of the brain that control temperature regulation, and that leads you to be slightly hypothermic. So if you then go get into a very cold lake or you get into even a cold shower or an ice bath, there's the possibility of you going very, very far down the ladder into very hypothermic territory and that can be very dangerous. Now, in terms of dealing with hangover when the alcohol has been largely cleared from your system, well, that's where some of this old lore combines with some of the modern science and says, well, if you can spike adrenaline, and certainly getting into an ice bath or getting into a cold shower or any kind of cold body of water, provided you can do that safely, that will sharply increase your adrenaline and, I should say, your dopamine. That's been shown and we've talked about this on the podcast before. You get these long, extended increases, several hours of increases in dopamine from deliberate cold exposure. It's well-documented in humans, by the way. So one could imagine using deliberate cold exposure as a way to accelerate the recovery from hangover. Provided that's done safely, I think there's no reason to not explore that, and if you wonder what safely is and what temperatures to use, please check out the episode on deliberate cold exposure. Cold showers, therefore, might actually be one way to at least partially relieve hangover. Certainly the science from various places in the literature converged to say that. But, again, be careful, please, please, please be careful not to get into cold water when you are inebriated. It's absolutely dangerous for all the obvious reasons, and it's dangerous also for the nonobvious reasons, not the least of which is the dramatic decreases in core body temperature that can make you dangerously hypothermic. Now, how would you go about using deliberate cold exposure to accelerate recovery from hangover? Well, there, I would look to the kind of standard protocols of, you know, one to three minutes or maybe even six minutes if you can tolerate it, or if you're really cold-adapted, maybe you do seven or ten minutes in a cold shower, although that could be a lot. Most people are going to experience a sharp increase in epinephrine, in adrenaline, and a long-lasting increase in dopamine from one to three minutes of deliberate cold exposure, ideally done immersion up to the neck, again, do this safely, please, please, please, or a cold shower where you're getting under the shower as much as possible. How cold? Well, that's going to vary person to person. I suggest making it as cold as is uncomfortable such that you really want to get out but that you know you can stay in safely without, for instance, giving yourself a heart attack, because if the water is really, really cold, of course you can give yourself a heart attack. Most showers won't go that cold, although probably some will. Again, please use caution. Spike your adrenaline, spike your dopamine with deliberate cold exposure safely. Other components of hangover that could be good targets for trying to alleviate hangover, and, here, I hope you are getting the picture because it is accurate to say that hangover is a multifaceted phenomenon. It's not like one molecule and one receptor. It's a bunch of things happening in the brain and body. But is the dehydration associated with alcohol? Alcohol is a diuretic. For multiple reasons, it causes people to excrete not only water but also sodium. Sodium is an electrolyte critical for the function of neurons, so making sure that you have enough sodium, potassium, and magnesium, so-called electrolytes, is going to be important for proper brain function, bodily organ function. Even for people that have just had one or two drinks the night before, it's likely that your electrolyte balance and your fluid balance is going to be disrupted, and that's because alcohol also disrupts the so-called vasopressin pathway. I talked a lot about vasopressin and the way that it interacts with and controls different aspects of water retention and water release from the body in the form of urine in the episode on salt. So, again, I'm referring to hubermanlab.com as the site where you can find that episode on salt balance and ways to restore electrolyte balance. Having your electrolytes at the proper levels before you drink is ideal. Some people will say for every glass of alcohol that you drink, you should drink one glass of water. I would say better would be two glasses of water given the dehydrating effects of alcohol, and even better would be water with electrolytes. That certainly would set you up for a better day the next day. And if you don't manage to do that, 'cause I suppose it's kind of geeky walking around with electrolyte packets out at the bar or whatnot, although, you know, geeky, in my book, is a good thing, the next day, you could take some electrolytes upon waking, maybe even some before you go to sleep the night of drinking. So hangover's made worse by disturbed sleep, made worse by disrupted gut microbiome, made worse by disrupted electrolytes, made worse by the depletion of epinephrine and dopamine. That's why replenishing the microbiome with fermented foods, low-sugar fermented foods, that is, that's why using safe deliberate cold exposure for spiking adrenaline and for increasing dopamine, and that's why consuming electrolytes are all going to be beneficial. The folks over at examine.com, a website that I really like because it just has so much useful information, have assembled a list of things that have been proposed, purported to improve, or, I should say, to remove the effects of hangover, and, as they point out and I would like to point out over there, there isn't a lot of quality science to support the idea that any one compound can eliminate hangover. And that's probably because hangover, again, arises from multiple organs and tissues and systems in both the brain and body. Nonetheless, they have a terrific list over there of things, everything from Japanese pear fruit juice has been proposed to do this, to some other really esoteric things, even things like yohimbine. Frankly, when I look at the literature there and elsewhere, one simply cannot find the magic substance, the one herb, the one potion that can wipe away hangover. Getting rid of hangover is going to be best solved by doing a collection of a small number of very powerful things, of which I've already listed off a few. However, there are some additional things that one can do for relieving hangover, and one of them is to be very thoughtful about what sorts of alcohol one consumes. So I find this interesting. There have actually been studies of which types of alcohol lead to the greatest hangovers. There's actually a lot of legend and lore about this as well. Some people have said, for instance, that drinks that have a high sugar content lead to greater hangovers. Turns out that's not the case, or at least that's not what the science points to. If you look at the expected hangover severity, what you find is that at the bottom end of the scale, there's a drink that I'm not going to tell you, for the moment, but what you find is that near it is, for instance, beer. The consumption of beer, provided it is not overconsumption, right, it's not far beyond the tolerance of the individual, so it's one or two beers, is less likely to cause a hangover than, say, whiskey. And a glass of whiskey, or, you know, not as much whiskey as beer, of course, but a glass of whiskey, for instance, is more likely to cause hangover than gin, as it turns out. Again, this is what's fallen out of the data. And yet a glass of rum or red wine is more likely to cause a hangover than any of the other things I've mentioned so far. At the top, top, top of the list of drinks that induce hangover is brandy. And one could then say, "Well, doesn't brandy have a lot of sugar? Maybe it's the sugar that's causing hangovers." And this is something that's been, again, discussed over and over, that people say, "Oh, it's the high-sugar drinks that cause hangover." It turns out, however, that when one looks at alcoholic drinks and sugar content and hangover, at the very bottom of the list is, gosh, this makes me cringe just to think about, is ethanol diluted in orange juice. Ugh, I can't believe people actually drink this, but ethanol diluted in orange juice. So this is not vodka and orange juice, okay? Vodka was third on the list from the bottom of drinks that induce hangover. Again, this is within amounts that are comfortable for the person to drink, that they have enough experience with or that they have the body weight to tolerate without getting very, very drunk. So the point is that if it were sugar that's causing hangover, well, then the ethanol diluted in orange juice would probably be at the top of the list in terms of inducing hangover. But it's not, it's at the bottom of the list, and brandy is at the top of the list. So what you find is that what scales from ethanol diluted in orange juice to beer to vodka to gin, here, I'm ascending the hierarchy of things that cause hangover, gin, white wine, whiskey, rum, red wine, and then brandy at the peak, it's sort of the world heavyweight champion of hangover-inducing drinks, well, what's increasing are congeners within those drinks. Congeners are things like nitrites and other substances that give alcohol it's distinctive flavor and that also lead to some of the inebriating effects of alcohol. Now, then you ask, "Okay, well, what is it that these congeners are doing? And what are these nitrites doing?" And guess what? While they do have effects on the brain and on other tissues, their main effects are to disrupt the gut microbiome. So what this points to again is that having a healthy gut microbiome and perhaps ensuring that you bolster your gut microbiome the day after drinking is going to be especially important for warding off hangover or at least reducing the effects of hangover or the symptoms of hangover or both. I would love to see a study on this. I could imagine designing the study myself, although this isn't really the sorts of things my laboratory does, but can imagine some people getting probiotic and prebiotic, some regularly, some just after drinking, or low-sugar fermented foods, and see what the effects are in terms of subjective effects of hangover but also some physiological measures. I think the way to think about hangover overall is that, again, it represents a multifaceted, multi-organ, multi-tissue phenomenon, and the best way to deal with it is as a multi-cell, multi-tissue, multi-chemical phenomenon. And before I listed off some of the things that one could do in order to adjust hangover, again, the one that comes out at the top of that list, I believe, at least based on my read of the data, is to support the gut microbiome and certainly not to ingest more alcohol. And I suppose if we were to get really honest with one another and ask what's the best way to avoid a hangover, it would be to not drink in the first place. So we've covered the major effects of alcohol that lead to this state that we call drunkenness or inebriation. Again, there's a range there. You can be tipsy, people can be blackout drunk, people can be passed out drunk. We've also talked about hangover and the fact that it's a multifaceted phenomenon and recovery from hangover involves a multifaceted approach. Next I want to talk about tolerance. Tolerance to alcohol is a very interesting phenomenon. It has roots mainly in the brain and in brain systems. There's not time in the world, let alone within this podcast, to get into all the aspects of tolerance. There are more than 10 different types of tolerance. There's functional tolerance, chronic tolerance, rapid tolerance, there's metabolic tolerance, there's psychological tolerance. Let's keep it simple for sake of today's discussion. And for those of you that are interested in learning about all the different types of tolerance and aspects of tolerance, there's an excellent review, we will provide a link to this. This was published in 2021, so it's pretty recent, in the journal "Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior." Incidentally, or not so incidentally, that was the first journal I ever published in so I have a particular affection for that journal. Nonetheless, it is called Tolerance to alcohol: A critical yet understudied factor in alcohol addiction. And while this paper does include alcohol addiction in the title, it's not just about alcohol addiction. Here's the basic summary of what tolerance is. First of all, tolerance refers to the reduced effects of alcohol with repeated exposure, and it is caused mainly by changes in neurotransmitter systems in the brain that are the direct consequence of the toxicity of alcohol, that aldehyde molecule that we talked about before. There's an enormous number of chemicals that change with repeated exposure to acetaldehyde, everything from GABA to dopamine to serotonin, second messenger systems, adenosine, and on and on. Rather than go into each of those in detail, I just want to talk about the contour of the reinforcing and the tolerance-inducing effects of alcohol. What do I mean by that? Well, here we are back to our old friend, meaning the molecule that comes up over and over again in these podcast episodes, which is dopamine. Whether or not somebody has a predisposition to alcoholism or not, whether or not they're experienced drinker or not, when people initially start drinking, there are increases in dopamine, or what we call dopaminergic transmission. Dopamine is involved in motivation, in craving, it creates a sense of well-being, it increases energy, again, typically only at the beginning of alcohol exposure. That occurs in most people as a sharp spike, as a increase. Again, if somebody does not have alcohol dehydrogenase or has very low levels of the enzyme that convert that acetaldehyde into acetate and that metabolize alcohol, in other words, they will feel sick and lousy in a way that will override any recognition of the dopamine release. They're going to be the people that are listening to this and just thinking, "Alcohol just makes me feel sick. I don't like it." Okay, that's a specific subcategory of people, but most people experience some sort of mild euphoria. That's why so many people drink, right? The current estimates are that in most countries, and certainly in the US, as many as 80% of the adult, legal drinking age population drinks alcohol, and that number could be even higher now because in the last couple of years, there's been a trend towards increased alcohol consumption, especially in the wake of the pandemic and during the pandemic. Topic for another time. So there's an increase in dopamine and an increase in serotonin, so it's kind of an increase in well-being, an increase in mood, but it's a very short-lived increase. Very soon after, and actually triggered by that increase, is a long and slow reduction in dopamine and serotonin and related molecules in circuits. So basically what you're getting is a blip of feel good followed by a long, slow arc of feeling not so great, which is why, typically, people will drink again and again across the night. The key thing to understand about tolerance is that with tolerance, the duration of that long, slow reduction in dopamine and serotonin gets even longer. In other words, the negative effects of alcohol that happen after the initial feeling good, extend longer and, in fact, get more robust. However, there's also a reduction in the reinforcing properties of alcohol. There's a shrinking of the feel good blip that happens when one first ingests alcohol, and this has been measured in animals and humans. So the first drink that somebody has, provided they have enough alcohol dehydrogenase so that doesn't make them feel nauseous and sick right away, they feel really good. And then as it wears off, they feel kind of lousy and they want to drink more so they might drink more. With each subsequent drink, and even drinks on different nights or even different weeks, the amount of dopamine that's released is reduced, the amount of serotonin that's released is reduced. So what you're getting is less and less of the reinforcing properties of alcohol, the feel good stuff, and more and more of the punishment pain signal aspects of alcohol. This is the contour of chemical release in the brain that was referred to by my colleague, the incredible Dr. Anna Lembke, who's a medical doctor. She wrote the incredible book "Dopamine Nation." She was a guest on this podcast, on Joe Rogan's podcast, on Rich Roll's podcast and several other podcasts. World expert in addiction, and she talked about this pleasure-pain balance that extends beyond alcohol to things like sex and gambling and to other behaviors that can potentially become addictive but certainly includes alcohol. So tolerance, it seems, is a process in which people are ingesting more and more alcohol as an attempt to get that feeling of well-being back, but what they're really getting is an extended period of punishment, of pain, and of malaise from the alcohol. Now, you might say, "Well, how does that relate to tolerance?" Well, it turns out what they do behaviorally, and when I say they, I mean animals do this and humans do this, is they start drinking more and more in an attempt to activate those dopamine and serotonin neurons and receptors, and as they do that, there is an increase in alcohol dehydrogenase, so the enzyme that metabolizes alcohol is increased because the body and liver have to contend with all that alcohol, so now you've got, again, the two-hit model. You're getting less of the feel good chemicals, more of the negative chemical release, or pattern of subjective feeling, I should say, and you're metabolizing alcohol more quickly and more readily, but it's not taking you to a better place in terms of how you feel. That's one of the major underlying reasons for what we call tolerance. So if you're somebody who drinks and you notice that the feeling that you are seeking with alcohol is now requiring an additional drink, or drinks plural, chances are you are disrupting the dopamine and serotonergic systems of your brain, and you are doing that in a way that is increasing the pain and punishment signals that follow alcohol ingestion. And again, that's not just on the night that you're drinking but afterwards as well. Is that all bad news? Well, pretty much. But the good news is that if you abstain from drinking for some period of time, then, of course, these systems reset. How long you need to abstain will depend on how much you were drinking and how long you were drinking for. Certainly people who have alcohol use disorder or who are alcoholics, their main goal should be to quit alcohol completely. I know there's some debate about this, and I don't want to get into that debate because I'm certainly not going to try and direct anyone's recovery. There are expert counselors and MDs and people that can work with people. In fact, for some very heavy drinkers and people with serious alcohol use disorder, going cold turkey, that is, stopping drinking completely, can actually be medically dangerous. So the path to sobriety for certain people looks different than the path to sobriety for other people. What I'm referring to here are people that are ingesting, again, somewhere between, on average, one to two drinks per night, whether or not that's done night to night or whether or not that's condensed to weekend use. I know a number of people are going to ask, perhaps are screaming, "Is drinking good for me in any way?" For instance, many people have probably heard that resveratrol is good for people and that red wine is rich in resveratrol. I hate to break it to you but the reality is that if indeed resveratrol is good for us, and there's some debate about this, some people say strongly yes, some people say no, other people say maybe, the amount of red wine that one would have to drink in order to get enough resveratrol in order for it to be health promoting is so outrageously high that it would surely induce other negative effects that would offset the positive effects of resveratrol. So I wish I could tell you different. Again, I'm not here to be the bearer of bad news, but the statement I just made was confirmed by Dr. David Sinclair when he was a guest on this podcast. It's confirmed by other researchers who work on resveratrol and related pathways. I wish I could tell you that red wine is good for your health, and indeed it might be through some other mechanisms. So, for instance, there have been studies of low to moderate red wine consumption. This would be anywhere from one to four glasses per week. And I don't mean enormous glasses, I mean six-ounce glasses of red wine. And in those cases, some of the stress reduction that can be induced by consumption of red wine, maybe some of the other micronutrients and components within red wines, in particular red wines that come from particular grapes, and this gets really nuanced and, frankly, is not well worked out in the peer-reviewed literature or certainly not clinical trials, at least not that I'm aware of. Tell me if you're aware of a great clinical trial on this. Well, there may be some positive effects of that very low level of consumption. I'm not trying to take away anybody's red wine. I'm not trying to take away anybody's anything. I would be remiss, however, if I didn't tell you that resveratrol as the argument for drinking, and drinking red wine in particular, is just not a good one. It's just not supported by the peer-reviewed research. A few other things about alcohol and health. At the beginning of the episode, I referenced a study showing that indeed not just heavy alcohol consumption of 12 to 24 or more drinks per week, but also light to moderate alcohol consumption of any type, wine, beer, spirits, et cetera, does reduce the thickness of the brain. It really does reduce cortical thickness. In fact, it actually scales with the amount of alcohol that people drink, and this has been well-documented in a number of different studies. I can provide a link to several of these. One of the more striking ones actually shows that there's almost a dose-dependent increase in shrinkage of gray matter volume and in these white matter tracts, these axons, these wires, as it were, that connect different neurons as a function of how much alcohol people drink. And that's also what's been seen in this recent study that I referenced at the beginning and that's in the show note captions. So, again, probably the best amount of alcohol to drink would be zero glasses per week or ounces per week. For those of you drinking low amounts of alcohol, make sure you're doing other things to promote your health. And for those of you that are drinking moderate and certainly for those of you that are heavy drinkers, please do everything you can to move away from that and to quit entirely. But even for the moderate consumers of alcohol, you are going to want to be aware of some of the negative health effects and do things to offset those if indeed you're not going to stop drinking or reduce your intake. One of the really bad effects of alcohol, but that's extremely well-documented, is the fact that alcohol, because of this toxicity of acetaldehyde and the related pathways, can alter DNA methylation, it can alter gene expression. That can mean many things in different tissues, but it is associated with a significant increase in cancer risk, in particular, breast cancer, and in particular, because breast tissue is present in both males and females, but in women, it's especially vulnerable to some of the DNA methylation changes, well, breast cancer in women has a relationship to alcohol intake, and alcohol intake has a relationship to breast cancer in women. In fact, there has been proposed to be a anywhere from 4 to 13% increase in risk of breast cancer for every 10 grams of alcohol consumed. How much is 10 grams? Well, there, we need to think a little bit about the variation in the amount of alcohol and different drinks across the world. Different countries serve different sized drinks and have different concentrations of alcohol in those drinks. So without going down too much of a rabbit hole and just giving you some good rules of thumb to work with, there have been studies of the percentage of alcohol included in different drinks and the sizes of different drinks that are served in different countries, and here's kind of a patchwork of those findings. In Japan, one beer, one glass of wine, or one shot of liquor, as it's served there, tends to include anywhere from seven to eight grams of alcohol. In the US, one beer, which generally is 12 ounces if it's in a bottle, one glass of wine or a shot of liquor tends to include about 10 to 12 grams of alcohol. And in Russia, one drink of the various sorts that I just described typically will have as much as 24 grams of alcohol because of the differences in the concentration of alcohols and the sizes of drinks that are poured in these different countries, okay? Of course, there are other countries in the world, those countries are also vitally important, but those are the ones that I extracted from the studies that I could find. What does this mean? Well, what we're talking about is that for every 10 grams of alcohol consumed, so that's one beer in the US, maybe a little bit more than one beer in Japan, or basically a third of a drink in Russia, there's a 4 to 13% increase in risk of cancer. That's pretty outrageous, right? And you might think, "Wait, how could it be that, you know, this stuff is even legal?" Well, look, as I described before, it's a toxin. It's also a toxin that people enjoy the effects of. I mean, in the US at least, they tried prohibition. It certainly did lead, yes, did lead to a reduction in alcohol-induced health disorders, in particular, cirrhosis of the liver. It also led to a lot of crime because it became a substance that a lot of people still wanted and that people were willing to break the law in order to provide, or, I should say, to sell and provide. But the point is that the more alcohol people drink, the greater their increase of cancer, in particular, breast cancer. And that's because of the fact that alcohol has these effects on cells that include changes in gene expression, and cancer, that is, the growth of tumors, is a dysregulation in cell cycles, right? A tumor is a aggregation or the proliferation, aggregation is stuff sticking together, by the way, proliferation is stuff duplicating, a proliferation or aggregation of cells that could be a glioma, glial cells, glioma brain tumor, right? It could be lymphoma, so within the lymph tissue, et cetera. The mutations that alcohol induces to cause this are wide ranging, some of those are starting to be understood. For those of you that are interested in cell biology, I'll just mention that the PD-1 pathway, again, this is super specialized and for the aficionados only, you don't need to know this, the PD-1 pathway seems to be upregulated and, and we knew this from the discussion earlier, there's a downregulation in some of the anti-inflammatory molecules that help suppress this proliferation of cancers. Nowadays, there's a lot of interest in the fact that the immune system is constantly combating cancers that exist in us all the time. You know, little tumors start growing and our immune system goes and gobbles them up. Little tumors start growing, the immune system senses inflammation, sends out these incredible cells, these killer B-cells and T-cells, and beats them up. Cancers proliferate and take hold and cause serious problems when the proliferation of cells exceeds the immune system's ability to gobble up and remove those cells. There are other mechanisms of regulating cancers, but that's one of the primary one. And alcohol hits it. Again, it's a two hit model. It increases tumor growth and it decreases the sorts of molecules that suppress and combat tumor growth. So, again, even low to moderate amounts of alcohol can be problematic for sake of cancers, in particular, breast cancers. Epidemiologists and health specialists love to try and compare different substances in terms of how bad they are. Rarely do they compare substances in terms of how good they are, but sometimes they do. And what they'll sometimes tell you and what you can find in the literature is that ingesting 10 to 15 grams of alcohol a day, so that would be like one beer in the US or one glass of wine, is the same as smoking 10 cigarettes a day. Frankly, it's hard to make that direct relationship really stick because, you know, it's a question of, you know, how long people inhale, do they have a predisposition to a lung cancer, et cetera. But even if that number is off by plus or minus two cigarettes, or even if that number was the equivalent of one glass of wine equals one cigarette per day... I think there's general consensus now that nicotine consumed by vaping or by cigarette, it's bad for us in terms of lung cancer and other forms of cancer. And for some reason, I don't know why, because this knowledge about alcohol and cancer and these established relationships have been known since the late 1980s. The first, you know, landmark paper on this was published in 1987. I can provide a link to that paper. It's actually quite interesting to read. Well, the relationship is there and yet we don't often hear about it, right? In fact, before researching this episode, I had heard before that alcohol can increase cancer risk but I wasn't aware of just how strong that relationship is. Because of the serious nature of what we're talking about and because I would hate to be confusing or misleading to anybody, I want to just emphasize that this statistic, that there is a 4 to 13%, depending on which study you look at, a 4 to 13% increase in the risk of cancer, in particular, breast cancer, for every 10 grams of alcohol consumed, that's 10 grams per day, so that's one drink per day. But I do want to emphasize that if that equates to seven drinks per week and all those seven drinks are being consumed on Friday and Saturday, it still averages to 10 grams per day. And I also want to emphasize that there are things that people can do to at least partially offset some of the negative effects of alcohol as it relates to predisposition to the formation of certain kinds of tumors and cancers. I also want to be clear before I say it that doing the things I'm about to tell you is not a guarantee that you're not going to get cancer, nor is it a guarantee that alcohol is not going to lead to an increased predisposition for certain kinds of cancers, and the two things are consumption of folate and other B vitamins, especially B12. You know, the consumption of folate and B12 has been shown to decrease cancer risk in people that ingest alcohol, but not completely offset it. Why that is isn't exactly clear. It probably has something to do with the relationship between folate and B12 and other B vitamins in gene regulation pathways that can lead to tumor growth. At some point soon, we will get an expert in cancer biology, and, in particular, in breast cancer biology, on the program and we can ask them about this. But I realize this is going to raise a number of questions and maybe even cause some of you to go out there and start taking folate and other B vitamins and B12. Not incidentally, a lot of the reported hangover supplements and treatments include folate and B12. I don't know if they had the cancer literature in mind when they created those supplements and products. I doubt they did. Alcohol really does disrupt B vitamin pathways, both synthesis pathways and utilization pathways, so sometimes you'll hear, "Oh, you know, if you get your B vitamins, it helps you recover from hangover more quickly." Again, the literature doesn't support that, but also again, there aren't a lot of studies. But more to the point as it relates to alcohol and the formation of tumors and cancers, it does appear that decreased folate and other B vitamins like B12 are partially responsible for the effect of alcohol in increasing cancer risk. And it does appear that consuming adequate amounts of folate in B12 might, again, might partially, really want to bold face and underline and highlight partially, offset some of that increased risk. There's an additional category that I want to highlight, of course, and this is vitally important to state even though it's obvious, which is that people who are pregnant should absolutely not consume alcohol. Fetal alcohol syndrome is well known and established, it's terrible. Fetuses experience diminished brain development that's often permanent, diminished limb development, diminished organ development in the periphery, meaning, you know, the heart, the lungs, liver, et cetera. Ingesting alcohol while pregnant is simply a bad idea. And the reason I say this at all is, first of all, it's important to include in an episode like this, but also because we can look at two things. First of all, we can look at mechanism and then we can also look at some of the lore that still sadly exists out there. Let's take care of the lore that sadly exists first. If you look online, you will sometimes be able to find, sadly, that some people believe that certain kinds of alcohol are not detrimental to fetuses. They'll say, "Well, champagne is safe for a pregnant mother to drink but beer is not." That is absolutely categorically false. Alcohol is alcohol. There is no evidence whatsoever that consuming certain types of alcohol is safer for fetuses than others. Alcohol is a toxin, and the reason fetal alcohol syndrome exists is because the ability of that toxin to disrupt cellular processes. Remember tumor growth and the way that alcohol can accelerate tumor growth by proliferation of cells, the wrong cells, the ones you don't want to proliferate? Well, all of embryonic development, all of fetal development, it's not the growth of a tumor, it's obviously the growth of an embryo, and it's done in a very orchestrated way. I started off studying brain development. That's where I got my beginnings in neurobiology, and I still teach embryology to medical students and graduate students. The set of coordinated processes that has to take place from conception to birth in order to give rise to a healthy embryo is so, so dynamically controlled and so exquisitely precise, with checkpoints and recovery mechanisms and redundancy in the genes that are expressed to make sure that if anything goes wrong, it's repaired, et cetera. Alcohol as a mutagen, I haven't used that word yet, but a substance that can mutate DNA through alterations in DNA methylation in these checkpoints in the cell cycle, alcohol as a mutagen is one of the worst things that a developing embryo can be exposed to. And, again, because it's water-soluble and fat-soluble, ingestion of alcohol when people are pregnant passes right to the fetus. Now, I realize that a number of people out there might be thinking, "Oh goodness, you know, I didn't realize I was pregnant until a certain stage of pregnancy, and before I realized, I was ingesting alcohol." Obviously, one can't undo what's been done, but I want to also emphasize that fetal alcohol syndrome, while, yes, there's a full-blown syndrome that manifests as changes in the cranial facial development that are very obvious, and you can look these up, you've probably seen these before, or the pictures before, rather, it has to do with eye spacing, forehead size, a number of other features of the cranial facial development, and of course stuff's going on in the brain too, it's along a continuum. So it is possible that some of the changes that occur are more minor, and, thankfully, the young brain, in particular, the early postnatal brain, is incredibly plastic. There are things that can be done in order to help recover neural circuits that didn't develop well, et cetera. But even though it's somewhat obvious, or should be obvious, I really want to make clear that there's zero evidence whatsoever that certain forms of alcohol are safer for pregnant women to ingest than others. Absolutely wrong, no one who's pregnant should be ingesting alcohol whatsoever. And certainly, if people feel like they can't avoid alcohol while pregnant, they really need to work with somebody to make sure that it just absolutely doesn't happen because it is so detrimental to the developing fetus. Lastly, I want to talk about the effects of alcohol on hormones, and I want to distinguish between low amounts of alcohol intake, higher amounts of alcohol intake, and, again, this chronic alcohol intake versus occasional use versus really chronic use, meaning alcoholic or alcoholic use disorder, where people are drinking an immense amount on an ongoing basis. The literature on alcohol and hormones is quite extensive, and there are, of course, many, many different types of hormones. The hormones that most often get mentioned and talked about on this podcast are the hormones testosterone and estrogen, which are present in both men and women and that, in both men and women, are important for things like libido, they're also responsible for sexual development, actual development of the genitalia before birth and after birth, they're responsible, for instance, estrogen is important for memory and cognition. You never want to drop estrogen too low in men or women 'cause it can disrupt cognition and joint health, et cetera. To keep this discussion relatively constrained, it's fair to say that alcohol, and, in particular, the toxic metabolites of alcohol, increase the conversion of testosterone to estrogen. Now, this occurs in a number of different tissues. This is not just occurring in the testes of males, this is occurring in lots of different tissues. And I'll refer you to a excellent review. We'll provide a link in the show note captions. This is a paper that was published in the year 2000 but the data are still quite strong. The journal is called, of all things, "Alcohol," yes, literally a journal called "Alcohol" for the publication of data and reviews on alcohol and its effects, and the title of the paper is Can alcohol promote aromatization of androgens to estrogens? Aromatization is this process of the conversion of testosterone and other androgens to estrogens through things like aromatase enzyme. And this is a beautiful review that describes every tissue, or near every tissue, from the ovary in females to the placenta to the liver to the testes, in which alcohol can increase the aromatization of testosterone to estrogen. Now, in females, this may be part of the reason why there's an increase in estrogen-related cancers. Breast cancer can be either estrogen-related or non-estrogen-related, there are other types of estrogen-related cancers outside of breast cancer, but it appears that one reason why alcohol increases the risk of breast cancer is because of this aromatization from, of testosterone, excuse me, to estrogen. In males, accelerated or abnormal conversion of testosterone to estrogen can actually lead to growth of the breast tissue in males, so-called gynecomastia, or other effects of high estrogen, or I should say of altered testosterone-estrogen ratios, 'cause that's really what's important. And these can include things like diminished sex drive, increased fat storage, and a number of other things that I think most people would find to be negative effects. I once talked about the fact that drinking alcohol can increase the aromatization of testosterone to estrogen. I posted that online, and I didn't get attacked but I did get criticized for the fact that it has been shown, yes, has been shown, that small amounts of alcohol ingestion, so five grams or so of alcohol ingestion, this would be half a glass of wine or half a glass of beer, at least in some studies showed increases in testosterone, which was kind of surprising. But I should point out, other studies have shown that alcohol ingestion causes decreases in testosterone over time. So there's always this issue of whether or not you're looking at a study of acute exposure versus chronic exposure, you know, one dose versus multiple doses and exposure. I think it's fair to say, based on my read of the literature, this review and other reviews that focus more particularly on humans, that regular ingestion of alcohol is going to increase estrogen levels whether or not you're male or female, and it's largely doing that through the aromatization process, by increasing the aromatase enzyme. Yes, there's some dose dependence, but I think if you're somebody who's trying to optimize your testosterone-to-estrogen ratio, regardless of whether or not you're male or female, well then most certainly you're going to want to avoid drinking too much alcohol. So we've covered a lot of topics and data related to the mechanisms of alcohol, hangover, tolerance, cancer risk, et cetera. I acknowledge that I've mainly talked to you about the negative effects of alcohol. I want to acknowledge that many people enjoy alcohol in moderation or even light drinking, the occasional drink or the occasional two drinks or maybe even, on average, one drink per night, so seven drinks per week. I'm certainly not here to tell you what to do and what not to do. I do find it immensely interesting, however, that, first of all, alcohol is a known toxin to the cells of the body. Some of you might immediately say, "Well, wait, what about hormesis? What about this phenomenon where if we regularly ingest a toxin, it makes us stronger?" In other words, what doesn't kill us makes us stronger. Yeah, there's, you know, some reason to believe that might be beneficial in terms of some forms of cellular resilience maybe, maybe. No, sorry. It doesn't work that way. There are processes of hormesis in which, for instance, exposing yourself safely through increases in adrenaline through, you know, ice baths or other things that increase adrenaline can raise your so-called stress threshold, but here, we're talking about cellular stress and damage to cells. So my read of the literature, and, again, this is my read and I invite others to, you know, provide studies or I would prefer actually collections of studies that point in the direction, if they exist, that alcohol can be beneficial, but my read of the literature, or I should say my understanding of what I would call the center of mass of the literature on alcohol is that no consumption, zero consumption, consumption of zero ounces of alcohol is going to be better for your health than low to moderate consumption of alcohol, and that low to moderate consumption of alcohol is going to be better for you, of course, than moderately high to high alcohol consumption on the order of 12 to 24 or more drinks per week. I realize that for most people listening to this, it's probably low to moderate alcohol consumption that is part of their standard repertoire, and I'm not here to give you justification for doing that nor am I going to tell you not to do that. I would like you to consider perhaps, however, the negative effects that we understand and that are documented. For instance, the negative effects of alcohol on the gut microbiome and the things that you can do to better support your gut microbiome, the negative effects on the stress system, that HPA axis that we talked about earlier, and the fact that even low to moderate levels of alcohol consumption can increase our levels of stress when we're not drinking, and to think about acquiring some tools and, you know, getting some proficiency with tools, behavioral or otherwise, that can help you with stress modulation that don't involve alcohol consumption. Again, the point here is to illustrate where the problems lie with alcohol consumption, but, also, what I've tried to do is to point you to some resources that can help offset some of those negative effects. Will they offset all the effects? I can't say that for sure, but certainly taking measures to offset some of the negative effects of any alcohol consumption that you might be having or doing is going to be beneficial to you. And those tools and protocols are going to be health-promoting in any case. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and on Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for us about the content covered on the podcast or suggestions of topics you'd like us to cover or guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please include all of that in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, and check out Momentous Supplements, our new partners in the supplement space, and check out Athletic Greens. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so. We are hubermanlab on Twitter and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram, and both places, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab on Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes. It also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter. You go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to Newsletter. You supply your email, but we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to hubermanlab.com and go to the Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like to point out that the Huberman Lab Podcast has a clips channel, so these are brief clips, anywhere from 3 to 10 minutes, that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols related to sleep, to focus, interviews with various guests. We talk about things like caffeine, when to drink caffeine, relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on, all the things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube, look for Huberman Lab Clips in the search area and it will take you there. Subscribe, and we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes or you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab Podcast, which, admittedly, can be rather long. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 261 ---
Video ID: 2Ds1m5gflCI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Ds1m5gflCI
Title: LIVE EVENT Q&A: Dr. Andrew Huberman Question & Answer in Seattle, WA
Published: 2022-08-17 12:00:02 UTC
Description:
Recently I had the pleasure of hosting two live events, one in Seattle, WA and one in Portland, OR. These events were part of a lecture series called The Brain Body Contract. My favorite part of each evening was the question & answer period, where I had the opportunity to answer questions from the attendees of each event. Included here is the Q&A from our event in Seattle, WA. 

Get notified when new live events are announced: https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Thank you to our sponsors
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps
00:00:00 The Brain Body Contract Q&A 
00:01:07 Momentous Supplements, InsideTracker 
00:01:35 Upcoming Live Events: Los Angeles & New York 
00:02:16 What Is Your Most-Used Protocol? 
00:04:12 Should You Vary Wake-Up Time Seasonally?
00:06:05 Why Is My Drive Depleted Upon Waking-Up?
00:08:42 What Are Your Favorite/Most Impactful Books? 
00:12:08 What Excites You About the Future of Mental Health Treatment?
00:17:25 What Is the Biggest Area Tor Performance Enhancement?
00:21:44 Can You Still Do a Kickflip?
00:22:32 Tips on How to Improve Memory
00:24:54 How Do You Manage Social Media Addiction?
00:27:43 Were You Nervous Tonight/ How Did You Prepare?
00:29:10 Is Learning from Failure Equal to Learning from Success?
00:32:23 When Are You Going to Start Training Jiu-Jitsu?
00:33:28 Discuss the Supplements You Take
00:36:29 Advice or Protocols to Improve Learning & Retention 
00:38:42 What Exciting Research/Work are You Doing? 
00:40:22 How Does Dopamine Factor into Neuroplasticity?
00:43:12 What Advice Do You Have for Future Scientists?
00:46:47 Is Age 66 Too Old for Neuroplasticity & Learning?
00:48:00 How Do You Read Research Papers?
00:49:40 What is Your Favorite Condiment?
00:50:10 Most Important Takeaway from Your ADHD Research?
00:52:58 What Future Episodes Are in the Pipeline?

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Recently, I had the pleasure of hosting two live events: one in Seattle, Washington and one in Portland, Oregon, both entitled, "The Brain Body Contract," where I discussed science and science related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. My favorite part of each evening, however, was the question and answer period that followed the lecture. I love the question and answer period because it gives me an opportunity to hear directly from the audience to what they want to know most, and indeed to get into a bit of dialogue so we really clarify what are the underlying mechanisms of particular tools, how best to use the tools for things like focus and sleep, we also touched on some things related to mental health and physical health. It was a delight for me and I like to think that the audience learned a lot. I know that many of you weren't able to attend those events, but we wanted to make the information available to you. So what follows this is a recording of the question and answer period, from the lecture in Seattle, Washington. I hope you'll find it to be both interesting and informative. I'd also like to thank our sponsors of these live events. The first is Momentous supplements, which is our partner with The Huberman Lab Podcast, providing supplements that are the very highest quality, that ship international, and that are arranged in dosages and single ingredient formulations that make it possible for you to develop the optimal supplement strategy for you. And I'd also like to thank our other sponsor, which is InsideTracker, which provides blood tests and DNA tests so you can monitor your immediate and long-term health progress. I'd also like to announce that there are two, new live events scheduled. The first one is going to take place Sunday, October 16th at The Wiltern theater in Los Angeles. The other live event will take place Wednesday, November 9th at the Beacon Theatre in New York City. Tickets to both of those events are now available online at hubermanlab.com/tour; that's hubermanlab.com/tour. I do hope that you learn from an enjoy the recording of the question and answer period that follows this, and last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music plays] "What is your most used protocol?" I'm assuming that you mean the protocol that I use the most. I genuinely do the morning sunlight viewing. And this evening I went and looked at the sunset, every single evening, and I absolutely do 10 to 30 minutes of some Non-Sleep Deep Rest protocol, every single day, every single day! The reason I called it Non-Sleep Deep Rest is because while I love the classic traditions of, and things like Yoga Nidra, my fear was that if I called things Yoga Nidra, that people would get spooked. But I also have to say that I rather loathe the fact that scientists use so many fancy terms, that it also vaults information from the very people that fund the work. So I have a kind of an ax to grind with the scientific community too. So Non-Sleep Deep Rest was my attempt to kind of put my arms around a number of different things like Yoga Nidra, which I have great reverence for, and other tools like that. I do that usually in the early afternoon, or if I wake up first thing in the morning and I haven't slept enough, or not that well, I'll do 30 minutes of Yoga Nidra and I feel terrific after that. I'll just mention a brief anecdote. I learned about Yoga Nidra while researching a book that I never wrote, that may or may not ever be published. I went and spent a week in a trauma center and addiction treatment center in Florida and saw some amazing work, of some amazing people, and some amazing transformations and it was a big part of their daily routine, for these people to do Yoga Nidra and Non-Sleep Deep Rest and I thought they're really onto something here. So almost religiously for me, every day, 10 to 30 minutes. Not that it matters, but the CEO of Google's really into NSDR. I don't know him, but he's written about that a number of times. "In Seattle, sunrise varies from 4:30 AM to 9:00 AM, depending on season, are you recommending to vary your wake-up/outside time with the seasons?" Somewhat. You know, you don't need to see the sun cross the horizon. That would be great, but not everyone can wake up with the sun. You want to get so-called low solar angle sunlight. Why? 'Cause of that yellow-blue contrast that we talked about before. Many people wake up before the sun is out. If that case, if you want to be awake, turn on as many bright lights as you can. Up here, I don't know, does anyone here, you don't have to admit this if you don't want to, but maybe nod or raise your hand if you're comfortable with doing that. In the winter you feel less well, or typically in the transition, yeah, it's huge up here. [audience laughing] It's really, it's amazing. And then when you're on campus or that's where I've spent time and you see Rainier and it's like, the blossoms are out and you feel almost high because that's dopamine, you know, animals that have white pelage in the winter, and then it turns dark in the summer and spring months that pathway, the melanin pathway, is from tyrosine, which is the precursor to dopamine and also to melanin production in the fur. So the whole system is linked. It's not rigged, it's linked. So what do I suggest? I suggest in the winter months, getting 30 minutes of sunlight viewing. I know it's a lot, but it's much better than feeling lousy all day. And then the real key in the winter is to try and catch some sunlight before it goes down. If you're indoors and it goes down and then you go outside and it's dark, your brain and body don't really know where they are in time. And then you flip on "Ozark" and you're watching "Ozark", and then you really don't know where you are in time. I have one more episode. Don't tell me what happened. That show is, when I was a postdoc, I used to recommend, "The Wire," to my competitors. [audience laughing] True. "I go to sleep fired up, ready and excited to do whatever it takes. When I wake up, that drive is depleted. Why, and what can I do?" Interesting. Have not heard that one before, but if I were to venture a guess, you know, we didn't spend much time tonight talking about the autonomic nervous system, this kind of seesaw that takes us from very alert, potentially panicked, but to very, very deep sleep; even, you know, God forbid we go into a coma. It's 'cause the parasympathetic nervous system is overactive relative to the sympathetic nervous system; the seesaw of autonomic function. You may be sleeping very, very deeply. And when you are in deep, deep rest, the last thing you want to do is get into that forward center of mass thinking, planning, predicting, right? In, you know, again in Yoga Nidra again, Non-Sleep Deep Rest, there's this common theme in the script of going from thinking and doing and predicting to being and feeling, they say. And I'm not making fun of them as the moment I hear that, I go, "Oh, just I want to be and feel." What are you doing? You're actually just moving into sensation, but no planning, right? There's nothing mysterious about it. Sensation, but no planning. Now in sleep, a very deeply parasympathetic sleep state, what's happening? You actually, that visual aperture is actually so big, you're not in panoramic vision, your eyes are actually closed. Space and time are from past, present, and future are invited into your thinking. You're in a deep, deep state of relaxation and it may be, Dustin, that when you're waking up, you're having a hard time transitioning out of that because you're sleeping so deeply. You may be waking up mid-sleep cycle. Many people find it useful to set an alarm so that they wake up at the end of a 90 minute so-called ultradian cycle. There's some sleep apps that do this on the phone. I can't recall their names, but so rather than sleeping seven hours, you might be better off sleeping six or seven and a half hours, right? Waking up at the end of one of these 90 minute cycles. Try that. That would be consistent with what we know about the biology. But I think it's common to, if you sleep very deeply, to wake up and not necessarily want to spring out of bed. I've heard of these people that just want to spring out of bed and attack the day; Jocko Willink, 4:30 in the morning, his Casio phone, and his watch. I'm seeing his watch when, and it's like eight for me. I'm like, "Wow," like again, these people are amazing. I must be doing something wrong. But these are, you know, I don't wake up that way. You know? Like Tiger, I'm like, I want water, I want sunlight, 90 minutes later I want caffeine. Yeah. "What are some of your favorite books that have had the biggest impact on you?" Kyle G, thank you, Kyle. Gosh, so many! You know, for non-fiction, well, Oliver Sack's autobiography, "On the Move," had a profound impact on me. You know, people hated him? The scientific community tried to kick him out. They said horrible things about him; created all sorts of scandals. It wasn't until "Awakenings" became a blockbuster movie that suddenly he got appointments at NYU and Columbia. Ha! Then now they wanted him back; the revered neurologist. Like incredible, right? But he was also a real seeker in the cuttlefish thing. And he had a lot of internal struggles too, some of which I relate to, some of which I don't. Actually, I've been in touch with his former partner because I actually moved to Topanga Canyon for a short while just 'cause Oliver lived there. I thought, "If I go there, I'll actually finish this book." Guess what? Just moving someplace doesn't allow you to finish a book. He lived in Topanga so I was like, "That's the key." It didn't work. And people were wondering why I was hanging around their house all the time 'cause it was Oliver's former home. So that's an amazing book, and tells you my obsessive nature. The other books that have had a profound influence on me, I would say in the non-fiction realm, well I learned how to make a decent steak and a few other simple recipes, not well, from Tim Ferris's book, "The Four Hour Chef," 'cause I really needed help. That was a fun one. I like Robert Greene's book, "Mastery," because I've had amazing mentors and that book is all about finding mentors and assigning mentors to you, even if you don't know them. And as you can tell from my stories about Oliver, who I never met, and a few other folks, that I've just decided that they don't know it, but I'm mentoring them, that they're mentoring me, excuse me, that book was really important for me. And that mentor-mentee relationships always involve a breakup, either by death, or by decision, or by consequence, to your circumstance rather. There's, something happens, and they're supposed to break. You're not supposed to apprentice with somebody forever. That was an interesting book for me. I would say in the fiction realm, [Andrew sighs] I would say in the fiction realm, it's all childhood books 'cause it's been a long time since I've read fiction. I read a lot of poetry. I'm a big Wendell Berry fan. I like poetry because poetry to me is, is like the subconscious, it, the structure is all messed up and you think you understand what they're talking about but you don't really know. And so it always feels important and consequential, even though, you know, it's your own interpretation. And then I love the psychologists. I love Jung. I love Erikson. I love the psychologists and could read endlessly about the early days of attachment theory and things like that because I find that stuff to be fascinating. So those books have been a lot of fun and I love picture books with animals. [audience laughing] And so if you can get a hold of Joel Sartore's Instagram account, the "Photo Ark," he decided to take pictures of every animal on the planet, especially the ones that are endangered. He's a amazing photographer, but his books are even better so if you like animal books. "What excites you most about the future research of mental health treatment, particularly anxiety and depression?" Oi! Michael, thank you, Michael. Well there, I think that we're in an exciting time. I am, I'll just reveal my biases, I'm quite pessimistic at the idea that we're going to have better medication soon for most things. What I do think we are starting to approach is a time in which we understand how broad categories of drugs impact broad categories of chemicals, which kind of shift our mind in broad categories of directions. What does all that mean? I think we're starting to realize that because there are different receptors for all these chemicals all over the brain and body, that that side effect-less drug is unlikely to exist for mental health, but that the combination of, maybe some pharmacology, but especially behavioral tools, people actually learning how to drive this thing that we call our nervous system is potentially helpful, maybe very helpful. Now in cases like schizophrenia, autism, and I didn't put those next to one another for any reason by the way, OCD, eating disorders, and I'm very mindful of the fact that, you know, anorexia is the most lethal of all the psychiatric disorders, right? Amazing and sad fact. I think for those conditions, we are soon going to enter a time in which it's going to be combination behavioral, drug therapy, and yes, brain-machine interface. I don't mean putting chips down below the skull. I think there's going to be, and there are things happening now of people using devices like virtual reality, as well as transcranial magnetic stimulation, placing a magnet on a particular location on the head combined with a particular, maybe drugs, maybe psychedelics, maybe not, to enhance plasticity. I urge a vote for psychedelics and I want to make a serious point about psychedelics. Five years ago, when I, well, four years ago when I started doing a bit of public-facing stuff, I was absolutely terrified to say that word; terrified. I thought I'd lose my job. I really did. I thought, "Don't say psychedelics." And I'll be very honest, you know, I, for me, I think that the clinical data on MDMA and on psilocybin are very interesting, very interesting. I don't think they are the first and only pass at rewiring the brain, but it is clear that the brain can enter a state of heightened learning capacity, but it needs to be directed towards something. The goal of opening plasticity, just, it opens plasticity. That's not the goal. It's like running; the goal isn't running. The goal is to run in a particular direction. So what I think is really needed is to drive that plasticity in particular directions. And I would love to see more directed use of those in, of course, the safe clinical setting where it's appropriate. And a guest on the podcast, Matthew Johnson, who's at Johns Hopkins, I asked him, "What's the deal with the microdosing?" And you know what his answer was? I was very surprised. He said, "Macrodose." And I thought, okay, I'm not a guy who, you know, I'm not into, I'm not, I'm not a pushing this. I'm not a proponent. I said, "You're kidding me. Why? Why would you say this?" This guy runs an NIH funded lab at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. I thought, "Why?" And he said, "Because the one session with a trained professional that's triggering rewiring plasticity, that's guided, is," as far as they know from the data, you can go back and listen to, these are his words, not mine, but he's the expert in this area, "are encouraging plasticity in a particular direction." And he thinks that that's far more useful than just kind of nudging the system a little bit without any particular goal or outcome. Very interesting, and very surprising. And again, a trained academic at one of the most elite institutions in the world. I think we're in very exciting times, for those compounds. And they're like, there are studies at Stanford and elsewhere on ketamine and other things, but it's early days. Young people should be very cautious, young, young people, and adults should be cautious, especially people with preexisting psychiatric issues and people who have a propensity for addiction although some of those compounds are being used to treat addiction. So I'd be an idiot and I would be lying, if I didn't say that it is a very exciting time for psychedelic therapies. [audience cheering and applauding] "Where do you see the biggest area?" and I've done only one clinical trial. True. I was a part I took part in one clinical trial. So I don't speak from a lot of experience there, just a little bit. I was a subject in that trial. "Where do you see the biggest area for performance enhancement within the elite athletes and operators that already hit marks of proper sleep and nutrition?" Meg Young, thanks for your question, Meg. Yeah, I think that, well, first of all, very few of them hit marks for proper sleep. But for those that do, so once you have your sleep dialed in and you got your nutrition dialed in, and the motivational component is there, I think where there's a lot of work still to be done and where people can really get outsized effects, is in this weird little cavern of human existence that we call creativity. And I didn't have time to talk about it tonight, but there's a very unique brain state that we call creativity, which is taking preexisting neural maps and starting to combine them in unique ways to create new ways of performance. Performance can be basically summarized in any domain as essentially four stages. You have unskilled, skilled, mastery, which is when the brain can generate movements or cognitive computations that are, create very predictable outcomes and then there's this fourth tier, this fourth layer, which is virtuosity. And virtuosity, by definition, means inviting back in a component of uncertainty. What this looks like in terms of operators or this looks like in terms of athletes, or even we can say musicians, or people who are in the cognitive fields, or poets, or writers, is what it means is introducing that uncertainty about what's going to happen next and the way to do that is to destabilize the system. In other words, to create states of mind in which there are literally sensory disruptions. It's like, like what I would like to see is more training in a kind of "funhouse of mirrors" type environment. That's when you start to see incredible performances emerge. And virtuosos invite in uncertainty, they actually don't know what they're going to do next. And so this becomes a little bit of a vague concept and what I'm about to tell you next might seem a little silly, but one of the best ways to access creative states is to, no surprise, use your visual system to view things that are highly unstable and uncertain. I don't just love fish tanks; I love staring at videos of aquariums in Tokyo, and actually watching the fish because it's completely unpredictable. There's some evidence that doing things like that or people would say, "Oh, I was in the shower," or, "I took a walk in nature and then I had this idea." I actually don't think it was the walk or the shower, it's that nature is filled with unpredictable visual stimuli, auditory stimuli. When you can predict what's going to happen next, you have very little opportunity to uplevel your game so to speak. It's only by way of unpredictable sensory input that you can do that. So if you're a coach, or you're working with people who are very high level performers, do you want them to stand on one leg and spin around and then do what they're doing? Not necessarily. What you want to do is try and get them into brain states that are different than the brain states that they're in when they normally enter their practice. The liminal state between sleep and waking, excuse me, the liminal state between sleep and waking is a very powerful one for accessing creativity. Many people access ideas as they're waking up in the morning, they have great insights, other people while strolling in nature. I don't think it's the strolling or the waking up. I think it's the lack of, as we call it top-down regulation on rules. You are able to access combinations of neural maps that are unusual. So you can play with this a little bit. A lot of people throughout history have used compounds, drugs, to do this, right? Great writers would get drunk and then try and write or wake up and they would, the amount of self-abuse that people including athletes and creatives put themselves through to try and capture these windows of cognitive ability is pretty intense. And I don't think that's a good idea. I think one should be an explorer and try and find these cognitive states in ways that are non-destructive. I'm starting to sound like my mother, with all this. [audience laughing] Heel flips on lock. No kick flips. Next question. [audience laughing] [scattered applause] There's some skateboarders in the audience; my first non-biologic family. There's some amazing skateboarders in this audience and I'm not going to be the one doing a kick flip anytime soon, but they're great to have. One of the reasons we built the podcast with the help of the great Mike Blabac is because I learned a long time ago that if you want things done right, and you want to do them outside the lane lines, and you want to have control over how things come across, you do it with skateboarders, 'cause I didn't come from a community where, you know, I didn't have parents at my sports games and things like that so, thanks to the skateboarders and the misfits and the those folks. "Do you have any tips on how to improve memory?" Yes, Ron Vered. Yes! Okay. This is a wild literature and I love it and it's changing the way that I do things. I thought that to remember things you're supposed to get really, really excited, really focused, and remember them. Guess what? That's not how you do it. There are data, and there are stories going back to medieval times that they used to teach kids things and then throw them in the river. There's a beautiful Annual Review of Neuroscience written by the late James McGaugh, a brilliant researcher who taught me that, in this review. And it turns out that if you want to remember something you want to spike adrenaline after you acquired that information, after! That means the double espresso and the ice bath after you study for math, immediately after. And you think about this, you know, that makes perfect sense, right? Think about the one trial learning that nobody wants to experience, which is a car accident or some traumatic thing. You didn't get the spike of adrenaline first. You got the spike of adrenaline after. So again, you know, I discourage the use of excessive stimulants or you know, anything like that. But if you're going to try and remember information, you need to get your brain and body into a high autonomic arousal state. Literally you need to deploy adrenaline into your system after you have made the attempt to learn some information. So much so that if you give people a beta blocker after learning emotional information, they don't learn it as well. Incredible, just incredible data in animals and humans. This is the beautiful work of Larry Cahill at UC Irvine and James McGaugh. So that's how I would focus on remembering things better. And it's also true that if you tell yourself that something's really important to you, you'll be able to learn it better. If you meet people and they tell you their name and you forget it two seconds later, well, you should probably be thinking, and now I do this, I meet people and I think, "Okay, what terrible thing did this person do?" Just try and spike my adrenaline or something like that. It's a terrible trick, but haven't figured out a better way, but that's actually one data-supported way to do that. Easily a dozen or more studies in humans on that very topic. "How do you manage social media addiction?" Paul. Oi, well we should be careful with the use of the word addiction because here, I think it's entirely appropriate. When you are engaging in a behavior over, and over. and over again, and you're thinking to yourself, "This isn't even that interesting," you're officially addicted. That's the litmus test for addiction. Not, "This feels so good." People talk about the dopamine hits of social media. Those only come at the beginning, but then when you find yourself scrolling, you're like, "What am I doing?" Maybe it's that narrow visual aperture; you're a hypnotized chicken, but maybe also you are seeking more dopamine hits because guess what? That dopamine wave pool is depleted, at least for that activity. It is true that dopamine, you have a baseline and then you have peaks on, on that ride on that baseline. I do think that we can have dopamine for one behavior, and not for another, but it's a generalized phenomenon. So how do you manage it? You have to stop seeking within social media. And so I've taken on the practice of turning off my phone for a couple hours each day. It's incredibly hard. People get really upset too, by the way, cause if you haven't noticed these tethers that people expect. We recorded a podcast recently and it, so I, I don't want to go into too much depth now, about attachment and grief. And, you know, we all have a map now, you know, you understand what the maps are, of space, time, and a dimension called closeness to everyone that we know space, where they are, time, when they are, dead, alive, when will I see them again et cetera, and closeness. And the phone has allowed us to tap into space, time, and this closeness map, which define all our attachments, on a very regular basis. So you can understand why it's so valuable to people. You know, the plane lands and everyone's texting. The planes, take off, everyone's texting. It's like, "Where are you?" Well, the plane's in the air, there's this thing called flight tracker. No one cares about that anymore. You want to hear from the person. So I do think that, I used to do an every odd hour of the day my phone was off, and like half the relationships in my life disappeared. They couldn't talk, they couldn't tolerate it. I loved it, but I loved them too. So I would say take breaks. And I would say at least an hour. And if you find yourself excited to get back on the phone, that excitement, that is the dopamine system. So you can kind of learn where it is for you. But if you find yourself scrolling mindlessly and it's not doing anything for you, you are driving that wave pool down, down, down, down, down, so hopefully that analogy will help. It's weird to call myself Dr. Huberman. In my business if you refer to yourself in the third person, it means you're officially a narcissist. [audience laughing] So I'm just going to start with, "Were you nervous tonight and if so, what did you do to prepare?" Brianne, you saw my nervousness, didn't you? No, the, I asked myself that question. I was excited, and I think I'm good at lying to myself and telling myself that autonomic arousal that might be nervousness is excitement. But in truth, I wasn't, I was and am really excited to tell you all these stories and about biology. I know this might sound like a little bit of a line, but I actually don't feel myself as a, like a person when I do the podcast or I do this stuff. I took a walk before I got here and I have to be careful. There are only two topics that make me cry. One is talking about my bulldog. The other is talking about my graduate advisor. So I have to be very careful, but I took a walk and I imagined that they were here and, I know, and don't make me cry. Lex Friedman made me cry on a podcast and it was really unfair. And he was like digging and digging and there are a few people in the audience that know Costello. And it's like, you know, and I just kept thinking to myself before coming in here, like, you know, I love them and miss them and I, Costello would be entirely bored with this whole thing. So I distracted myself a bit and not so nervous. I do get nervous about things, sure, I'm human. But when it comes to biology, I think I still feel like that little kid who just wants to tell you all this stuff, you know, so, you know, I can't help it. "Is learning from failure equal to learning from success? Is one more efficient than the other?" Rachel, thanks for your question. Well, on a trial-by-trial basis, we know that when you fail at an attempt, on the next attempt, your forebrain is in a position to engage better. And this makes total sense, right? You feel that frustration [alarm buzzer] and you want to get the next one, right? Well, you're harboring, or I should say funneling more neural resources, your focus, that aperture tightens. Now you have to be mindful of that too, because when you have a failure and then you're like, you're going to hit the bulls. I'm thinking about a dart board, 'cause I'm terrible at darts, you know, sober I'm terrible at darts. I don't even drink. So that next trial, part of the problem is, is that focus can narrow so much that you can start to lose access to information that might help you. If you were just to relax a little bit and dilate that focus a little bit, but in general, on a trial-by-trial basis focus is the cue that your nervous system is going to be positioned to learn better on the next trial. Now in terms of life experiences, gosh, I wish for everyone fewer failures and more successes, but you know, failures keep you humble. And I've had a lot of 'em. I mean, if people ever wanted and they, you know, I'd be happy to tell you about, I mean, I've made a ton of mistakes in life, a ton of mistakes. Some of those were mistakes of persistence, like dumb decisions. I kept like, "It's going to change. It's going to change." And it's clearly never going to change. And then some were failures of misjudgment about other people or situations. And a lot of them were just plain failures like the experiment didn't work, or the, it just wasn't the right thing. And you try and reframe those. I do think that we owe it to ourselves and to the people that we know to try and generate some wins here and there and try and help other people generate wins. You know, in running a lab over the years and I still do, you realize that you want your students to publish a paper and feel that success pretty early so that they can experience, A, how much work it is so they pick problems wisely, but, B, so they can feel that, like, "Oh, I can do this." And I think that, you know, this gets into the psychological as well. I think that yes, failures help, but successes help. And there, I think, you know, I function best in a team. And I think that for those of you that are feel like you're fighting some challenge alone, I do think that there are great resources to be had in trying to access other, you know, other people as sources of support. I think that that's a great tool. There's this whole literature, scientific literature, around social connection and how that can help us reframe motivation and goals. Anyway, maybe that's a topic to expand on another time. But failure is important on a trial, trial by basis. People who don't experience enough wins for a long period of time, the brain is a prediction machine after all and they start to predict failure so takes a bit more work to wedge oneself out of that. "When are you going to start training jiu-jitsu? Lex made me ask." Ryan Flores. Okay. Here's the story with that. Lex said, "Do you want to try jiu-jitsu?" I said, "Sure." Lex said, "Okay, it'll be great to show people beginner's mind." I said, "Sure." We went and did a jiu-jitsu class. He was very nice; nice, nice, Russian, nice. Like, "Oh yeah, yeah, yeah." Then he puts it on the internet with me in a rear naked, him putting me in a rear naked choke, it was actually Lex Friedman choking out Andrew Huberman, There, I just talked about myself in the third person, dammit, edit that one. I have not had the time for jiu-jitsu. I like my ears the way they are, you know. Have you ever seen these people that do jiu-jitsu? Their ears literally look like stumps. No, I should do it. It looks like a great sport. And unlike the other sports I've been involved in my life, boxing, please don't do it. It's not healthy. Skateboarding and all this, you don't really damage your head doing jiu-jitsu. So no. I'm going to get you back for that one Lex. Okay. "Can you go through," oh wow, John Edwards. There's a joke that my friends used to tell about the supplements I take. They used to say, someone would say, "What supplements do you take?" And they would just go, "All of them." I don't take all of them, but I have been very systematic. For about 30 years, I've been interested in compounds that change the nervous system. And I do think that the, the events of the last few years have changed the way that people view supplements. I think that more people are starting to think about how to take better care of their health. And they, people are realizing that obviously, great sleep, mindsets, social connection, exercise, nutrition and so forth are very important. But I, I actually don't know anybody, granted, I run with a strange crowd, but I don't know anybody that doesn't take something nowadays. You know, I could go through the whole list, but I would say the most fundamental things and there's no product pitch here, the most fundamental things are the things that are going to support your kind of foundational health. So for that's going to mean mainly getting either by food sources or supplements is going to be getting sufficient amounts of these essential fatty acids. So important. For some people that's taking liquid fish oil, for some people it's a capsule, for somebody that's eating fish. I don't like the way fish tastes unless I'm in Seattle, by the way, the seafood here is amazing, not so much in California. So I think the essential fatty acids, and then I'm big on the data, dare I say, out of Stanford, Justin Sonnenburg's lab and Chris Gardner's lab that these fermented foods of which all these cultures have interesting fermented foods, kefir, and sauerkraut, and kimchi, and, you know, pick your fermented food. That those seem to really encourage health of the gut microbiome. So I started eating a lot of those and taking no probiotics except in, you know, a few of the supplements that I was already taking. So I'm not trying to dodge the question, but I think, by and large, if you're eating well and doing the other foundational behaviors as well, you can get it way with a minimum of supplements. D3, it seems to be a lot of people deficient in D3, but not everybody. So I think that those are the main ones. However, I do think that nutrition should be the primary entry point. Again, it should be behaviors first, then nutrition, then supplements, then prescription drugs, only if you need them. And then, you know, for some people, their brain-machine interface like TMS and things like that are going to be useful, but behaviors change your nervous system, no supplement actually rewires you or changes your nervous system: behaviors do that. I hope I didn't dodge that question entirely. I do take some of the things that we talk about on the podcast to do some focused work, sometimes alpha-GPC, but lately I've been doing this whole thing of cold water exposure to spike my adrenaline, 'cause I hate it, and it spikes my adrenaline after learning based on the McGaugh and Cahill data. "What would be your best one or two pieces of advice or recommended protocol for improving learning and retention for graduate students in science and medicine? We try to sleep sometimes." Thank you, JD. Oh great. You're at UW, JD. So, you know, I used to teach this course at Cold Spring Harbor on career development for scientists and the there's a lot in there, but the two things that are most important are, I, for sake of answering this question, I would say, are, find non-destructive ways to reset your dopamine and your energy levels and do those at least every three days. So for me, it was kind of a, a tough thing to take a long walk, or to spend, I used to work really hard on Mondays, really hard on Tuesdays, and I would not go in until the afternoon on Wednesdays and sometimes not at all. And then I go in Thursday, Friday, and work really, really hard and then not at all on Saturday and then maybe do a little bit of work from home on Sunday. And I was very productive that way. But those breaks are absolutely key and it's not encouraged so much in academic or tech or maybe anything now. I hear about so much stress and overwork. I say, you just do it and define the culture and let the results and your focus be the thing that defines you, not how many hours you're in there. But I realize there's a huge cognitive load and energetic load and for that, I do think these Non-Sleep Deep Rest protocols are where it comes in really handy. There are at least two faculty I know at Stanford. One whose a so-called Howard Hughes investigator, who is big, those are big deal appointments. They get tons of money, et cetera, et cetera, and they do amazing science most of the time. These individuals certainly do. And they take two 20 minute naps, per day, in their office. When this guy came and visited me, years ago when I was at a different university, he took the time that we were supposed to meet in my office and talk about data, he asked if he could take a nap. [audience laughs] And he gave a great talk that afternoon. So there you go. I do think you have to take control of your schedule and do those things. And I hope that helps. And then of course, for some people, exercise and so on is the way they reset. "What research or work are you doing or that your colleagues are doing that you're most excited about lately?" Glen, yeah. One project in particular, I hope this paper gets accepted soon, it's been out for review forever and so if the reviewers are in the audience, please just tell us one way or the other, you know? We did a very large scale study during the pandemic, we meaning David Spiegel and I, and an amazing PhD named Melis she now has two last names, excuse me, Balban, Yilmaz Balban. And Melis we essentially equipped people with remote monitoring devices and measured sleep and heart rate variability and a bunch of stress and bunch of other things. And we gave them a very brief set of breathing protocols and it turns out that this thing that I'm talking about a lot on the podcast, these days of this double inhale, long exhale, the so-called, "physiological sigh," was the most effective breathing practice for allowing people to control their heart rate variability, reduce overall heart rate, access better sleep, and these were extremely short protocols. So I'm very excited about this. I didn't discover physiological sighs. I love the idea that people can do a very brief protocol, once a day, maybe even just while walking down the street or in the moment and actually learn to control that autonomic seesaw better. So I'm very excited about that. And then we are gearing up to do some studies on people who have more severe forms of anxiety and panic attack, using mainly respiration, but also looking at some of these eye, vision-related ways of controlling the nervous system. I love that stuff. If I keep talking about it, I'm going to give you a data presentation so I'm going to turn around. "How does dopamine factor into neuroplasticity if at all?" Colin, great question. It's a very strong trigger of plasticity, so much so in fact that there's some work that shows if you stimulate with an electrode, the brain area that releases dopamine, and you pair that with anything, anything, even just like an eight kilohertz tone, [vocalizes a high tone] the brain remaps and it's like, "Oh, I love that eight kilohertz tone." Remember dopamine is dumb, and is just dumb. And it is just, you know, it's like Costello when he sits this dog, I could hang a rope from a tree. This dog was so lazy he wouldn't cross a room for a steak. You had to give the steak to him, [audience laughing] but it would run across a field. He would run and jump on and hold onto that rope, and he would sometimes bite through his lip with like blood dripping down. And I was like, "Oh my gosh," it was like breaking my heart. He loved every sit, that's dopamine; turns us into idiots. He was as smart about what he needed to be smart about. Dopamine. So if you trigger dopamine release with Ritalin, Adderall, to a lesser extent L-Tyrosine, and certainly please don't do this, but cocaine, amphetamine, whatever you're doing seems super interesting. It's true. And that's why it's such a slippery slope. It makes anything you're doing seem interesting and important. And actually I'll use this as an opportunity to say something about the psychedelic thing earlier. One of the issues with MDMA, it's a very unusual brain state: it's high dopamine, high serotonin, completely synthetic compound. There are other things in there that it does as well. One of the problems with people I see with the problem with people just taking MDMA, just at a basic level, is that if you're not pushing that towards some therapeutic outcome, music sounds amazing. Everything feels and sounds amazing, but it's a very neurochemically, you know, severe state. So that's why I think if people are going to explore those things, do it as part of one of the university-supported clinical trials. One of the reas- those drugs make everything seem interesting, even stuff that's not terribly interesting. Now they also have the potential for trauma healing capacity. These are the MAPS studies and so on. So you have to be very careful with what you pair with dopamine and what you pair dopamine with. And for those of you that are high sensation seeking, novelty seeking, and everything's interesting to you, and you want more, and more, and more, experiences, I, you basically have a eight cylinder car in you and you need to be very careful how you drive that thing. Like any high performance automobile, it's going to spend more time in the shop, [audience laughing] so learn to drive appropriately. "What advice can you offer to future scientists who want to make an impact like you have?" Ryan O'Boyle, get tenure first. No, I'm kidding. So I have this weird history in science and I'm not looking for sympathy here, but my undergraduate advisor, who I adored, he's like a father to me, my graduate advisor, and my postdoc advisor, who I also adored, all three of them died: suicide, cancer, cancer, really young. So the joke in my field is you don't want me to work for you. But in all seriousness, all three of them had a really morbid sense of humor, all amazing people, but it is this kind of weird curse that I've had. So what scientists, you know, what advice, you know, well, Ben Barres, the late Ben Barres died of pancreatic cancer, an amazing individual. They're actually making a documentary about Ben's life. He's transgendered. He was a totally irreverent. He said whatever he thought. He offended everybody. He was awesome. Brilliant too. Ben and I had a conversation as he was dying. I recorded a lot of conversations with him and I told him I was interested in doing public-facing education. And he said, "Well, you're tenured now and, people are going to be upset, and they're not going to like it, and your colleagues are probably going to hate it so whatever you do and you better make it good." And I was like, "Wow, that doesn't really help much, Ben." And he said, "You know, you seem to have a compulsion for it." So, he was right. I think that if you are excited about science, and sharing what you know, then do that. And even if it seems super nerdy, I mean, there are these ento- I think they call themselves entomologists, the insect people, they, I mean they make insects seem really, really cool. And if you are excited about spindle kinetics or whatever, you know, tell people about it, I really mean it. I think that the one caveat is that I do think it's important to get a formal, rigorous training in it first. I think that you'll go further and faster in the long run. And there's some amazing people out there. There's a postdoc at Stanford. I think his name is Ben Rein, I think if you shorten it up on Instagram, it's actually brain, brein, 'cause he works out he talks about brain science so that's why it's weird: B B R E I N. He does a great job. And he's a really good example of someone who's still on the ascent with his career, doing serious science, and doing science communication. But you have to be careful, it's time consuming. Look, you, people will dislike you for whatever. I made the mistake once of saying that I eat butter. Apparently that's a sin on the internet. I like little bits of actually like a lot of butter, but try and eat little bits of butter. But somehow it's like, there's this idea that I eat sticks of butter. So you have to be careful. [audience laughing] Like, I mean, the things I've heard, I heard I was dead. That was cool. So you have to be careful and remember everything is stamped into the, the cloud now and the metaverse or whatever it's called. So I would say, here are the rules that we have at the podcast and on here's the rules that I created for myself. I truly don't do it for me. I do it 'cause I think people want to hear about it, but I've been telling myself that since I was six years old. The other thing is never, ever, ever do it just for your own gratification. You should really try and think, "Is anyone going to get anything useful out of this, potentially?" That's the goal. If you're doing that, it'll work out for you. If you are thinking about how to get followers or something like that, it ain't going to work out. That's my advice. "Is age 66 too old for neuroplasticity?" No, no, I'll cut myself off, "to begin learning again?" Sandra Trazzare, no! Did I pronounce that right? Thank you, Sandra. No, Richard Feynman, the great Richard Feynman, taught himself to draw later in life. He was also really into flotation tanks. Did you know that? Yeah, he was also into bongo drumming naked on the roof at Caltech. Richard Feynman, you know, did so many things that would get most people fired nowadays. He's just lucky he was alive when he was. You can absolutely learn at 66 and way beyond. There's an amazing study from Rusty Gage's lab at the Salk Institute years ago, showing that even people who are very late in life, terminally ill in fact, are still producing new neurons in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. These people that were gracious enough to allow researchers to inject them with dyes that would label these neurons for analysis postmortem, after they died. Absolutely you can learn. What's harder is focus. Oftentimes what's harder is sleep as well, but the same mechanisms apply. There's no evidence whatsoever that neuroplasticity disappears at any stage despite what Hubel and Wiesel told the BBC. "How do you tackle reading research papers? Do you have a specific strategy?" Anne Hun, yes I do. I do. I take notes on everything. I try and so I there's four questions that we teach students and that I think that I use. The first one is: "What's the question they're asking, major and more specific?" Second is: "What did they do? What are they, like methods-wise, what did they do?" You don't have to know all the details in the methods necessarily, but be versed in those methods, but you have to kind of understand like, are they looking at mice? Are they looking at humans? Is this a, you know, did they have people in two different conditions or just one? You have to understand what did they do, then you ask, "What did they find?" And then the last question is the most important one and you should write down the answer to this is: "What did they conclude?" And then you look back at the first question and you go, "Did they actually answer that question, or is it something unrelated?" And those four questions are essentially the way that I parse each paper. Learning to parse papers is tricky for the podcast. I use the telephone. I call people and I badger them and I ask them, you know, "Like who's doing the really good work in this area?" And I spend a lot of hours doing it. And then the best way to remember science is to tell someone about it. So before each podcast I'll call someone and be like, "Hey, did you know that they used to throw kids in the river?" After, I do this, and my sister, my poor sister, and she's like, "Yeah." My sister, by the way, does not watch the podcast. I, she's a therapist. And she's like, "Hey, I learned this amazing breathing technique." I was like, "Oh yeah, really? Tell me about it." And it's like, someone else is there. I'm like, "You know, I have a podcast." She's like, "I don't like your podcast." You know, it's older sister, it's older sister. It's, she's not lying. "What is your favorite sauce, condiment, seasoning? Sauce. There's one in every audience. I like the spicy stuff. We've been fermenting our own food at home. It's kind of cool. You put the cabbage and the stuff in the little ceramic thing outside, and then it, it goes [popping] It makes this amazing sound. And then you can like make your own sauerkraut and you know, with peppers and like fermenting that stuff, it's really good. Okay. They're telling me one more question so we'll do two. "What's most important from your ADH, ah." Gabriel, a lot of questions about ADHD, for people on medication or not on medication, so I'll answer both. For people on medication, I think work with somebody really good who's willing to work with you to allow you to find that minimal effective dose, and also timing that dose. One of the key things that we know now is that from that waking up point in your morning until about eight or nine hours later, we've sort of named that phase one of the day for lack of a better naming protocol. The systems that release cortisol, dopamine, and epinephrine, are essentially more effective at producing those than they are in the later periods of the day. Which makes sense if you think about the way that the autonomic nervous system works, et cetera. So there's an important question that I can't answer for you, but you can answer for you, which is if you're using Ritalin, Adderall, Vyvanse, these things that enhance dopaminergic transmission, Modafinil, Armodafinil, by the way, for the people in the audience like me, who didn't go to college when these things were all in use, the numbers of people that use these compounds, on and off prescription, is astronomical. It's incredible. I didn't realize it. I think something like 80% of college students use these at some point. Incredible, 'cause they put you into a narrow aperture tunnel of concentration. So you want to, with a physician's support of course, to help, get permission or not, to figure out what time of day to take your medication. Now for people who are not on medication, I'll just go right back to what I said earlier, which is that you can train focus, but it feels terrible to train it. It is hard. Again there are these large scale studies in China and elsewhere of people literally teaching themselves, and yes, they blink, although less often, to focus their vision on a narrow aperture and to really battle through that agitation, stress, and learn how to keep their focus. Now focus will drift, right? Focus is not a constant; focus will drift, and you pop out of focused states and then refocus, and pop out, and refocus. That's something that you can train up. I've heard from many people who have managed to train themselves off medication or to lower doses of medication, and look, some people can't do that. They absolutely have to maintain their standard medication protocols. This is a larger discussion, obviously, as it relates to ADHD. We're going to do another episode on ADHD because the data are coming out so so fast. "What future episodes are in the pipeline?" David Nguyen. Okay, thank you for that question. We have one on grief. We have an amazing episode with a guy from the Rockefeller University on the, this is, am I allowed to say it's going to be my favorite episode? I love all the guests, but this episode just blew me away. It's on the relationship between language, speech, dance, and music. And I have no musical talent and I'm not a very good dancer. So that's being generous. Amazing interplay between those things, exercise in the brain, OCD, bulimia, binge-eating disorder, Peter Attia's coming on. He'll teach us about everything medicine, and longevity. And I'm kind of blanking at the moment. David Anderson from Caltech on aggression and emotional states. Amazing. And then there are a number of people, Lisa Feldman Barrett, or Barrett Feldman. I always get it backwards. Sorry, Lisa, on emotions in the brain. And really we do take suggestions about who to bring on the podcast very seriously. What we're mostly looking for are the people that no one else has heard, that people haven't heard of, who are not going on podcasts every week and that people should absolutely hear from. And then I will tell you, they're going to kill me for saying this, but I'm going to do it anyway, we have some short series coming up with expert professionals. I'm going to do a short series on trauma. And my hope for this series is that you'll actually get to see an exquisitely skilled trauma therapist, take someone through, excuse me, I seem so excited I'm spitting on the audience, excuse me. So it, to take someone through actual trauma therapy. This isn't staged. This is somebody who's actually in a point of near suicidal grief and trauma, taking them through it in the course of the podcast, as people can see what this process actually entails. That's a very meaningful project to me for a number of reasons so we're really excited about that. And you know, to be honest, I feel like there's just such a treasure trove of information out there I just want to grab it all, and tell you all about it, until, I always say, "If nothing else, I'll cure insomnia." So, the, yeah. [audience applauding vigorously] Thank you. Appreciate it. [applause continuing] Thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate everyone coming out on a weekday and I'd be remiss if I didn't say, Thank you for your interest in science. [audience cheering and applauding] [upbeat music playing]

========================================

--- Video 262 ---
Video ID: DTCmprPCDqc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTCmprPCDqc
Title: Dr. Peter Attia: Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones for Vitality & Longevity
Published: 2022-08-15 12:00:09 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Peter Attia, M.D., who trained at Stanford University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital and the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Dr. Attia is host of The Drive podcast and is a world expert on behavioral approaches, nutritional interventions, supplementation and pharmacological techniques to improve lifespan, healthspan and athletic performance. We discuss how best to evaluate your health status using routine blood work, body scans and regular tests of physical strength and endurance. Dr. Attia explains what he uses with his patients to “back-cast” their health goals as a way to design their exercise and nutritional programs. We also discuss hormone modulation and replacement therapy for both men and women. We explain how cholesterol and related factors contribute to cardiovascular disease risk and how to monitor and mitigate that risk. Dr. Attia details various supplementation, nutrition, exercise and prescription approaches useful to people in every decade of life to improve vitality, reduce their risk of disease and increase the number of years sustaining peak cognitive and physical health. 

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www. hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs

Dr. Peter Attia
Website: https://peterattiamd.com 
The Peter Attia Drive Podcast: https://peterattiamd.com/podcast 
Newsletter: https://peterattiamd.com/newsletter 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/PeterAttiaMD 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/peterattiamd 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/PeterAttiaMD
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/peterattiamd

Articles
Strength & longevity: https://peterattiamd.com/ama27
VO2 max & longevity: https://peterattiamd.com/how-does-vo2-max-correlate-with-longevity

Timestamps
00:00:00 Assessing Health Status & Improving Vitality 
00:02:51 Momentous Supplements 
00:03:46 Thesis, InsideTracker, Helix Sleep 
00:07:29 Lifespan: Bloodwork & Biomarkers Testing, The “4 Horseman of Disease” 
00:11:51 Healthspan: Functional Testing, Cognitive & Emotional States 
00:13:59 Blood Testing: Best Frequency 
00:16:01 DEXA Scan: Lean Mass & Fat, Bone Mineral Density & Osteoporosis 
00:22:33 Bone Mineral Density & Age-Related Decline, Strength Training, Corticosteroids 
00:29:24 Osteopenia & Osteoporosis Diagnosis, Strength Training
00:31:03 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:32:16 Back-casting: Defining Your “Marginal Decade” 
00:38:31 All-Cause Mortality: Smoking, Strength, VO2 max 
00:44:43 Attia’s Rule of Supplementation, “Centenarian Decathlete” Physical Goals
00:49:24 Importance of Exercise, Brain Health, MET hours 
00:55:23 Nicotine & Cognitive Focus
01:03:12 Menstruation, PMS & Menopause 
01:10:10 Hormone Replacement Therapy, Menopause & Breast Cancer Risk
01:22:06 Estrogen, Progesterone & Testosterone Therapies in Women
01:26:35 Hormone Replacement Therapy in Men, SHBG & Testosterone, Insulin
01:37:23 Clomid, Pituitary, Testosterone & Cholesterol, Anastrozole, HCG
01:47:46 Fadogia Agrestis, Supplements, Rapamycin 
01:52:06 Testosterone Replacement Therapy & Fertility 
01:59:26 Total Testosterone vs. Free Testosterone
02:02:51 Cholesterol & Dietary Cholesterol, Saturated Fat, LDL & HDL, Apolipoprotein B
02:17:42 Apolipoprotein B, Diet, Statins & Other Cholesterol Prescriptions 
02:25:15 Cardiovascular Disease, Age & Disease Risk 
02:28:53 Peptides, Stem Cells, BPC157, PRP (Platelet-Rich Plasma), Injury Rehabilitation 
02:37:40 Metabolomics & Exercise 
02:40:44 GLP-1 & Weight Loss 
02:47:06 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter, Huberman Lab Clips

#HubermanLab #PeterAttia #Longevity 

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Peter Attia. Dr. Attia is a physician who's focused on nutritional, supplementation-based, behavioral, prescription drug, and other interventions that promote health span and lifespan. His expertise spans from exercise physiology to sleep physiology, emotional and mental health and pharmacology. Today we talk about all those areas of health, starting with the very basics, such as how to evaluate one's own health status and how to define one's health trajectory. We also talk about the various sorts of interventions that one can take in order to optimize vitality, while also extending longevity, that is lifespan. Dr. Attia's uniquely qualified to focus on the complete depth and breadth of topics that we cover. And indeed, these are the same topics that he works with his patients on in his clinic every day. Dr. Attia earned his Bachelor of Science in mechanical engineering and applied mathematics, and his MD from Stanford University School of Medicine. He then went on to train at Johns Hopkins Hospital in general surgery, one of the premier hospitals in the world, where he was the recipient of several prestigious awards, including Resident of the Year. He's been an author on comprehensive reviews of general surgery. He spent two years at the National Institute of Health as a surgical oncology fellow, at the National Cancer Institute, where his work focused on immune-based therapies for melanoma. In the fields of science and medicine, it is well understood that we are much the product of our mentors and the mentoring we receive. Dr. Attia has trained with some of the best and most innovative lipidologists, endocrinologists, gynecologists, sleep physiologists and longevity scientists in the United States and Canada. So the expertise that funnels through him and that he shares with us today is really harnessed from the best of the best, and his extensive training and expertise. By the end of today's episode, you will have answers to important basic questions such as should you have blood work? How often should you do blood work? What specific things should you be looking for on that blood work, that are either counterintuitive or not often discussed, and yet that immediately and in the long-term influence your lifespan and health span? We talk about hormone health and hormone therapies for both men and women. We talk about drug therapies that can influence the mind as well as the body. And of course, we talk about supplementation, nutrition, exercise, and predictors of lifespan and health span. It is an episode rich with information. For some of you, you may want to get out a pen and paper in order to take notes. For others of you that learn better simply by listening, I just want to remind you that we have timestamped all this information so that you can go back to the specific topics most of interest to you. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. If you'd like to see the supplements that we've partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements, and just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous, on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentus.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics that are designed for your unique needs. Now, to be honest, I'm not a fan of the word nootropics, because nootropics means smart drugs, and, to be honest, there is no such thing as a smart drug, because there's no neural circuit for being smart. There are neural circuits rather for being creative or for task switching or for focus. And as we all know, different sorts of demands, whether or not they're cognitive or physical, require different types of cognitive and physical abilities. Thesis understands this and has created a kit of custom nootropics that are tailored to your needs. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go to takethesis.com/huberman. Take their three minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman, and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box of custom nootropics. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done, for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also analyze, for instance, what your biological age is, and compare it to your chronological age. And obviously it's your biological age that really matters. The challenge with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests, however, is that you get information back about metabolic factors, hormones, and so forth, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes it very easy to know what to do with that information to optimize your health. They have a personalized platform, it's a dashboard that you go to. You can click on the level of any hormone, metabolic factor, lipid, et cetera, and it will tell you the various sorts of interventions based on nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, that you can use to bring those numbers into the ranges that are ideal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality. They also have some really unique features, because they are customized to your unique sleep needs. I've talked over and over again on this podcast and on other podcasts, about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. There's just simply no other substitute for a quality night's sleep on a regular basis. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for well over a year now, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. And that's in large part, because the mattress was designed for me. What you need to know, however, is what's the ideal mattress for you. And you can do that by going to Helix's site. You can take their brief quiz which will ask you do you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach, or maybe you don't know, or maybe all three, do you tend to run hot or cold in the night, maybe you know, maybe you don't. At the end of that short quiz, they will match you to the ideal mattress for you. I matched to the dusk, the D-U-S-K mattress, but again, that's what I need. That's not necessarily what you need in order to get your best night's sleep. But if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you, and you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows, they have terrific pillows. And you get to try out that mattress for 100 nights risk-free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it, but I'm certain you will. Again, if you're interested you go to helixsleep.com/huberman, for up to $200 off your mattress order and two free pillows. And now for my discussion with Dr. Peter Attia. Peter, thanks for joining me today. - Thanks for having me, man. - I've been looking forward to this for a very long time. - [Peter] As have I. - I'm a huge fan of your podcast. I know that you went to Stanford and worked with a number of people that are colleagues of mine. So for me, this is already a thrill, just to be doing this. - Yeah, well, it's likewise. - I have a ton of questions, but I want to start off with something that I wonder a lot about, and that I know many other people wonder about, which is how to assess their current health and their trajectory in terms of health and wellbeing, specifically as it relates to blood work. So what are your thoughts on blood work? Is it necessary for the typical person? So this is somebody who's not dealing with some acute syndrome or illness. And at what age would you suggest people start getting blood work? How frequently should they get blood work? How often do you get blood work done, et cetera? - Yeah, there's a lot there. I mean, the way I talk about this with patients is, first, taking everything back to the objective. So what's the thing we're trying to optimize? So if a person says, look, I'm trying to break 10 hours for an Ironman, I don't know that blood work is going to be a game-changing aspect of their trajectory and their training. You know, they're going to benefit much more from sort of functional analyses of performance. So I'm assuming, based on the question, that you're really coming at this through the lens of living longer and living better through the lifespan health span lens? - Mostly, yeah. I think most people have some sense of their vitality or lack of vitality, but I think everyone wonders whether or not they could feel better, and whether or not blood work will give them a window into how they might go about feeling better. - Yeah, I think it does to some extent, but I also think that it has a lot of blind spots. So I kind of break things down into the two vectors that make up longevity, which are lifespan and health span. So lifespan is the easiest of those vectors to understand, because it's pretty binary. You're alive or you're not alive. You're respiring or you're not. You make ATP or you don't, end of story. So what gets in the way of lifespan is essentially the four horsemen of disease, right? So atherosclerotic disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disease, and metabolic disease, which directly isn't the cause of many deaths, but basically creates the foundation to all of those other diseases. So, you know, if you're a non-smoker, what I just rattled off is about 80% of your death. So how does blood work help address those? It varies. So on the atherosclerotic standpoint, it's a very good predictor of risk, if you know what to look for. So primarily ApoB would be the single most important lipoprotein that we care about. I can explain what that means in a second. And then also, other markers of inflammation, endothelial health, and metabolic health. When it comes to cancer, you know, blood testing in the sense of biomarkers is not particularly helpful, outside of knowing that the second leading environmental or modifiable cause of cancer is metabolic ill health, after smoking. So we don't actually know a lot about cancer in the sense of what causes it. It's really stochastic, and it's a lot of bad luck. So we know that smoking drives it, and we know that, even though epidemiologically we say obesity drives it, what it really means is metabolic poor health. It's probably the hyperinsulinemia that comes with obesity that drives it. So biomarkers help with that, but there's still an enormous blind spot to cancer. We could talk about liquid biopsies aside, 'cause those aren't really biomarker studies, but put that away. On the neurodegenerative side, you know, I don't think we have a lot of insight that comes to understanding Parkinson's disease, but when it comes to dementia, particularly Alzheimer's disease, which is the most prevalent form of dementia, I think the biomarkers can be quite helpful. They overlap a lot with the atherosclerotic diseases. So the same things that drive the risk of heart disease are driving the risk of dementia. And then there's some novel stuff as well, if you include genetic testing, which you can get out of a blood test. We get a whole suite of genes, not just APOE, but far more nuanced stuff than that, that can also play a role. So you can stratify risk in that sense. So in aggregate, I would say, you know, blood testing of biomarkers provides pretty good insight into lifespan. When you get into health span, you have kind of the cognitive, physical, emotional domains. I think here the biomarkers are far less helpful, and here we kind of rely more on functional testing. So when it comes to sort of the cognitive piece, you know, you can do cognitive testing. In terms of long-term risk, a lot of the things that imply good cognitive health as you age, are in line with the same things that you would do to reduce the risk of dementia. So all the biomarkers that you would look to improve through dementia risk reduction, you would be improving through cognitive health. On the physical side, I mean, outside of looking at hormone levels and things which we look at extensively, and understanding how those might aid in or prevent some of the metrics that matter, it really is, this is a biomarker aside thing. I mean, I'd be much more interested in a person's DEXA, CPET testing, VO2 max testing, you know, zone two lactate testing, fat oxidation. Those are what I would consider more functional tests that give me far more insight into that. And then of course the emotional piece, which depending on who you are, might be the single most important piece, without which none of this other stuff matters, right? If you're a totally miserable human being, your relationships suck, I don't think any of this other stuff matters. And certainly there's nothing that I'm looking at in biomarkers that's giving me great insight into that. - Do you ask about emotional state, or do you try and assess emotional state indirectly when you do an intake with one of your patients? - Probably not so much in the intake, because I think it takes a while to form a relationship with a patient before that starts to become something that they're necessarily going to want to talk with you about. But I definitely think of it as an important part of what we do. And I think without it, none of this other stuff really matters. Again, the irony of thinking about how many years I spent sort of in pursuit of fully optimizing every detail of everything, without any attention being paid to that dimension, is not lost on me. And look, there are some patients who, that's just not something that, that's something that's compartmentalized. Maybe they're, you know, they're doing well in that department, or maybe they aren't, but they just aren't willing to engage on that yet. - In terms of frequency of blood testing, if somebody feels pretty good and is taking a number of steps, exercise, nutrition, et cetera, to try and extend lifespan and improve health span, is once a year frequent enough, and should a 20-year-old start getting blood work done just to get a window into what's going on? Assuming that they can afford it or their insurance can cover it. - Yeah, I mean, look, I certainly think everybody should be screened early in life because if you look at, like, what's the single most prevalent genetic driver of atherosclerosis, is Lp[a]. So unfortunately most physicians don't know what Lp[a] is, and yet somewhere between eight and 12% of the population has a high enough, and depending on who you, you know, I had a recent guest on my podcast who suggested it could be as high as 20%, have a high enough Lp[a], that it is contributing to atherosclerosis. So to not want to know that, when it's genetically determined, right, this is something that, you're born with this and you only need to really check it once, why we wouldn't want to know that in a 20-year-old, when it can contribute to a lot of the early atherosclerosis we see in people. It's leaving money on the table, in my opinion. The frequency with which you need to test really comes down to the state of interventions. I don't think it makes sense to just do blood tests for the sake of doing blood tests. There has to be kind of a reason. Is something changing? You know, a blood test is, for the most part, a static intervention. It's a look at a window in time. And there's benefit in having a few of those over the course of a year, if you're unsure about a level. So if something comes back and it doesn't look great, yeah, it might make sense just to recheck it without reacting to it. But typically, you know, in patients, we might check blood two to four times a year, but we're also probably doing things in there to now check, like hey, you know, we gave this drug, did it have the desired outcome? You put on three pounds of muscle and lost three pounds of fat, did it have the desired outcome? - Speaking of tracking weight and fat, lean mass percentages, is that something that you recommend your patients do pretty often? I know people that step on the scale every day, I know people like myself that frankly, I might step on the scale three times a year. I don't really care. I pay attention to other things that are far more subjective. Maybe I'm making a huge mistake. What are your thoughts about quantitative measurements of weight, BMI, for the typical person? - I think they're pretty crude. I think a DEXA, I'd rather take a DEXA annually, and then maybe follow weight a little bit more closely to get a sense of it. And so with a DEXA you're getting, at least the way we look at the data, four pieces of information. Now, most people when they do a DEXA, should I explain what that is, I'm? - Yeah, I think some people might not know what DEXA is. In fact, I confess, I have a crude understanding of what it is. Tell me where I'm wrong, and hopefully where I'm at least partially right. My understanding is that there are a number of different ways to measure lean mass to non-lean mass ratio, and there's one where they put you underwater. There's one where they put you into some sort of non-underwater chamber. There's calipering. And then there's the looking in the mirror and pinching and changing the lighting. - You know, it's funny, if you've done it enough, you can, I can sort of tell my body fat by my abs, right. So I can sort of tell by, you know, how good the six pack or how bad the six pack is, what the leanness is. And that's actually not a terrible way to do it. A bodybuilder, for example, which I've never been, can tell you the difference between being 6%, 7%, 8%, 10%, just based on the degree of visibility within the abs. But basically, a DEXA scan is an x-ray. So it's the same principle as just getting a chest x-ray, where ionizing radiation is passed through the body. And there's a plate behind the body that collects what comes through. And the denser the medium that the electrons are trying to go through, the less of them that are collected. So when you look at an x-ray, as everybody's probably seen an x-ray, that which is white is most dense. So if you had, you know, a piece of metal in your pocket, it would show up as a bright white thing. That's why ribs and bones show up as white, and the things that are the least dense, like the lungs, where it's just air, are the blackest. And everything is a shade of gray in between. So a DEXA is just doing that effectively, but it's a moving x-ray. So you lay down on a bed and it takes maybe 10 minutes, and this little, very low power x-ray kind of goes over your body. And the plate beneath it is collecting information that is basically allowing it to differentiate between three things, bone mineral content, fat, other. And the other is quantified as lean body mass. So that's organs, muscles, everything else. So when most people do a DEXA, they get the report back, and the reports are horrible. I've yet to see one company that can do this in a way that isn't abjectly horrible. We've created our own templates, so we have our own dashboard for how we do this, 'cause we've just given up on trying to use theirs. But the first thing most people look at is what's my body fat. And this is the gold standard outside of like MRI or something, that's only used for research purposes. So a DEXA is going to produce a far better estimate of body fat, than calipers or buoyancy testing, or things like that, provided the machinery is well-calibrated, and the operator knows how to use it. I've heard some people argue that in the hands of like the guy who's been doing calipers his whole life, it could probably be comparable with calipers. But nevertheless, for an off-the-shelf tech, DEXA is amazing. Of the four things that get spit out of the DEXA, we think that the body fat is the least interesting. And so I would rank that as fourth on the list of what's germane to your health. The other three things that you get spit out are bone mineral density, visceral fat, and then the metrics that allow you to compute, like to basically compute what's called appendicular lean mass index and fat-free mass index. And so those three metrics are significantly more important than body fat. And the reason is as follows, right? So, bone mineral density basically speaks to your risk of osteoporosis and osteopenia. And that doesn't sound very sexy to people our age, you know. 50-year-old guys listening to this, it's like, yeah, big deal. But for a 50-year-old woman, this is a huge deal, right? A woman who's just about to go through menopause, or has just gone through menopause, is at an enormous risk for osteopenia, and then ultimately osteoporosis, because estrogen is the single most important hormone in regulating bone mineral density. And we can come back and talk about why that's the case, but it's very interesting how the biomechanics of bones work, and why estrogen specifically is so important. And this is a huge cause of morbidity, right? So, you know, if you're over the age of 65 and you fall and break your hip, your one year morbidity is about 30 to 40%. Which again, just to put that in English, if you're 65 or older, you fall and break your hip, there's a 30 to 40% chance you're dead in a year. - [Andrew] Wow. - Bones matter. So we want to really get a sense of where you stack up for your age, for your sex. And if you're anywhere off the pace, we have to ramp up our strategy and be super aggressive about how to increase that, or at a minimum, prevent any further decay. - And are there age-related charts for these sorts of things? - Yeah, this all gets spit out into what's called a Z-score. So when you're looking at your BMD, it's going to give you a Z-score. So a Z-score of zero means, and you understand this, but it's like, a Z-score referring to a probability distribution in a standard mode. So Z-score of zero means you're at the 50th percentile for your age and sex. A Z-score of plus one, you're one standard deviation above, minus one, below, et cetera. There's also a T-score, which is doing the same thing, but comparing you to a young person. And so the T-score is technically used to make the diagnosis of osteopenia or osteoporosis. We tend to look more at the Z-score, and basically say, look, if your Z-score right now is minus one, in four years I want your Z-score to be zero. Not necessarily because you've increased that entire way, but maybe you've increased slightly while it's expected that you would've declined. - I see. What are some things that we can do to improve bone mineral density at any age? - So it turns out there's a real critical window in which we are malleable. So depending on the age at which someone's listening to us discuss this, you know, if you're under 20, 25, you are still in that time of your life when you are able to reach your potential. So it turns out that strength training is probably the single best thing you can do. And this was a surprise to me, 'cause we, you know, we did an AMA on this topic a little while ago, and that's when I got really deep on this with our analysts. My assumption was running must be the best, like some sort of impact must be the best thing you can do. You know, I assumed running would be better than swimming and cycling. But it turned out that power lifting was probably the best thing you could do. And I think once you understand how bones work, it became more clear, which is, you know, power lifting is really putting more of a sheer force from the muscle via the tendon onto the bone, and that's what the bones are really sensing. They're sensing that sheer force that's being applied through the bone, in a compressive way, depending on the bone of course. And that's what's basically activating the osteoblasts, which are the cells that are allowing bone to be built. So this turns out to be probably more important for females, because how high you can get during that period of development, say till you're 20 or 25, basically sets your trajectory for the rest of your life. So where we get into real trouble is with patients who, for example, used large amounts of inhaled steroids during that period of their life, 'cause let's say they had really bad asthma. Or patients who needed large amounts of corticosteroids for some other immune-related condition. So during their critical window of development, they were taking a drug that was impairing this process. So, you know, we have some patients like that in our practice and that's just an enormous liability that we're working really hard to overcome, with nutrition, with hormones, with drugs, with training. And, you know, it's just something you have to be aware of. - I wasn't aware that inhalants for asthma and things of that sort can impair bone mineral density. - If they're steroid-based. Some of them of course are just beta-agonists, and they're fine. - So anything corticosteroid like? - Yep. - Interesting. And then I always get asked this question, and I always reflexively want to say no, but I don't really know the answer so I don't reply. What about topical corticosteroid? You know, people will put cortisone cream. To me, it seems almost inconceivable that it would have a systemic effect, but then again, what do I know? - It's all dose and time-related. So, you know, if you're talking about like I've got a little rash under my skin, I'm going to put corticosteroids on, probably not. But certainly, with enough of it put on, I mean it is absorbed, so it could be an issue. But that's not typically what we're concerned with. I mean, we're mostly concerned with people that are taking even modest amounts of prednisone for months, years at a time. Or, like I said, kids that are using steroid inhalers for years and years and years. Again, I'm not suggesting that if your kid's on a steroid inhaler they shouldn't be. You have to solve the most important problem, and if asthma is the most important problem, so be it. I think you just want to turn that into, okay, well, how much more imperative is it that our kid is doing things that are putting a high amount of stress on their bones, via their muscles, to make sure that they're in that maximal capacity to build. - Do you think that somebody in their 30s or 40s or 50s could still benefit from strength training in terms of bone mineral density and longevity, as it relates to bone mineral density, given that there's this key window earlier, they might have missed that one. - Oh yeah, no, no, this is essential for the rest of life because you're now trying to prevent the fall off. So basically the way it works is you're sort of, from birth to say 20 you're in growth. From 20 to 50, you plateau. At 50, men start to decline, but it's really small. Women start to decline and it's precipitous. - And it's related to the drop in estrogen associated with menopause or premenopause? - [Peter] Correct. - And can we get into any of the broad contours of what that strength training looks like? We had Dr. Andy Galpin on the show, he talked a lot about ways to build strength versus hypertrophy versus endurance, et cetera. I think there's pretty good agreement across the fields of physiotherapy, et cetera, of physiology and medicine, in terms of how to do that. But my understanding is fairly low repetition ranges, so this is anywhere from one to six repetitions. Typically not aiming for a pump hypertrophy, that sort of thing. But heavy loads that are hard to move, 80% of one repetition maximum or more, done with long rest periods, two to three times a week type thing, is that about right? - Yeah, if you look at the literature on this, it's going to tell you, it's going to differentiate power lifting from weightlifting. In other words, yeah, you do need to be kind of moving against a very heavy load. Now again, that can look very different depending on your level of experience. Like I really like deadlifting. Now, I mean, I can count the number of days left in my life when I'm going to want to do sets over 400 pounds. But, you know, I'll pick and choose the days that I do. But, you know, I grew up doing those things, I'm comfortable with those movements. If I had a 60-year-old woman who's never lifted weights in her life, who we now have to get lifting, I mean, we could get her to deadlift, but I think, I wouldn't make perfect the enemy of good. I'd be happy to put her on a leg press machine and just get her doing that. You know, it's not as pure a movement as a deadlift, but who cares, right? We can still put her at a heavy load, for her, and do so safely. So, now that said, I mean, there was a study that was done in Australia, and I'm, you know, hopefully we can find a link to it. There's a video on YouTube that actually kind of has the PI sort of walking through the results. I could send it to you. - [Andrew] Okay, yeah we'll track it down. - And it's just amazing. They took a group of older women. They looked like they were in their 60s or 70s, who had never lifted weights in their life, who had osteopenia, and some probably already had osteoporosis, and they basically just put them on a strength training protocol. And it is remarkable to watch these women. They're doing good mornings. They're doing dead lifts. They're picking heavy things up off the ground. I think one woman was picking up, God, I want to say she was like picking like 50, 60 kilos up off the ground. I mean, just staggering sums of weight for these women who have never done anything. And their bone health is improving at this age. So the goal, frankly, is to just, you know, never get to the point where you have to do this for the first time. Strength training is such an essential part of our existence that it's never too late to start, but you should never stop. - I love that advice. Is it a systemic effect or a local effect? So, for instance, let's say that, well, my mother's in her late 70s. She actually used to be really strong when we were kids. She could move this fish tank that was in my room long before I could move it, and I was always, she's really strong. Over the years, I wouldn't call her frail by any means, but I certainly think she could benefit from some strength training. Let's say she were to start doing some leg presses or start even with air squats and maybe work up to some pushups, are the effects all local, meaning if she were to just train her legs or just do pushups, would it only be the loads applied to the limbs and muscles and tissues that were involved? - I think that's where the bulk of it is, yeah. - Okay. - Yeah. - [Andrew] So you need to train the whole body, essentially. - Yeah, now keep in mind, the diagnosis of osteopenia and osteoporosis is based on only three locations, the left hip, the right hip, and the lumbar spine. So, you know, that's just the convention by which we make the diagnosis. And I think part of that has to do with that's where the majority of the insults occur. Now not all of the insults, I've seen people that have, you know, because of horrible bone density, they're fracturing ankles and tibia, fibula, like they're having low tib fib fractures just walking. So clearly bone density outside of those regions does matter. But much of it is really focused on, and, by the way, you know, you fall, you break a wrist, so this is a systemic issue. But the majority of the response is a local response, 'cause it really comes down to putting a load directly on that bone, and then having that bone, in kind, respond by laying down more bone. - Before we continue with today's discussion, I'd like to just briefly acknowledge our sponsor Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens, aka AG1, is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I've been taking Athletic Greens since way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens twice a day is that it supplies total foundational coverage of my vitamin mineral needs, and it supplies important nutrients that I need to support my gut microbiome. The gut microbiome, as many of you know, supports the immune system. It also supports the so-called gut brain access, which is vital for mood, for energy levels, for regulating focus, and many other features of our mental health and physical health that impact our daily performance and high performance in any endeavors we might be involved in. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2, with every order. And of course, vitamin D3 K2 are vital for all sorts of things like hormone health and metabolic health, and K2 for cardiovascular health and calcium regulation. Again, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. You mentioned falling and the problems with falling and breaking things, and mortality related to that. I wonder whether or not there are also health-related effects of just having weak bones that are not just about falling and breaking a bone, and dying a year later. That's obviously very severe. Because I think when people hear about that, some people might think, well, I'll just be more careful. I'll just move more slowly. I'll sit in a wheelchair if I need to, even though I might be able to walk, if it keeps me from falling. Some people I think adopt that mentality. What are some of the benefits of having high bone mineral density for men and women, that are perhaps independent of risk of injury? - Well, I think it's actually the inverse of what you just said, right? It's sort of like, you have to sort of be able to articulate what it is you want in your marginal decade. So we use this thing in our practice called the marginal decade. Marginal decade is the last decade of your life. So everyone will have a marginal decade. That's the only thing I can tell you with absolute certainty, right? - I believe you. - There's no immortality. There's no hidden elixir that's going to help us live to be, you know, whatever. I mean, we're all going to be in our last decade at some point. And outside of people who die suddenly or through an accident, most of us know when we're in that marginal decade. You might not know the day you enter it, but most people, you know, who are old enough, if you tell them, are you in the last decade of your life, they probably have a sense that they are. So I think the exercise that we like to go through with our patients very early on is have them, in exquisite detail, more detail than they've ever considered, so we have to prompt them with like 50 questions, lay out what their marginal decade should look like. - Wow, that's a serious exercise. - It's a very serious exercise, right? Like what, tell me everything that is going to happen in your marginal decade. I don't know when it's going to be, Andrew, it could be 87 to 97 if we're doing well, right? It might be 79 to 89, I don't know. But, you know, it would really be a very nuanced exploration of that topic. And I think until you do that, all of this other stuff is just abstract and kind of nonsense. Until a person can tell you what it is that they want to be doing in that last decade, you can't design a program to get them there. I mean, think about it. Someone wants to do an Ironman, we take it for granted that we know what the objective is. I have to be able to swim 2 1/2 miles. I have to be able to get out, take my wetsuit off, hop on my bike, ride 112 miles, get off my bike, take the bike shoes off, put the run shoes on, run 26.2 miles. Like we get it, we know what the objective is. And only by knowing that can you train. Can you imagine if I said to you, Andrew, I'm going to have you do an athletic event in a year, start training. I'm not going to tell you what it is, just do it. Could be playing basketball. You know, it could be swimming to Catalina Island. It could be running 100 miles. You wouldn't be able to do it. So similarly, if we don't know what our marginal decade is meant to be, there's no way to train for it. - Do you think this is a good exercise for anyone and everyone to do on their own, regardless of age here? I'm hearing this - Absolutely. - and I'm thinking, I need to think about when my last decade might be and what I want that to look like. - Absolutely, I mean, when I say we do it with our patients, that's only because that's the population I work with. But there's simply no reason everybody shouldn't be going through this exercise. - And then you sort of back script from there, figure out what people should be doing, given their current health status. - Exactly right, we call it back casting. So the first step we do is, once we've really delineated what the objective function looks like, we then say, okay, how do you break down that into metrics that we can measure? So, you know, you described doing a whole bunch of things. Okay, just to let you know, to do that will require a VO2 max of 30 milliliters of oxygen per minute per kilogram. And the person will say, okay, what does that mean? We'll say, well, that's a measure of your maximal uptake of oxygen, and that declines at about 8% to 10% per decade. So if you have to be at 30, and let's just assume you're going to be doing that at 90, so what do you need to be at 80, 70, 60, 50. Okay, here's what it would need to be at 50. Okay, what are you now? Ah, there's a big gap. You're below where you need to be now. So you're obviously higher than 30 now, but if you're only at 42 now and you need to be at 30 and 40 years, you're not going to cut it. You have to be a lot fitter. Okay, now let's do the same exercise around strength and stability. And without exception, most people, when they do this exercise, will find out they're well below where they need to be. So the gravity of aging is more vicious than people realize, and therefore the height of your glider needs to be much higher than you think it is when you're our age, if you want to be able to do the things we probably want to be able to do when we're 90. - I absolutely love this approach. I've never done it in terms of my health. I've always thought about what I want to accomplish in the next three to six months or next year or so. - And by the way, that's a great approach. That's forecasting. Forecasting is fantastic. Forecasting is really good at short-term things. It doesn't work for long-term things. Long-term, you have to do back casting. - This back casting approach really appeals to me because in my career, well, I never anticipate, excuse me. I never anticipated I'd be podcasting. But that's what I did at some point as an undergraduate, I looked at professors, I'm like, that looks like a pretty good life. They seem pretty happy, I talked to a few of them, and then I figured out what I need to do at each stage in order to get to that next rung on the ladder, and just kind of figured it out in a back casting kind of way, as you refer to it. I think this is incredibly useful because it puts all the questions about blood work and how often to get blood work and what to measure, in a really nice context that's a highly individualized. I've never heard of this before, so. - And I should give a nod to Annie Duke. I used to always refer to this as reverse engineering, but in Annie Duke's book, she wrote about this exact thing and called it back casting, and I was like, I like the term back casting better. I think it's more intuitive than reverse engineering. - Yeah, there's a real genius to it and I think it, 'cause it sets so many things into the appropriate bins and trajectories. I've heard you talk before about some of the prime movers for longevity and all-risk mortality. And I'd love for you to review a little bit of that for us. I think we all know that we shouldn't smoke because it's very likely that we'll die earlier if we smoke nicotine. I'm neither a marijuana nor a nicotine smoker, so I feel on stable ground there. But anytime we see smoking nowadays, people really want to distinguish between cannabis and nicotine. So I am curious about any differences there in terms of impact on longevity. But in that context, what are the things that anyone and everyone can do, should do, to live longer basically? - How long you got? - Well, you tell me. You tell me. I'd like to live, to be, I'd like my final decade to be between 90 and 100. - Oh no, I meant how long do you, yeah yeah. - No no, I'm just kidding. I'm just kidding. - And will we spend from now until you're 90 talking about this? - Well, there's a risk of that. But top contour is fine, I know you've done a lot of content on this, and we will give people links to some of that more in depth content. But, you know, let's say we were on a short flight from here to San Diego, we're in Los Angeles now, and we got take off and landing, and we don't want to kink our neck too much by doing this thing. So if I just said, hey, you know, gimme the extended version of the three by five card. What does that look like? - So, let's start with a couple of the things that you've already highlighted. So smoking, how much does smoking increase your risk of all-cause mortality? And the reason we like to talk about what's called ACM, or all-cause mortality, is it's really agnostic to how you die. And that doesn't always make sense. I mean, if you're talking about, you know, a very specific intervention, like a anti-cancer therapeutic, you really care about cancer-specific mortality or heart-specific mortality. But when we talk about these sort of broad things, we like to talk about ACM. So, you know, using smoking, smoking is approximately a 40% increase in the risk of ACM. - What does that translate to in, that means I'm shortening my life by 40%? - No, it means at any point in time, there's a 40% greater risk that you're going to die relative to a non-smoker and a never smoker. - Got it. - Yeah. So it's important to distinguish. It doesn't mean your lifespan is going to be 40% less. It means at any point in time, standing there, your risk of death is 40% higher. And, by the way, that'll catch up with you, right? At some point that catches up. High blood pressure. It's about a 20 to 25% increase in all-cause mortality. You take something really extreme, like endstage kidney disease. So these are patients that are on dialysis, waiting for an organ. And again, there's a confounder there because there's what's the underlying condition that leads you to that. It's, you know, profound hypertension, you know, significant Type II diabetes that's been uncontrolled. You know, that's enormous, that's about 175% increase in ACM. So the hazard ratio is like 2.75. Type II diabetes is probably about a 1.25 as well. So a 25% increase. So another question is like, how do you improve? So what are the things that improve those? So now here we do this by comparing low to high achievers on other metrics. So if you look at low muscle mass versus high muscle mass, what is the improvement? And it's pretty significant. It's about three X. So if you compare low muscle mass people to high muscle mass people as they age, the low muscle mass people have about a three X hazard ratio, or 200% increase in all-cause mortality. Now, if you look at the data more carefully, you realize that it's probably less the muscle mass fully doing that, and it's more the high association with strength. And when you start to just tease out strength, you can realize that strength could be probably 3 1/2 X as a hazard ratio, meaning about 250% greater risk, if you have low strength to high strength. - And high strength is the ability to move loads at 80 to 90% of one repetition? - It's all defined by given studies. So, the most common things that are used are actually, they're used for the purposes of experiments that make it easy to do. And I don't even think they're the best metrics. So they're usually using like grip strength, leg extensions, and like wall sits, squats, things like that. So how long can you sit in a squatted position at 90 degrees without support, would be a great demonstration of quad strength. A leg extension, you know, how much weight can you hold for how long, relative to body weight, things like that. You know, we have a whole strength program that we do with our patients, we have something called the SMA. So it's the strength metrics assessment. And we put them through 11 tests that are really difficult, you know, like a dead hang is one of them. Like how long can you dead hang your body weight, stuff like that. So we're trying to be more granular in that insight, but tie it back to these principles. If you look at cardio respiratory fitness, it's even more profound. So if you look at people who are in the bottom 25% for their age and sex, in terms of VO2 max, and you compare them to the people that are just at the 50th to 75th percentile, you're talking about a two X difference roughly, in the risk of ACM. If you compare the bottom 25% to the top 2.5%, so you're talking about bottom quarter to the elite, for a given age, you're talking about five X. - Wow! - 400% difference in all-cause mortality. That's probably the single strongest association I've seen for any modifiable behavior. - Incredible. So when you say elite, these are people that are running marathons at a pretty rapid clip. - Not necessarily. It's just like what the VO2 max is for that, like my VO2 max would be in the elite for my age group. My VO2, but again, I'm training very deliberately to make sure that it's in that. So I wouldn't consider myself elite at anything anymore, but I still maintain a VO2 max that is elite for my age. - I consider you an elite physician and podcaster. And guy all around. But true. But in terms of, okay, so- - But the point is like, you don't have to be a world class athlete to be elite here, yeah. - Got it. So maybe we could talk a little bit about the specifics around the training to get into the top two tiers there, because it seems that those are enormous positive effects of cardiovascular exercise, far greater than the sorts of numbers that I see around, let's just say supplement A or supplement B. - Well, and that's, you know, like this is my whole pet peeve in life, right? It's like, I just can't get enough of the machinating and arguing about this supplement versus that supplement. And I feel like you shouldn't be having those arguments until you have your exercise house in order, you know. You shouldn't be arguing about this nuance if you're carnivore diet, versus this nuance if you're paleo diet, versus this nuance if you're vegan diet, like, until you can deadlift your body weight for 10 reps. Like then you can come and talk about those things, or something like, let's just come up with some metrics. Like until your VO2 max is at least to the 75th percentile and you're able to dead hang for at least a minute, and you're able to wall sit for at least two, like we could rattle off a bunch of relatively low hanging fruit. I wish there was a rule that said like you couldn't talk about anything else health-related. - We can make that rule. - [Peter] No one'll listen to it. - I don't know about that. We can make whatever rules we want. We can call it Attia's rule. One thing I've done before on this podcast, and on social media is, just borrowing from the tradition in science, which is it's inappropriate to name something after yourself, unless you were a scientist before 1950. But it's totally appropriate to name things after other people. So I'm going to call it Attia's rule. Until you can do the following things, don't talk about supplements. - Please refrain from talking about supplements and nutrition. - There it is, hereafter, thought of, referred to, and referenced as Attia's rule. I coined the phrase, not him. So there's no ego involved, but it is now Attia's rule. Watch out. Hashtag Attia's rule. - Oh God! - Wikipedia entry, Attia's rule. In all seriousness, and I am serious about that. Dead hang for about a minute seems like a really good goal for a lot of people. At least- - That's our goal. I think we have a minute and a half is the goal for a 40-year-old woman. Two minutes is the goal for a 40-year-old man. So we adjust them up and down, based on age and gender. - Great. And then the wall sit, what are some numbers? - We don't use a wall sit, we do just a straight squat, air squat at 90 degrees. And I believe two minutes is the standard for both men and women at 40. - Great. And then, because for some people thinking in terms of VO2 max is a little more complicated, they might not have access to the equipment to measure it, et cetera, what can we talk about, think about, in terms of cardiovascular. So run a mile at seven minutes or less, eight minutes or less? - Oh, that's a good question. So there are really good VO2 max estimators online, and you can plug in your activity de jure, so be it a bike, run, or rowing machine, and it can give you a sense of that. And I don't, I used to know all of those. - Oh, that's okay. - But now that I just actually do the testing, I don't recall them. But it's exactly that line of thinking, like, can you run a mile in this time. If you can, your VO2 max is approximately this. - [Andrew] Great. - And I think, somewhere in my podcast realm, I've got all those charts posted of like, this is by age, by sex. This is what the VO2 max is in each of those buckets. - Terrific, we'll provide links to those. We'll have our people find those links. And then you mentioned deadlifting body weight 10 times. - I just made that one up. That's not one that we include, but- - [Andrew] Something like that? - We use farmer carries. So we'll say for a male, you should be able to farmer carry your body weight for, I think we have two minutes. - [Andrew] Great. - So that's half your body weight in each hand. You should be able to walk with that for two minutes. For women, I think we're doing 75% of body weight or something like that, yeah. - Great. I love it. As indirect measures of how healthy and, - Yeah. - we are. And how long we're going to live. - It's basically grip strength, it's mobility. I mean, again, walking with that much weight, for some people initially, is really hard. You know, we use different things like vertical jump, ground contact time if you're jumping off a box, things like that. So it's really trying to capture, and it's an evolution, right? Like I think the test is going to get only more and more involved as we get involved, 'cause it took us about a year. Beth Lewis did the majority of the work to develop this. Beth runs our strength and stability program in the practice. And, you know, basically I just tasked her with like, hey, go out to the literature and come up with all of the best movements that we think are proxies for what you need to be like the most kick-ass, you know, what we call centenarian decathlete, which is the person living in their marginal decade at the best. - Well, what I'm about to say is certainly a mechanistic leap, but if you look at the literature on exercise-related neurogenesis in mice, or brain atrophy or brain hypertrophy, et cetera, in animal models, it's very clear that the best way to get a nervous system to atrophy, to lose neurons, shrink neurons, and or lose connections between neurons, is to stop that animal from moving. Or to de-enrich its environment, deprive it of some sensory input or multiple sensory inputs. And the best way to enhance the size of neurons, the number of connections between neurons, and maybe even the number of neurons, is to enrich its environment and get it moving while enriching that environment. - You know, Andrew, I think it's very difficult for me to say that the same is not true in humans. And so the first time this became clear to me was in 2014, I had an analyst, Dan Pelletier, and I said, Dan, I'm going to give you a project that is vexing me to no end, which is, I want you to look at all of the literature that we have, both mechanistic and clinical trial data, that talks about Alzheimer's prevention. And I want to know every single type of input. And I want to have a clear sense of via what mechanism does it offer what mode of protection? And it took Dan, and this was obviously, we iterated a lot on this together. And he came back with kind of an amazing presentation that took, I don't know, nine months to a year of work. And what amazed me was when he came back to it, he said, the single greatest efficacy we can point to is exercise. And I was like Dan, that's got to be nonsense, dude. There's no way exercise is the single best thing you can do for the brain. There has to be some drug you've missed. There has to be some other thing that you've missed. And he's like, no, like this is hands down the best thing 'cause you're, you know, it's not just what it's doing to BDNF. It's not just what it's doing to vascular endothelium. It's not just what it's doing to glucose disposal and insulin signaling and all these things. It's just touching every aspect of the brain. And I was very skeptical for about six months, kind of really pushed on him and I was like, I think you're missing something, Dan, I think you're missing something. And then finally in the end, looped in Richard Isaacson, who's a neurologist that we work with really closely on Alzheimer's prevention. And you know, ultimately it turned into a paper that we wrote basically, you know, about this topic, and a few others. 'Cause again, I thought, oh, are you sure it's not EPA and DHA? Like that's got to have a bigger impact. And again, there are a lot of things that I think do matter and there's a whole host of things that we do for Alzheimer's prevention. But I think you're absolutely right. There's not one thing that I'll tell patients is more important than exercising. And by the way, it's not the sort of pathetic recommendations that are made. Like it's, you have to exercise a lot more if you want to get this maximum benefit. You will get, you know, the maximum benefit comes going from nothing to something. So if you go from being completely sedentary to doing 15 MET hours per week, you'll get probably a 50% reduction in risk. - Wow. - So a MET hour, a MET, just for people who don't know, is a metabolic equivalent. So we're exerting about 1.3 METs sitting here talking. If we were sitting here being quiet, it would be about one MET. Walking really briskly would be about five METs. So 15 MET hours per week would be three one hour really brisk walks. That's not a lot of work. But just going from doing nothing to doing that would give you 50% of the benefit that you would get from going all the way. Now I, again, I think, I'm personally a little skeptical of how much that's, I think it's probably a bit less than that. I think there's more upside than people appreciate. But the studies, I don't think, can truly capture that. But look, you know, there's no reason to not be exercising more than that, and capture more benefit, even though the rate at which you accrue it is less. And it also speaks to the health span side of this, which is not necessarily captured in those data. The health span gets back to the functional piece we opened with, which is what do you want to be doing in your marginal decade? Do you want to be able to pick up a great-grandkid, if they come running at you? Do you want to be able to get up off the floor? Do you want to be able to play on the floor with a kid and then get up on your own? - And I think most people are thinking final years of life, they're trying to think, you know, how can they take themselves to the bathroom? They're thinking, how can they sit up off the toilet? I mean you have like really base, vegetative type functions, right, at some level. I love this, again, this idea of marginal decade and using that as a way to back cast, to actual methods and behaviors and protocols that one should be doing on a daily basis. I'll use anecdata, as it's now called, to cite just, I know three Nobel prize winners, which doesn't mean anything except that they did beautiful work. But the point is that they're all in their 90s. So I'll name them 'cause I'm complimenting them for what they've done. Not just their work, but what I'm about to describe. So Eric Kandel at Columbia. Nobel prize winner for work on memory. Torsten Wiesel, work on neuroplasticity. And then Richard Axel, who's also at Columbia, Nobel prize winning work for molecular biology of smelling and molecular biology generally. All three of them still alive, Richard's younger compared to the other two. All three of them either swim, jog, or play tennis, or racquetball I think is Richard's thing, multiple times per week. They're all cognitively still extremely sharp, still interested in the arts, doing science, curious about science, running laboratories, writing books, going on podcasts. I mean, it's incredible. Again, that's anecdata. But I was kind of surprised to learn that colleagues that were so intellectually strong were also so obsessed with exercise. I mean, they really are obsessed with their exercise routine and early on linked that to their, some of their intellectual vigor over time. I want to just also use that as a jumping off point to ask about one kind of niche thing, but it comes up. I don't think I'm going to out which one of those told me this, but one of those three individuals chews an excessive amount of Nicorette. Used to be a smoker and I asked him why and he said because, in his estimation, it's protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, or at least the nicotinic acetylcholine augmentation of nicotine, 'cause nicotine is an acetylcholine receptor obviously, is known to create a state of focus and neural enhancement. What are your thoughts about not smoking, let's just, I just want to be really clear, people, don't smoke nicotine, vape nicotine, it's going to shorten your life. Just terrible idea, addictive, et cetera, in my opinion. But what are your thoughts about augmenting acetylcholine, through the use of nicotine, in order to keep the brain healthy and focused? Again, this is one Nobel prize winner, so it's truly N of one, but he's so convinced that this matches up with the mechanistic data on acetylcholine and cognition, that I'd love to hear your thoughts on it. - So I can't speak to the AD prevention component of it. I'd have to run that by a couple of my colleagues who I collaborate with on that. But I can definitely speak to the cognitive enhancement piece of it. And I actually did an AMA on this, probably a year ago, where I went into all of the gory details of it and talked about my own use of nicotine, which I'll cycle on and off, I've been doing it for the last 10 years. I haven't- - What form do you take it in? - I used to use the gum. I don't like the gum anymore, so now I like these little lozenges that, and I'll tell you a funny story about this. So our mutual acquaintance, David Sinclair, mentioned a company to me a year ago. He's like, hey, have you heard of this company? And I forget the name of the company, but he gave me some name. So I go online and it's like this company selling nicotine. And I'm like, I wonder why he's asking me to do this. Well, I'll just order a bunch and then we'll figure out why, 'cause we were, you know, there was some reason we were doing this potentially through investment. So I get a, like literally order like a lifetime supply of this stuff. And it's pretty good, it's actually, it's a really nice little patch, 'cause I, the thing I didn't like about the gum was I hated just the taste of it. So then the next week I'm talking to David and I'm like, by the way, I ordered all that nicotine stuff you told me about. He's like what? And he goes, oh, the company's name was something else. It was totally unrelated. It's like, oh God. So the short answer is, I think this stuff is absolutely a concentration-enhancing substance. It is addictive and people need to be wary of that. Now it's not addictive to everybody. I personally experience no addiction to it whatsoever. So I can, I could do it every day for 30 days and stop and experience no withdrawal. I could forget about it, it doesn't really seem to matter. You have to be careful with the dose, truthfully. I mean, remember one cigarette is about one milligram of nicotine, and a lot of these lozenges will plow four to eight milligrams into you in one shot. And for someone who is, you know, naive to that, like I am, four milligrams is a lot of nicotine in one bolus. So you just have to be very mindful of it. I got a lot of flack when I did this AMA, for obvious reasons, but people were like, how can you, as a doctor, encourage people to use nicotine. And I was like, first of all, I'm not encouraging anybody to use it. I just want to be able to talk about the biochemistry of it. And if disclosing that I use it from time to time is an endorsement then I apologize for that. But on the list of things that you can do to make your brain a little more focused, I would consider this infinitely safer than what a lot of people are doing, which is using stimulants. I mean, to me, you know, I just tell patients outright, like we are under no circumstance prescribing stimulants. I mean, yeah, we're not giving anybody Adderall. We're not giving anybody Vyvanse, or any of these things. Not to say they don't have an appropriate clinical use, but they should be prescribed under the care of somebody who's really monitoring the use case for it. And using that as a tool to enhance, you know, concentration in cognitive performance is not something we're comfortable doing. - Yeah, it's rampant on college campuses. - [Peter] I can only imagine. - Armodafinil, modafinil which are slightly different, of course, but, so non-clinical use, not prescribed for ADHD, but just, it's rampant. Recreational use, study-based use. - But the data I've seen on modafinil suggests that it only really provides a nootropic benefit. in someone who is deprived of sleep. Is there data that in a totally well-rested person, there is a nootropic benefit of modafinil? - I don't know. I have one experience with armodafinil, where I took a half a recommended dose, this was prescribed by a doctor. I went to give a talk. This was in Hawaii and I'm four hours into the talk. My co-speaker came up to me and just said, well, first of all, you got a little bit of spit in the corner of your mouth. And second of all, you haven't blinked in three minutes. And third, there's only two people left in the audience. I was so lazered in that I kind forgot the context. Now I'm a little bit of a, kind of a tunnel vision, OCD-type anyway, but one, that was all it took, I never took any more of it. It was a powerful stimulant. I take 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPC now and again, before some cognitive work, sometimes before workouts, and I do subjectively feel that it narrows my focus in a nice way. But I don't take it more than once or twice a day, and more than once or twice a week. - See, this is an example of where, you know how we're talking about exercise versus sort of nutrition and supplements for longevity. I think there may be a whole bunch of things that are kind of interesting around focus, but nothing would compare to changing our environment. Like I think that if I compare my focus today to my focus when I was in college, there's no comparison. Like in college, I was truly a robot. But I think a large part of it was, there was no distraction. There's no email. There's no social media. There's no internet. I mean, I was in college when Mosaic launched in the early '90s. Like I, you know, and you had to walk like a mile to get to the computer lab on a big Sun workstation to do anything in, you know, some computer code language. So when you're sitting in your room studying, there was no distraction. And I think that's a far greater component of what it means to be focused, than the challenges we have today. So, you know, my thoughts on this would be, if we really wanted to return to a state of focus, we're going to have to individually do something about, you know, our environment. And I don't know what the answer is. Like, I've tried every little trick I can think of, like closing my browsers when I'm writing and stuff, but, you know, I'm just not strong enough willed. Like I'll pick up my phone every 20 minutes to look and see if I missed a text message or something stupid. - That's pretty infrequent. I did an episode on habits and looking at the data. It seems that people are getting interrupted or interrupting themselves about once every three minutes in the typical workplace, now that typical has changed with a lot more people working at home. I do put my phone away when I try and work, but nothing focuses me like a deadline. A little bit of fear-based urgency. That's it, grant deadlines, you know, drop deadlines as I call them, or podcasts we're going to record today, that nothing works quite like it. But such is life. Well, thanks for that offshoot about nicotine. Again, you're not recommending it, I'm not recommending it, but it's clear that augmenting the acetylcholine system, which is what nicotine does in its various forms, and some related type pharmacology, does enhance focus and pretty potently. So I think it's going to be an interesting area for real clinical trials and things of that sort. Love to chat about hormone therapies, and hormones generally. When Robert Sapolsky came on the podcast, we talked a little bit about menopause and the data around menopause. He's very interested in these findings that, I think I'm going to get this right, that whether or not women benefit from estrogen therapy to offset menopause really depends on when that therapy is initiated. I don't know if you're aware of those data, but he claimed that if they begin estrogen therapy in the middle to tail end of menopause, the outcomes can be quite bad. Whereas if they initiate those estrogen therapies as they enter menopause or even before menopause, then the outcomes can be quite good. I don't know what percentage of the patients you treat are male versus female, and what ages those patients are of course, but what are your thoughts about estrogen therapy for women, menopause, and hormone therapies generally for women, maybe even testosterone therapy, you hear about that these days, and then we'll talk about men. - So our practice is probably 70 30 male female. So we have lots of women, and this is a very important topic. It's also probably, let me think. I just want to make sure I'm not being hyperbolic when I say this. Yeah, I don't think I am. It's hands down the biggest screw up of the entire medical field in the last 25 years. Now, again, it's possible in the next hour I'll think of, nope, there's a bigger screw up. - Another giant screw up. - Yeah, but I don't think I will. I'm pretty confident that I won't be able to think of a bigger act of incompetence than what happened with the women's health initiative in the late '90s and early 2000s, which is effectively the study that turned the entire medical field off hormone replacement therapy for women. So it's important, I think, to explain what this study looked at. So this was a study that was conducted in response to the widely held belief in the '70s and '80s that women should be placed on hormones as they're going through menopause, right? Menopause is, I guess maybe I'll even take a step back. I don't know how much your audience is familiar with how estrogen progesterone work. Is it worth going into that stuff? - Yeah probably worth mentioning a bit of the top contour. Some of them might be familiar with it, we've done episodes on estrogen testosterone, but frankly, as I think back to those, we didn't really go into the biology of estrogen testosterone enough. - Yeah, so, I mean, actually an interesting aside that I always tell my female patients who get a kick out of this. When you look at a woman's labs, you'll see her estrogen, her progesterone, her FSH, her LH, her testosterone, her sex hormone binding globulin, and all these things. But based on the units they're reported in, it's a very distorting picture of what the most common androgen is in her body. If you actually convert them to the same units, she has much more testosterone in her body than estrogen. - Interesting. - Yeah. - I did not know that. - Yeah. - Then again, I've never been a woman getting my hormone profile. - Yeah, yeah. So even though a woman's testosterone is much less than a man's level, it's still more than she has estrogen in her body. - [Andrew] Wow! - So phenotypically, right, estrogen is the hormone that's dominating and test, so it's the, she has much higher estrogen than a man and much lower testosterone than a man, but in absolute amounts, she has more testosterone than estrogen. Just worth pointing that out. - [Andrew] Incredible. - So, you know, what's happening to a woman from the age she starts menstruating until she goes through menopause, outside of pregnancy and birth control and stuff like that, is she has this cycle, you know, roughly every 28 days, but it can vary, where at the beginning of her period, we call that day zero, her basic, her estrogen and progesterone are very low. You can't measure them. And then what happens is the estrogen level starts to rise, and it rises in response to a hormone called follicle stimulating hormone, FSH, that is getting her ready to ovulate. And she ovulates at about the midpoint of her cycle. So if we're just going to make the math easy, on day 14 she's going to release a follicle from one of her ovaries. And the estrogen level is sort of rising, rising, rising. We love to measure hormones on day five, because I want to have a standardized way in which I measure her hormones. So our women know if we're in the business of trying to understand her hormones, the day her period starts, even if it's just a day of spotting, that becomes our benchmark, and then day five, I want to see every hormone on that day. And if everything is going well, I know what her FSH, LH, estradiol and progesterone should be on that day. So the estrogen rises, starts to come down a little bit as she ovulates, and then the luteinizing hormone kicks on because it's now going to prepare her uterus for the lining to accommodate a pregnancy. So now you start to see estradiol go back, but now, for the first time, progesterone goes up. So progesterone has been doing nothing for 14 days, and now it starts to rise. And actually progesterone is the hormone that's dominating the second half, which is called her luteal cycle. So the first 14 days is the follicular cycle. Second is the luteal cycle. So once you get to about the halfway point of that, which is now, just to do the math, 21 days in, the body has figured out if she's pregnant or not. And again, most of the time she's not going to be pregnant. So the body says, oh, I don't need this lining that I've been preparing, I'm going to shed it. So now progesterone and estrogen start crashing, and the lining is what is being shed, and that is the menses. By the way, it's that last seven days of that cycle, that in a susceptible woman is what creates those PMS symptoms. So it's the, actually, this is something that you would probably have a better understanding of than me. There is something about this in a susceptible woman, where the enormous reduction of progesterone so quickly is probably impacting something in her brain. So this is a legitimate thing, right? I mean, you know, it's not like, oh, she's crazy because she's having all these PMS symptoms. No. We know that that's the case because if you put women on progesterone for those seven days, those symptoms go away. - [Andrew] Interesting. - So if you can stabilize their progesterone during the last half of their luteal phase, and sometimes we would just do it for the entire luteal phase, just put them on a low dose of progesterone, all PMS symptoms vanish. - Very interesting. I'll have to look up where the progesterone receptors are located in the brain. The Allen Brain Institute now has beautiful data of in situ hybridization, which for, 'cause they don't understand is, looking at RNA and sort of where genes and proteins ought to be expressed in the human brain, by using actual human brain tissue sections as opposed to just mice. So I'll take a look, I think- - Yeah, I'm really curious, yeah. - Some insight into what that progesterone emotionality link might be, and where it might exist, neural circuit wise. - So then, when the estrogen and progesterone reach their nadir again, that starts the cycle. So that just, that cycle is happening over and over and over again. Okay, so it became well known in the '50s that, okay, a woman's going to stop menstruating at some point, her estrogen goes down. Why don't we just give her estrogen? 'Cause that's clearly going to help with some of the symptoms of menopause. So what do women experience when they go through menopause? The first symptoms are what are called vasomotor symptoms. So this is usually in the form of night sweats, hot flashes. So, and depending on the woman, this can be really significant, right? These are women who can have a hard time sleeping. They can be having hot flashes during the middle of the day. They can wake up soaked in a pool of sweat. Those tend to pass after a couple of years, and then they get into sort of the more long-term complications of menopause. So what we call vaginal atrophy, vaginal dryness, and then the stuff that we talked about a while ago, which is the osteopenia osteoporosis. A lot of women will complain of brain fog. So, I mean, clearly this was an issue and it was recognized 70 years ago. Why don't we give women estrogen back to replace that hormone? And so that went on for a couple of decades, maybe less, maybe a decade, and then it was realized, wait a minute, we were driving up the risk of uterine cancer. And the reason for that is if you just give estrogen with no progesterone to antagonize it, you will thicken the endometrium endlessly and you will increase the risk of hyperplasia. Well, you'll definitely undergo hyperplasia, and then ultimately dysplasia. Dysplasia is precancerous, and ultimately we were seeing that. So people figured out, well, actually, if you want to give estrogen to a woman who still has her uterus, you have to give her progesterone as well. You have to be able to have a hormone to oppose the estrogen. And then that became effectively in, call it the 1970s-ish, the standard for HRT. So in the early 1990s the NIH said, look, we haven't really studied this. We have a ton of epidemiology that says giving women hormones seems to be doing really good things. They feel better, so all their symptoms go away. They seem to have lower risk of heart disease, lower risk of, you know, cardiovascular, pardon me, lower risk of cardiovascular disease, lower risk of bone fractures. Everything seems to get better. Lower risk of diabetes. But we haven't tested this in a randomized prospective trial, so let's do this. So that became the WHI. And it randomized, it had two parallel arms. So it had a group for women who did not have a uterus. So these are women that had undergone hysterectomy for some other reason. And then it had a group for women that did have their uterus. In the first group, there was a placebo arm and then an estrogen only arm. And in the other group, there was a progesterone plus estrogen versus a placebo. Everything about the way this study was done is a bit wonky. Some of it is justifiable, but it's important to understand. First, the women were all way outside of menopause. So none of these women were started when you would normally start HRT. And there were probably several reasons for that, but one of them is, and I think this is a legitimate reason, they wanted hard outcomes. They wanted to know death rates. And if you're doing this on women in their 50s, you just weren't going to get it, right. You couldn't- - Wait too long. - Yeah, you got to wait too long. And this was only going to be like a seven to 10-year study. So they had to do this on women who were much older. They also disproportionately took much sicker women. I believe the prevalence, and again, I'm going to get some of these numbers wrong and people are going to get all phosphorylated, but, you know, I mean, I'm in the ballpark, right? Something like 30, 40% of these women were smokers. The prevalence of obesity, diabetes was enormous. So they really disproportionately picked the most unhealthy population they could, that was pretty advanced in age. And again, I think part of that was to say, look, we want to make sure that after seven years, we really know if there's a difference in these causes of death. The other thing is, this is kind of weird, although again, I understand their rationale for it, but this is a great example of be very careful when you look at a clinical trial, that it remotely represents the patients you're interested in treating. So they also treated no patients who were symptomatic. The rationale being, if we include in the study patients who are symptomatic, those who are randomized to placebo will drop out. - Okay, it makes sense in terms of study design, makes no sense if the study design is intended to mimic the real world. - That's right. So now let's just keep track of the three issues. We have a disproportionately unhealthy patient population who are not symptomatic, and we're starting them more than 10 years after menopause. The next thing that they did, which again, I understand why they did it, but it's now the fourth strike against this study, is, and I've spoken with the PI of the study and asked this question point blank. I'm actually going to have her on my podcast at some point soon to go over this in more detail, is why did you use conjugated equine estrogen, an MPA, which is a synthetic form of progesterone. - [Andrew] Horse- - Yes. - estrogen? - It's horse urine, is they collect horse urine, so they're getting, it's- - Horses do urinate a lot. Or at least when they urinate, it seems like a large volume of urine, from what I've observed. - [Peter] You have a lot of experience with this? - No, but, you know, my sister rode horses for a little while, my high school girlfriend had a horse, and that thing, I mean the pees were legendary. It's a male horse. - Yeah. - Yeah. - So, yeah, so the conjugated equine estrogen is the estrogen that's collected from female horses. And then it's a synthetic progesterone. And I said to the person, I said, well, why didn't you use what we use today, which is bio-identical estrogen in progesterone. Like today, when we put women on estrogen, we use a, it's an FDA product called the Vivelle-Dot. So it's a patch that you just put on, and it's estradiol, but it's bioidentical estradiol. And we use what's called micronized progesterone. So bio-identical progesterone. And she said, well, at the time we just wanted to test what was currently being used. And I said, totally makes sense. But again, now you have four considerations that you have to keep in mind, okay. So despite those four considerations, and I'm going to make a case for you why I think the MPA created a real problem in that study, the synthetic progesterone, when the preliminary results were first made available, but not yet peer-reviewed and not yet published, there was a huge fiasco, huge press announcement about it, suggesting that the women receiving the CEE plus MPA, in the group with the uterus, had a higher incidence of breast cancer. And that basically became the headline that never went away, though it turned out not to be true. Let's talk about the numbers. What was the increase in the risk of breast cancer in that group? Which gets to one of my, you know, if you ever listen to me on a podcast rail on something. - Listen, I have about 3,800 pet peeves and counting. My laboratory staff know these, know a good number of them. So, you do not have - Here, I'll add to one of them. - to apologize for having many pet peeves. Because as long as they have experience in data to support them, it provides- - So one of my biggest pet peeves is, and my team knows this 'cause sometimes they'll occasionally, you know, they'll do this and I'll have to remind them, you never talk about a relative risk change without an absolute risk accommodating it, right. So, what does that look like? So the relative risk increase of breast cancer in the estrogen plus MPA group versus the placebo was 25, 27%. And that became the only headline. HRT increases risk of breast cancer by 27%. Now, I don't think that's true at all today, but let's even look at the data. What was the ARR? What was the absolute risk increase? It was a difference between five cases per thousand and four cases per thousand. So the ARR was 0.1%, one case in a thousand. And it's true, going from four in a thousand to five in a thousand is a 25% increase, but it's a completely inappropriate context. - I agree, and I feel like headlines of that sort, which have come up recently around various dietary interventions, we won't go there, at least not for the time being, are nothing short of criminal because they really distort people's thinking. But also they steer the course of science and medicine for, as you pointed out, for decades, if not longer. And they can really take us off our health track in serious ways. - So I'll bring this meandering to a close, which is to say, even though I could spend the next hour talking about all of the ways in which this study was flawed, and all of the very unethical things that were done by a number of the investigators who went out of their way to mask the truth of this study from the world, I'll tell a woman today, we're going to start you on this when you're going through menopause. We're using bio-identical hormones. And if your upper bound risk of breast cancer is one case in a thousand, you should at least weigh that against all of the other benefits, which I'll talk about. Now, there's something else I want to say, because a moment ago I alluded to the fact that I think the MPA might have been the biggest issue in that study. So there were two findings in that study that were negative. One was the small increase in the risk of heart disease, and the small increase in the risk of breast cancer. But consider the other group, we forgot about the group that didn't have a uterus. 'Cause remember, those women got estrogen only versus placebo. What was the difference in breast cancer there? Well, this is interesting 'cause it didn't reach statistical significance, but its P value was 0.06 or 0.07. So it came very close, but it was in the opposite direction. It was a 24% risk reduction, about one in a thousand as well. So when you had estrogen plus MPA, you had a barely statistically significant, the P value was 0.05, so it just hit statistical significance, one in a thousand cases for breast cancer. And then you had one in a thousand cases, but P value of 0.07, for reduction of risk of breast cancer. Which to me suggests that the MPA, the synthetic progesterone, was playing more of a role than anything else. The second thing I point out is oral estrogen, which we no longer use, does increase coagulability. It does increase the ability of the blood to clot a little bit. And when we look at the more recent data on HRT, using topical estrogen or patches of estrogen, we don't see that at all. In fact, we see the opposite now. So now we see the risk of heart disease going down in women with estradiol. - And some women will be arriving to those treatments with mutations and things like Factor V Leiden and other clotting factors. Is it appropriate to say that everyone, both male and female, should know whether or not they have mutant forms of Factor V Leiden? - You know, we don't typically test people for Factor V. My wife actually has it, but we didn't learn it until she had HELLP syndrome giving birth to our first daughter. But, you know, we kind of look for more family history reason to be testing things like that. We take a pretty detailed family history, so we'll kind of look for clotting issues there. - What about, so your reflex nowadays is to put women on these topical estrogen therapies? - Well it's to basically have the discussion, right? So here's where we still struggle, right, is, you know, if it were up to me, I'd prefer for a woman's HRT to be provided by her GYN, because we want to be able to work in partnership with the GYN who we would like to see an endometrial ultrasound done every year. That's, you know, some would argue that's overkill, but we think she should be having a pap smear every year as well. So if we're looking at the cervix, we want to look at the endometrium, we want to make sure the lining isn't too thick. The other thing I should say, Andrew, is today, we now realize that not all women can tolerate estro, pardon me, progesterone. So you have to be careful. So assuming, again, a woman still has her uterus, the estrogen solves most of the problems, but then you have to decide, can she tolerate the progesterone? And it needs to be, if given systemically like a hundred to 200 milligrams. And for some women, that is a lifesaving intervention. I mean, they start sleeping better, their hair gets thicker, they feel better. But for some women, it literally drives them crazy. It's probably the reciprocal of what we were seeing in the case of women with PMS. So in those situations we say, great, we're done with oral progesterone. We just use a progesterone coated IUD. So then you get the local progesterone in the uterus for protection, and the systemic estrogen. - Fascinating. What about oral contraception in women? So the use of estrogen chronically through people's, you know, college years or 20s, 30s, maybe even teens, who knows. What's known about the long-term effects, if any? - I got to be honest with you, I don't think I know enough to comment on it. It's not something that really impacts my patient population. At least in what I see, more women are using IUDs for contraception than OCs. I mean, we use OCs sometimes in women who are premenopausal, for symptomatic control, but we'll typically use like a low low estrin, so a very low synthetic estrogen, which I don't like using these very much. But if it's the only thing that we can get to control certain symptoms, and we'll use it like half her cycle. But it's typically not something we're that experienced with. - What about testosterone, because you mentioned that, you know, nanogram per mill, when you said everything to the same, you know, I guess it's nanogram per deciliter, - Yeah yeah. - as it would be to kind of normalize everything. - Versus picogram per ML. - Right, yeah. And so, what Peter was pointing out before is that you look at your charts and they're all in these different measures, and so when you normalize, testosterone is actually higher than estrogen in women. That's a surprise to me. Do you prescribe testosterone therapy to women ever? - We do sometimes, but I do it with much more caution because I don't have the data, right. So where I'll, you know, what we'll say is, look, I mean, we're now really outside of an area where I can point to a lot of data. Like when it comes to estrogen and progesterone, I'll happily go toe to toe with anybody who wants to make the case that it's dangerous. Similarly, when it comes to using testosterone in men, I'll spend all day, and I can go through that literature until the other person cries and wants to just call uncle, right. When it comes to- - And then you prescribe them testosterone. - When it comes to estrogen in, testosterone in women, don't have that data. And I'd love to see that trial done. So what's the sweet spot, how do we reconcile that? So it's not something I consider standard. And basically, if a woman is, if her testosterone, first of all, is staggeringly low, and again, even though her testosterone's low compared to a male, we still have a range. So if it's really at the bottom of that range, she's really having difficulty putting on muscle mass and really complaining of low libido, I think in that situation, we'll go ahead and use topical testosterone, and, you know, replace her to a level that is still physiologically normal. - Yeah, that's key because when people hear HRT, they think about, super physiological seems to be the term. - Yeah, like I've never seen a single symptom in a single woman that I've put testosterone on, in terms of like acne, body hair, things like that. Like those are real symptoms that you have to be aware of, but, you know, like clitoral enlargement and things like that, like that doesn't happen under physiologic normal conditions. - I'd love to talk a little bit about hormone replacement therapy in men. When one looks on social media and the internet, there seems to be a younger and younger cohort of guys and people in their teens and 20s, showing up to the table thinking that injecting testosterone cypionate or taking Anavar, whatever it is, is going to be the right idea. They mainly seem to be focused on cosmetic effects. I'm not a physician, so I can't say whether or not they were actually hypogonadal et cetera, but it seems to me, again, correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me that similar to the Attia's rule as it relates to longevity, that we could come up with a broad contour rule in which if a male of any age is not trying to get decent sleep, exercise appropriately, appropriate nutrition, minding their social connections, et cetera, et cetera, the idea of going straight to testosterone seems like a bad idea. That said, just like with depression and antidepressants, there is a kind of a cliff after which low enough testosterone, or low enough serotonin, prevents people from sleeping, exercise, social connection, et cetera. So I do want to acknowledge that. But with that in mind, how do you think about, and perhaps occasionally prescribe and direct your patients in terms of hormone replacement therapy in men, person in their 30s, person in their 40s, who's doing almost all the other things correctly. What sorts of levels do you think are meaningful? Because the range is tremendous in terms of blood tests. 300 nanograms for deciliter, I think on the low end now in the U.S., all the way up to 900 or 1200, that's an enormous range. What are some of the other hormones you like to look at, estrogen, DHT and so on? - So, a lot to unpack there. So, let's start with the ranges, right? So the ranges you gave are for total testosterone, of course, and we don't spend a lot of time looking at that the way we, you know, I used to spend more time looking at total and free when I used more tricks to modulate it. So I'm actually far more simple in my manipulation of testosterone today than I was six or seven years ago. Six or seven years ago, I mean, we were, you know, we would use a micro dose of Anavar to lower SHBG in a person who had normal testosterone, but low free testosterone. - What was a low dose of Anavar in that context? - 10 milligrams subling two to three times a week. - Anavar basically being DHT. Oxandrolone- - Yeah, oxandrolone, yeah exactly. - And again, we're not recommending this. This actually, if you're playing a competitive sport, can get you banned from that sport. - No no, yeah yeah. This is- - It can also get you banned from having children if you do it incorrectly. - Yeah, so a micro dose of this has to be small enough that it doesn't impair your body's ability to make testosterone. But Anavar has such a high affinity for SHBG, that it basically distracts your SHBG from binding your testosterone. - Freeing up testosterone. - That's exactly right. So the goal was, how do I just give you more free testosterone? So if a patient shows up and they've got a total testosterone of 900 nanograms per deciliter, which would place them at, you know, depending on the scale you look at, the scale we look at, that would place you at about the 70th percentile. But your free testosterone is, you know, eight nanograms per deciliter. So that's pretty bad. That means you're less than 1% free. A guy should be about 2% free T. So that dude should be closer to 16 to 18 nanograms per deciliter. So in that situation that I just gave you, his SHBG is really high. His SHBG is probably in the 80 to 90 range. - That's very high. 'Cause I think the upper range is somewhere around 55, 56. - Exactly. - Yeah. - So we would first back stall for what's driving his SHBG. So there's basically three hormones, so genetics plays a huge role in this. There's no question that just out of the box, people have a different like set point for SHBG. Mine is incredibly low. My SHBG is like kind of in the 30s, 20s to 30s. But from a hormone perspective, there's basically three hormones that run it. So estradiol being probably the most important, insulin and thyroxine. So we're going to look at all of those and decide if any of those are playing a role. So insulin suppresses it. So this is actually the great irony of helping a person get metabolically healthy, is in the short run, you can actually lower their free testosterone, all things equal. Because as insulin comes down, SHBG goes up, and if testosterone hasn't gone up with it, you're lowering free testosterone. - So somebody who goes on a very low carbohydrate diet in an attempt to drop some water and drop some weight, is going to increase their SHBG? - Yeah, if their insulin goes down enough. - Bind up testosterone, less free testosterone. I can tell the carnivore diet people are going to be coming after me with bone marrow in hand. But then again, after this discussion extends a little further, I'm sure the vegans will be coming after me with celery stalks, so it's a. - So then the same as with estradiol. So except in the opposite direction. So higher estradiol is higher SHBG. So again, occasionally you'll see a guy with normal testosterone, but he's a very high aromatase activity person. So he has a lot of the enzyme that converts testosterone into estradiol. You can lower estradiol a bit with an aromatase inhibitor, and that can bring down SHBG. Now, again, these things individually are rarely enough to move the needle. The last is thyroxine. So if you have a person whose thyroid is out of whack, you have to fix that before you, if their T4 is out of whack, you're going to interfere with SHBG. There are also some supplements which I think you've probably talked about these on the podcast. I feel like I've heard you talk about these on the podcast. - Yeah, there are a few that will adjust, you know, there's this idea now there's a much better review, it just came out, I'll send it to you, I'd love your thoughts on it, and I've been perusing it line by line. But I love input from experts like you on the use of Tongkat Ali for reducing SHBG. In my experience, it does free up some testosterone. By which mechanism it isn't exactly clear. And the effects aren't that dramatic. Right, they're probably multiple effects. For all we know, it increases libido, and it does, generally, by way of increasing estrogen slightly, which can also increase libido in some individuals. So we don't know the exact mode of action. So we've talked about a few. The one that a few years back people were claiming could reduce SHBG was stinging nettles. - Stinging nettles, yeah. - Stinging nettle, well I'll just, urinating seems to be coming up multiple times on this podcast, for whatever reason. Stinging nettle extract, I took, the most pronounced effect of that was you could basically urinate over a car when taking SHBG. What the underlying mechanism of that was, I do not know. I took it for a short while, it didn't drop my SHBG very much, but it did drop my DHT sufficiently so that I stopped taking it. - You felt that, yeah. - I do not like anything that impedes DHT. I don't care if my hairline retreats, I don't care about any of that. DHT to me is something to be coveted and held onto because you feel so much better when your DHT is in the appropriate range, and I'd love your thoughts on that. - Yeah, again- - At some point too. - It really depends on the guy, and it depends on what risk you're trying to manage, right. So prostate size starts to become one of the issues with DHT. - Luckily my prostate-specific antigen is low, and DHT, the things that I know can reduce it are things like finasteride, Propecia, things like, yeah, right. Things that people take to try and avoid hair loss can dramatically reduce DHT and lead to all sorts of terrible sexual side effects, mood-based side effects, et cetera. But yeah, so I'm not aware of anything that could be taken in supplement form that can really profoundly drop SHBG. - Yeah, we don't spend much attention on it anymore. Basically, I used to have a much more complicated differential diagnosis eight years ago. Like, I mean it was, I would drive patients nuts with the whiteboard diagrams I would draw for them, when in the end, I think they were just like, dude, just, what do I need to take? Today we take a much more simple approach. So the first question is, should you or should you have your free testosterone being higher? That's the metric I care about, is free testosterone is the first, most important, the second most important is estradiol. - And sorry to interrupt, you said, if you look at your total testosterone, you want the free T to be about 2% of your total. - Well, it should be, right. Now I can't, I might not change that anymore. So in other words, if a guy's at 1%, then I know I have to really boost his total testosterone. If he's only going to get one to 1 1/2% of it converted to free, I need to boost him. And that's why I don't care if he's outside the range. Like, I'll have a guy who's free T, I might have to get a guy's total T up to 1500 to get his free T to 18. - I see, so free T is the target. I like this approach. - Free T is what we treat. - And do you still use Anavarax, - I don't use- - oxandrolone, sorry, to try and lower SHBG. - I don't, no. - Because it's too potent? - No, because it's just too complicated for patients. It's a drug that can't be taken orally, so you have to take it under the tongue. - Like a troche or something. - Right, but then, you know, I had one patient once who, even though we told him about 87 times that, he was like swallowing the Anavars and his liver function, and he was like, we're talking 10 milligrams three times a week is a tiny dose, and three months of him, or whatever, two months of him swallowing that every time tripled his liver function test. So it's like, I was like, you know, it's just not worth the hassle of doing this for, you know, perfection. In reality, we can fix this another way. So the first order question is, do we believe clinically you will benefit from normalizing your free testosterone, or taking it to a level, let's call it 80th to 90th percentile. So upper normal limit of physiologic ranges. That's the first order question. And that's going to come down to symptoms, and that's going to come down to some biomarkers. I think there's, two years ago, was it two years ago or maybe a year ago, very good study came out that looked at pre-diabetic men, you've probably talked about this study, and looking at insulin resistance and glucose disposal with and without testosterone. And the evidence was overwhelmingly clear. Testosterone improves glycemic control. Testosterone improves insulin signaling. This shouldn't be surprising by the way, given the role muscles play as a glucose reservoir and a glucose sink. So now I include that as one of the things that we will consider as a factor for using testosterone. Now, again, it's not the only one. So you can accomplish that with exercise, you can accomplish that with these other things, but then you get into a little bit of the vicious cycle of will having a normalized testosterone facilitate you doing those things better. So let's just assume we come to the decision that this person is a good candidate for testosterone replacement therapy. The next question is, what's the method we're going to do. Are we going to do it indirectly or directly? Now we used to use a lot of Clomid in our practice. And have you talked about Clomid on the pod? - Haven't talked too much about it. No, we've talked a little bit about the fact that some people taking things like anastrozole to reduce aromatase activity, can potentially run into trouble because they think, oh well, more testosterone, good, lower estrogen, bad, and then they end up with issues like joint pain, memory issues, and severe drops in libido. And I think a lot of the reason why- - And even fat accumulation. So if estrogen is too low, you can develop adiposity in a way that you wouldn't otherwise. There was a great New England Journal paper, it's probably 10 years old now, that looked at, I believe it was five different doses of testosterone cypionate. So these men were chemically castrated and divided into 10 groups. It's pretty remarkable- - [Andrew] That somebody signed up for this study. - Yeah, so you were with and without anastrozole and five doses of testosterone. So now you basically had five testosterone levels, plus or minus high or low estradiol. And the results were really clear that the higher your testosterone and the more your estradiol was in kind of that 30 to 50 range, the better you were. So if estrogen was too low, even in the presence of high testosterone, the outcomes were less significant. - And this is 30 to 50 nanograms per decile, not 30 to 50% of one's testosterone. Okay, great. No, we haven't talked, but Clomid is, you know, we have not talked a lot about Clomid. I'd love to get your thoughts on Clomid. - So Clomiphene is a fertility drug. It's a synthetic hormone. It's actually two drugs, M Clomiphene and I forget the other one. And it tells the pituitary to secrete FSH and LH. So you, and so the advantage of Clomid is it's oral, and it's meant to be taken orally. So, you know, a typical starting dose would be like 50 milligrams three times a week. And if you do that, you'll notice, in most men, especially young men, FSH and LH goes up. In any man, the FSH and LH go up, but if a man still has testicular reserve, he'll make lots of testosterone in response to that. 'Cause that's the first order question we're trying to answer is do you, is your failure to make testosterone central or peripheral? - Yeah, and I think, just want to point out, again, correct me if I'm wrong, but my understanding is that a lot of the drugs that we're talking about, the synthetic compounds, testosterone, estrogen, things related to growth hormone, et cetera, were discovered and designed in order to treat, and excuse me, in order to isolate and treat exactly these kinds of syndromes, whether or not it was the hypothalamus, the pituitary, or the target tissue, the ovaries or the testes. Correct? - Correct, yeah. I mean, I think, the easiest way to go about doing this is just give the hormone that's missing, without attention to where the deficiency is. Why this becomes relevant is if you have a 35-year-old guy whose testosterone is low, but you can demonstrate that it's low because he's not getting enough of a signal from the pituitary, why would you bother giving him more testosterone when he has the Leydig cells and the Sertoli cells to make testosterone. He just needs the signal. Sometimes, though not always, just a course of Clomid can wake him up, and he's back to making normal testosterone. - So he'll do this three times a week, 50 milligrams, three times a week, for a short course, and then? - Yeah, we would do that for eight to 12 weeks and then we reevaluate. - And estrogen and testosterone will increase in parallel. - Yes. And again, it depends, you know, aromatase activity is dependent on how much body fat you have and genetics. And if estradiol gets too high, we think if it gets over about 55, 60, we will give micro doses of anastrozole. But it has to be real micro doses. I mean, you cannot pound people with anastrozole. To give you perspective, the sort of on-label use, like if you just go to a pharmacy and order anastrozole, you're going to get one milligram tablets. Like we can't give anybody a milligram. - [Andrew] They'll feel like garbage. - We have to have it compounded at 0.1 milligrams, and we might give a patient 0.1, two to three times a week. That would be a big dose of anastrozole. - Yeah, I think that the typical TRT clinic out there is giving 200 milligrams per mil, one mil, 200 milligrams of testosterone once every two weeks, and then hitting people with multiple milligrams of anastrozole, and they're all over the place. - I've never really understood, I mean, I guess I shouldn't be surprised, but it kind of blows my mind that these TRT clinics are up all over the place, given how bad. I mean, I see the results, 'cause I have patients that come from them, and I don't understand like why they're so incompetent. - I actually think it's worse than that. I think that they simply don't understand and don't care, because it's a pill mill and it's a money mill. I think that nowadays it seems almost everybody who's doing TRT is taking lower doses more frequently every other day, or twice a week, dividing the dose, and being very, very careful with these estrogen or aromatase blockers. - Most of our patients do not take aromatase inhibitors. It's not needed. It's really only the high aromatasers that need it. And so yeah, when we'll talk about testosterone, we'll talk about dosing there, 'cause I agree. The more frequently you can take it the better, and frankly, you don't need to go more frequently than twice a week. - Because it's so slow-acting. - The half-life, yeah, the half life of the drug is, I think it's about 3 1/2 days, is the plasma half-life or something like that. I could be off a little bit, but twice week dosing is really nice. So if you go to like a testosterone clinic that's giving you 200 every two weeks, 50 twice a week is the same total dose, which, by the way, is a physiologic dose. That's not going to give somebody any of the side effects you would see. You're not going to get acne with that. You're not going to get gynecomastia. You're not going to get anything. The only real side effect you get from that is you will get testicular atrophy. It is enough to suppress. - Yeah, to maintain fertility, what do you typically do for? - Well, so this is where, so I'll finish the story on Clomid, 'cause we currently do not use Clomid, and that's due to a really interesting observation that we made, that I don't think has been reported in the literature yet, which is that Clomid was increasing levels of a sterol that we also happen to measure called desmosterol. - [Andrew] I'm not familiar with that. - So, and the way that cholesterol is made, it's made by, there's two pathways that make cholesterol. So it starts like with two carbon sub units, like Acetyl-CoA, and it kind of marches down a pathway, bifurcates, and cholesterol is the finished product of both. But in one of those pathways, the molecule right before cholesterol is called desmosterol, in the other pathway it's called lathosterol. So we constantly measure lathosterol and desmosterol, because we want to know how much cholesterol is being synthesized in the body. Not just what your cholesterol is. We want to know how much cholesterol you reabsorb. And those markers are really important to us when we're looking at cardiovascular disease risk. So when we gave patients Clomid, we were noticing a almost universal rise in their desmosterol levels. Now, the most obvious explanation for that, though the last time I looked, I couldn't find clear explanation for this in any of the clinical, like the clinical trials that led to the approval of Clomid. So I don't know if it was described. In fact, maybe it wasn't known. I suspect it is inhibiting the enzyme, which I think is called delta-24 desaturates, that turns desmosterol into cholesterol. Makes sense if you inhibit that enzyme, you're going to see a rise in desmosterol. This wouldn't have been a concern to me, if not for the fact that Tom Dayspring, who's one of the physicians we work with, who's one of the world's experts in lipids, pointed out a very obscure story, which was that the very first drug ever approved to treat cardiovascular disease, at least to treat hypercholesterolemia, was a drug that attacked the same enzyme. So this is in the early 1960s I believe, maybe the mid '60s. This drug was approved and it lowered cholesterol. And it was approved on the basis of lowering cholesterol. Now today, no drug for ASCVD is approved on the basis of it lowering cholesterol. That's not a high enough bar. You have to reduce events. Actually have to show that you're preventing heart attacks and death. But at the time it was like, hey, it lowers cholesterol, it's got to be good. Well, in the late '60s it was pulled from the market because events were going up. So cholesterol was coming down, events were going up. How could that be? We don't know. What we are suspecting is that desmosterol, which is still a sterol, was potentially more damaging and created more oxidative stress in the endothelium, in the sub-endothelial space than cholesterol. - [Andrew] I see. - Which would at least suggest to us, and again, we're taking a lot of leaps here, that maybe having high desmosterol, very high desmosterol, is not a good thing. And so once we kind of pieced all that together a few years ago, we were like, yeah, we're just not going to prescribe Clomid anymore. And we then switched to HCG, which we used to use sometimes instead of Clomid, but it's more cumbersome to work with. It needs to be refrigerated, it's a much more fragile molecule. - Yeah, I think we talked about this once. It's almost like if you accidentally knock over the little bottle, it's basically gone bad. - Yeah yeah. - Travel with it is very challenging. - Can't travel with it. It's a needle, you know, it's an injection, Sub-Q. So easy to administer, it's not IM or anything like that, but it's just more of a hassle factor. But that said, it has the benefit that Clomid does, which is it preserves testicular function. It preserves testicular volume. So, you know, body builders will often use this in their post-cycle therapy, as a way to kind of recover function. And we would just use it now as ongoing therapy for a guy who still has testicular reserve. - So on its own, no testosterone, no aromatase inhibitor, nothing. Just a way to crank out a bit more testosterone from the testes. Maybe some additional estrogen also? - Yeah, and HCG is a different model. HCG is just an analog of luteinizing hormone. So it's basically like giving them luteinizing hormone. - So it's going to crush endogenous luteinizing hormone levels, right, because it's- - Actually, yeah. You don't really see much of an impact on LH, but you do see endogenous testosterone production go down. Actually, no, I correct that. Both FSH and LH will go down on a high enough dose. Yep. - Just as a mention, and here I'm not making recommendations, but one supplement I've talked a lot about publicly is Fadogia agrestis, which is this weird Nigerian shrub that- - You talked about this on Tim's podcast. - On Tim's podcast and Joe's podcast, and, you know, there was a bit of a backlash because it does turn out that at high doses, in rodent studies, it can cause some toxicity of the testes. But at lower doses, it does seem to increase luteinizing hormone. And after talking about this, a number of people went out there, did pre and post blood work, and the consistent effect seems to be an increase in luteinizing hormone. There's a noticeable effect on testicular size and volume. So a lot of people take this and be like, oh, you know, their balls are getting bigger, and so they get all excited that something good is happening. But we don't know the long-term safety and efficacy of something like Fadogia, whether or not it needs to be cycled- - Yeah, this is why I'm also very leery of the supplements in this space, because at least when we're using HCG, or testosterone, like we have so many years of data. You have to remember how many women are using this stuff for reproductive medicine. So, you know, I think the FDA has a lot of faults. I think I have an entire podcast devoted to the corruption of the FDA and all of the mistakes that have been made with respect to their oversight in, especially generic drugs. But it's way more regulated than the wild wild west of nutty supplement land. - Absolutely. I think that the reason we're talking about things like Tongkat and Fadogia was to provide some intermediate discussion between doing all the correct things, but no supplementation or hormone therapy, and then going straight to hormone therapy. - Yeah, I- - It's sort of like the leap from, I can't focus very well, to Ritalin, right, without a real diagnosis of ADHD to, oh well, maybe some things like Alpha-GPC low doses of nicotine, right? But I agree entirely. I mean, the sourcing is important. The dosages are worked out empirically on an individual basis. And there aren't randomized control trials. There just aren't. - Yeah, and, you know, have kind of like a seven, this is another Peter Principle, right. So I got a lot of patients that come into the practice and, you know, during our intake, we go through what drugs and supplements are you taking right now? And, you know, a lot of people come in, I'm not taking anything, Peter, I just, you're in charge now, like tell me what you think. And then you get a lot of people that come in and they're like, are going to need an extra few pages for this part of the documentation. - Right, the people who travel with a suitcase that you can hear as they walk through the airport from all the pills rattling. - So I give these patients a little homework exercise, which is you have to answer these seven questions for every supplement you take, and here's the spreadsheet and let's talk about it. And it basically just runs through like, you know, it's basically walking you through the logic of why do you take this molecule? And I think for many people, it's when they do that, it's very sobering, right. They kind of, a lot of them will come back and be like, you know what, I don't think I can come up with any reason along this really rigorous line of thinking as to why I'm taking 80% of this stuff. - Well, I know people, and actually we know some of the same people, who are fanatic about like red light on the testes, sunning their testes, putting ice packs on their testes. It's kind of all over the place. The number of things that people are trying and doing in order to increase testosterone output from their testes is pretty remarkable. And that said, among some of the women I know, the number of things that they're doing to try and promote longevity and fertility, and in particular skin health, hair health and nail health, is also kind of outrageous. Everything from collagen to red light therapies, which may actually have some efficacy in certain cases. But. - As an interesting aside. - There's a hunger there, right? - Oh for sure. One of the things that I hope gets a lot more attention is the use of rapamycin for preserving ovarian health. So the animal literature on this is pretty impressive, right? So in mouse models, rapamycin will preserve ovarian life. And so- - Interesting. - It makes sense, right. I mean, it totally makes sense why the most potent GRo protective molecule we have would also preserve and extend ovarian life, at least in mice. So I'd love to see the clinical trials done in women to test this hypothesis. - I definitely want to come back to this, 'cause that's a key thing. I know that a lot of people are interested in female fertility out there, including their male partners. So going back to, so now I understand why you don't prescribe clomiphene, because of this desmosterol, potential desmosterol link. What about testosterone therapy? So less, - Yeah. - less frequent, lower doses, less or no estrogen inhibition or aromatase inhibition. - Yeah, only, we're only using an aromatase blocker, and we use Arimidex when we do. It's just to get that estradiol into the range we want. I like to see it between 30 and 50. That's the sweet spot. And I don't know, I would say like a third, maybe a, not even a third, I'd say probably 20% of men require a micro dose of anastrozole to get into that range. Most do not. And I'd rather err on the side of being a little high than a little low. So I never really want to be below 25, unless sometimes it's just below 25 and it is, it is what it is, that's fine. But if we're suppressing it to below 25, I never want to be in that zone. And then yes, so TRT is ultimately, you know, giving testosterone cypionate is usually what we use. - Injectable, so as opposed to cream or pellet. - Correct. I used to use pellets with women, for some who were really adamant about the convenience of it, but for a bunch of reasons I just, I'm mostly not doing that and I've never been a fan of pellets in men. - You can't control the dosages, once it's in, right? - Well, even if you know the dose, yeah, that's obviously a problem. But I don't think, there's a big difference between putting a pellet into a man and a woman. So when you're putting a estrogen pellet into a woman, it's like, it's that big. When you're putting enough pellets into a man for six months of testosterone, it's two sums of pellets that are longer than my fingers. So you're putting like a V-shape. - [Andrew] Where are you putting this? - You're putting it into the gluteal fat. So it's just a more morbid procedure, and I don't think it's necessary. I think if you know how to manage it, you know, through sort of the injections, and now- - [Andrew] Injections are no big deal. - Yeah, well especially now if you're doing, we're having them do Sub-Q injections anyway. So it's not IM, they're using five-eights inch to a one inch 25 gauge needle, which is about the smallest needle you can push the oil through, once to twice a week, depending on. And by the way, if they're real needle-phobes we use Xyosted, which is a preloaded pen. - And are you having all men take HCG to maintain fertility and testicular size? - Only if they want to. - Got it. - And by the way, we do not like to use TRT in men who, we don't like to use testosterone specifically in men who still want to maintain fertility. We just steer them away from that. - Because total sperm count goes down. - Yeah, we just say, why risk it. Like we'd rather use HCG. - [Andrew] Yeah, just on its own. - Yeah, just wait till you're done reproducing. Bank sperm, wait till you're done reproducing before we go to testosterone. - What are some of the benefits, and what are some of the cautionary notes with appropriate TRT, meaning the kind of contour that we're talking about here. A lower dose with the yes or no low estrogen control. People, what did generally people report, how do they feel? What does it allow them to do that they couldn't do or feel before? And then in terms of what are the markers to look for? Is it LDL, blood pressure, water retention, acne, those kinds of things. Are there some other things as well? - Yeah, it depends on the doses, right? I mean, again, we're using these in really low doses, so it's pretty rare that we'd have a patient on more than a hundred milligrams a week of testosterone. I think for comparison, like a bodybuilder could easily take 500 to a thousand during a high growth phase. - I know some of these guys, they go ballistic, or they're doing moderate levels of testosterone cypionate, but they're also taking Dianabols, Nandrolone, you know, SARMs, and a bunch of other things. I mean, their stacks are kind of ridiculous. I mean, no disrespect to that sport, but I mean, people are dying like crazy in that sport right now. - [Peter] It's outside of physiology. - Yeah, and I think for 99% of people listening, they look, they hear bodybuilder and they just go, like, why would somebody do that anyway? - [Peter] Right. - I think that's the typical response. - So the point is, a lot of, but we owe those guys a great deal of gratitude 'cause they've shown us the boundaries. - Including the women. - That's right, yeah, yeah. And so, those bodybuilders have taught us a lot about like what happens. And so yeah, the bloating, the water retention, acne, hair loss, hair growth, all of those things we understand. The truth of it is, we just don't see those things in our patients. - But a hundred milligrams per week is a very low output. My understanding- - But it's a physiologic dose. I mean, the reality of it is it's enough for most people. I mean there's, probably the highest we've ever had to go is maybe 70 twice a week. - What's the youngest patient you've ever had to put on TRT? - Actual testosterone? - Mm hmm. - Probably, that's a good question, I'm thinking about. Maybe 40. - I think that's great for people to hear, 'cause I know that a lot of guys in their 20s are thinking TRT is the way to go, and I would argue unless you're doing everything else right and you're still hypogonadal and you're really struggling, put that time off. Because also the fertility issue you want to delay, delay, delay. - Well, again, it depends if, when we say TRT, if you're in your 20s and there's no other way, I would hope you would be steered toward HCG to at least preserve testicular function. Now again, we don't actually know if after being on HCG for 10 years, your pituitary will still work. - Right, you won't be able to make your own luteinizing hormone. - Exactly. So, it might be the case that you're going to need something upstream of that, like Clomid, to kick start it, and then we're, but again, I don't want anybody who's listening to this who's using Clomid for fertility, to think that there's anything wrong with it. I was, my concern over this became like, if you're going to be on this for 10 years, is it problematic? Not if you're using this for a course of IVF or something like that. So, again, if we felt that someone's pituitary was not working, I would be happy to put three months of Clomid on them to kind of try to see if we could blast it back. - Do you have men cycle on and off testosterone at these low dosages? Are they taking a month vacation from it every once in a while? - Yeah, totally depends. You know, I was talking to a patient yesterday where we're going to do, we just decided to change his cycle, eight weeks on, then eight weeks on HCG, eight weeks on, then eight weeks on HCG. So that's going to be a cycle that maintains his testosterone level, but fluctuates between endogenous, exogenous, endogenous, exogenous. Sometimes we'll just do testosterone on, off, on, off. And there it's like, how much can he replenish naturally, but understanding his T will dip during those off cycles. - Seems to me there's a tremendous incentive for somebody to develop a molecule that can directly target SHBG, besides Oxandrolone and Anavar, right? If one could just drop SHBG just the tiniest bit, it seems like one could adjust the free T in a way that would be great. I don't know why that molecule's so hard to target, but somebody ought to do it. The chemistry can't be - Yeah, it's funny. - that hard. - I talked with Patrick Arnold about this many, many years ago. I wish I could remember what his ID, he had a comment about this that at the time made sense, and I don't remember what it was, 'cause I had that thought too, like man. Especially for that subset of guys who have normal testosterone, but they're just over binding it. - I'm really glad that you brought up this issue of total testosterone versus free T, and the reason is, ever since going on podcasts and talking about this stuff, and talking about it on this podcast, people will send me their numbers. They'll send me their charts and then they'll send photos of themselves, and I can tell you, while I'm not a clinician and I haven't done fancy statistics on it, there's very little correlation between someone's absolute testosterone and how they appear. I mean, some of these guys look, you know, really lean, really strong, and they'll say, oh, total testosterone is 550, 480, right. And then other people, you know, testosterone is 860, but you look at them and you think, oh, they kind of have kind of a dough-y look to them. And so it's got to be this free testosterone thing, plus estrogen, et cetera. And so cosmetically- - Well, but also training and nutrition too, right. - Yeah, absolutely. - I mean, I just think, I think for all this talk about testosterone, which I enjoy talking about and, you know, I enjoy talking about the data on, you know, long-term health consequences of testosterone, 'cause it's another controversial topic, I also think people kind of overstate its importance. - [Andrew] I agree. - And I think there's a group of people who think if I could just fix my testosterone, everything will be better. And it's sort of like, no, actually that's not true at all. Really, the only purpose in my mind of fixing testosterone is to give you the capacity to work harder. It's really going to help you recover more from your workouts. This should just give you a greater ability to experience muscle protein synthesis. So, you know, if I just give you a bunch of testosterone and you sit on the couch and your nutrition doesn't change and you're not exercising anymore, you're not going to experience any benefits of this thing. I mean, my testosterone level has fluctuated quite a bit throughout my life. And when I think about as an adult, not sort of including when I was sort of a fanatical teenager, but as an adult, when was I at my absolute most insane physique, like my best performance on a DEXA scan, would've been, I was 38-years-old, by DEXA I was 7% body fat. My fat free mass index was like 23.2, 23.3 kilograms per meter squared. I mean, I was huge, strong, and totally ripped. My testosterone was in the toilet. I was over-training like crazy. I was, you know, exercising probably 26 hours a week, killing it in the gym, swimming like a banshee, cycling like my life depended on it, grossly over-trained, low T, but, you know, I mean physically looked like twice the guy I am today. You know, today my T's probably twice as high as it was then. So, you know, now you could say, well, Peter, what if you took T back then? How much better could you have been? Sure. But, again, I think the take home is just giving somebody T doesn't do much of anything. It probably helps on the insulin resistance front, without any other thing. But to me that's a waste, like that's squandering the gift that it is giving you, which is the ability to do more work and, you know, capture the benefit of it via muscle protein synthesis. - I agree, and I think that the psychological effect of testosterone, whether or not it's exogenous or endogenous, is it makes effort feel good. - Yeah. - At some level it really seems to do that. And Sapolsky tells me the main reason, or mechanistically the main reason that it can do that is by adjusting levels of activity in the amygdala. - Interesting. - And so there's some interesting imaging there. I'd love to chat more about the cholesterol pathway, and I know this is a huge landscape as well, but I think we're doing a good job of diving in deep, but not getting stuck in the underlying currents at all. There's tremendous debate about whether or not dietary cholesterol directly relates to, or does not relate to, serum cholesterol, LDL and HDL. Here's my- - Is there? - I think, well, let me put it this way. There are people that argue, I'm certainly not arguing. - Yeah, yeah, yeah. - There are people that argue that if one eats a ton of saturated fat, that LDL goes up and HDL goes down. - Oh, okay, but that's not dietary cholesterol per se. - No, not dietary cholesterol per se, but, and then there are people that argue that, you know, any increase in saturated fat intake is going to be bad, that you already synthesize enough cholesterol for hormone production, et cetera. I'd like to talk about this in terms of how one should read their charts. My LDL is in what I'm told is healthy range. My HDL is in what I'm told is healthy range. I do try and not overeat things like butter, cheese, and red meat, but I do eat some of those things and I feel pretty good. But most people are operating under the assumption that eating saturated fat is bad, and you only do it insofar as you want to taste it. And then of course there's a small group of people that love to eat organs and meats, and really pack cholesterol, and would argue that it doesn't matter if your LDL is 870, it's not going to impact your health. What's the reality around LDL, HDL, dietary cholesterol, saturated fat, at least in your view? - So first let's differentiate between cholesterol and fat, just for the listener, 'cause we use them, you know, I want to make sure people understand. So, cholesterol is a really complicated molecule. So it's a ringed molecule. God, I used to know exactly what its structure was, but like it could have 36 carbons, for all I remember. It is a lipid, so it is a hydrophobic molecule that is synthesized by every cell in the human body. It is so important that without it, if you look at sort of genetic conditions that impair cholesterol synthesis, depending on their severity, they can be fatal in utero. So in other words, anything that really interferes with our ability to produce cholesterol, is a threat to us as a species. And the reason for that is cholesterol makes up the cell membrane of every cell in our body. So, you know, as you know, but maybe the listeners don't, even though a cell is a spherical thing, it has to be fluid, right? It's not just a rigid like sphere, like a, you know, a blow up ball, right? It's got to be able to kind of move in this way to mesh with other cells. It also has to accommodate having porous structures that traverse its membrane to allow ions and things like that to go across. And it's cholesterol that gives the fluidity to that membrane. It's also, as you're alluding to, the backbone of some of the most important hormones in our body. Estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, cortisol. So we have this thing, super important. Okay. Then let's talk about, can you get cholesterol in your diet? Yes, you can eat foods that are rich in cholesterol. What was known in 1960, but somehow escaped everybody's imagination until finally the American Heart Association acknowledged this a few years ago, is that the cholesterol you eat does not really make it into your body. And the reason for that is it's esterified. So we have, and not to get too nerdy, but I think people, I really think it's important people understand how this thing works. So we have cells in our gut, and enterocytes, they're the endothelial cells of our gut. They have, each one of them has basically two transporters on them. So the first is called the Niemann-pick C1-like 1 transporter. The second is called the ATP-binding cassette G5/G8. Okay. The Niemann-pick C1-like 1 transporter will bring in any sterol, cholesterol, zoosterol, phytosterol. Any sterol that fits through the door will come in. Virtually all of that is the cholesterol we produce that gets taken back to the liver, that the liver packages in bile and secretes. So that's what aids in our digestion, which is another thing I should've mentioned earlier. In addition to using cholesterol for cell membranes and hormones, we wouldn't be able to digest our food without cholesterol, because it's what makes up the bile salts. So our own cholesterol is basically recirculated in a pool throughout our body, and this is the way it gets back into the body. It's through this Niemann-pick C1-like 1 transporter. When it gets in there, the body, this is the checkpoint of regulation. This is where the body says, do you have enough cholesterol in the body, yes or no? If yes, I will let that cholesterol make its way into the circulation. So it'll go off the basolateral side of the cell, not the luminal side, into the body. Alternatively, the body says, you know what? We have enough cholesterol. I'm going to let you poop this out. And now the ATP-binding cassette will shoot it out, it'll go back into the luminal side, and away it goes. So all of the cholesterol in our body is not esterified. And it doesn't have that big, bulky side chain attached to it. The cholesterol you eat is esterified, and an esterified cholesterol molecule simply can't physically pass through that Niemann-pick C1-like 1 transporter. Now, we probably manage to de-esterify 10 to 15% of our dietary cholesterol. So in other words, there are small amounts of dietary cholesterol that do make their way into our circulation, but it represents a small fraction of our total body's pool of cholesterol. Again, this was known, even by Ancel Keys, the guy who turned fat into the biggest boogeyman of all time. Ancel Keys acknowledged this in the 1960s. Dietary cholesterol plays no role in serum cholesterol. Again, it took the American Heart Association another 60 years to figure that out. But even now they acknowledge that. Dietary cholesterol has no bearing. - So why is it that it's pretty easy to find studies, or at least people who are highly credentialed from good institutions, claiming that eating saturated fat- - [Peter] Saturated fat's different. - Saturated fat and red meat, things that are rich in cholesterol, to be more specific, is bad for us in terms of our eventual LDL. - So this is two different things. So saturated fat consumption in many people will erase LDL cholesterol. So it's important to differentiate between the, what is saturated fat? So saturated fat of course is a fatty acid, just so people understand. Totally different molecule from cholesterol. Cholesterol is this very complicated ring structure, multiple rings stuck together. SFA, saturated fat, is just a long chain fatty acid that is fully saturated, meaning it has no double bonds, and it can exist in isolation. It can exist in a triglyceride, triglycerides, or, you know, a phospho lipid, or all sorts of things like that. So when we eat foods that contain fat, basically there are three distinctions for that fat. Is it saturated, is it monounsaturated, one double bond, or is it polyunsaturated, two or more double bonds? The observation that eating saturated fat raises cholesterol is generally correct. But again, now it makes, because if we're going to start talking about LDL, we have to explain what LDL is. This is another one of those things that's just so grossly misunderstood, that it's, it makes having discussions about this very complicated. Let's go back to the cholesterol problem, right? So every cell in our body makes cholesterol, and almost without exception, they make enough. There are a handful of times, however, when a cell needs to borrow cholesterol from another cell. Okay, so how would you do this, right? So if you're sort of, if you're playing God for a minute and you want to design a system, you have to be able to transport cholesterol from one cell to another. The most logical place you would transport this is through the circulation. And the problem with circulation is it's water. Plasma is water. So now you have this problem, which is, I want to transport cargo that is hydrophobic, in a hydrophilic medium. Can't do it. So if you think about all the things that we transport in our blood, sodium, electrolytes, glucose, things like that, they're water soluble. It's easy. They just move back and forth in our blood with no chaperone. But when you want to move cholesterol, you have to package it in something that's hydrophilic. That something is called a lipoprotein. So we have these spherical molecules that are lipid on the inside, protein on the outside, lipoprotein, and inside they contain cholesterol and triglycerides. So now you've got this spherical thing, triglyceride, cholesterol on the inside, and it's chaperoned by a hydrophilic molecule that allows it to move through our circulation. And those lipoproteins exist in different densities. So if you run these out on a gel electrophoresis plate, you'll identify different densities. The density is a function of how much protein and how much lipid is in it. So the highest density of this is called a high density lipoprotein, and the lowest density of this is called a very low density lipoprotein, a VLDL. And then next to that you have an LDL, a low density lipoprotein, and then next to that you have an IDL, an intermediate density lipoprotein. So, you know, it actually goes VLDL, IDL, LDL, but anyway. So when people say my LDL is high, or my LDL is 100, what are they saying? They're saying the cholesterol concentration of my LDL particles is a hundred milligrams per deciliter. So the total cholesterol concentration you have in your circulation is that number that says total cholesterol. So if someone's blood panel says my total cholesterol's 200, it means that if you take all the lipoproteins in their circulation, bust them open and measure the cholesterol content, it's 200 milligrams per deciliter. And for all intents and purposes, because the IDLs are so short-lived, that's basically the sum of your LDL cholesterol, your VLDL cholesterol, and your HDL cholesterol. Those three things sum to your total cholesterol. - What about LDL little a that you mentioned earlier? - [Peter] LP little a is another- - LP, excuse me. - Yeah, yeah, he's another actor. He is a special type of LDL that, again, in sort of 10 to 20% of the population, is a really bad actor. So that's an LDL that has another apolipoprotein on it called apolipoprotein little a. - [Andrew] Got it. - The other thing I'll just say on this, because earlier I mentioned ApoB. There are two broad families of lipoproteins. There are those that are wrapped in ApoBs, and those that are wrapped in ApoAs. The ApoA family is the HDL family. The ApoB family is the VLDL, IDL, LDL family. - I see. So for somebody who let's say their total cholesterol is, let's just stay with 200 for simplicity. What do you like to see in terms of the HDL LDL ratio? - Couldn't care less. I only care about ApoB. I only care about ApoB. I care about the causative agent of atherosclerosis. ApoB is the thing that drives atherosclerosis. - And what levels are attractive or repulsive for you when you see levels of ApoB that are blank, you get really concerned? - It depends on the person's objectives. So again, we take a very different view. I mean, we have. - Vitality now, and I want to live to be a hundred. - Yeah, so if you see- - And I'm assuming some taper. - If you tell me you want to live to be a hundred, you're going to need to keep your ApoB below 30 milligrams per deciliter. - Let's say I want to live to be a hundred, but I also, well, how about, I don't care how long I live, but I want to feel great while I live. - Again, it depends, right? Like anybody who's had a heart attack is going to be compromised in their ability to feel well after. Right, so. - I guess, I say it that way, because if you're going to tell me that in order to achieve that live to a hundred level, I'm going to have to give up my personal life and my- - No no, to get- - and my brain functioning, then I'm not really interested. - Sure, but to get LDL levels, and really, again, people think of it as LDL, it's really ApoB, right? ApoB is this total concentration of LDL and VLDL. And that's what matters. Those are the big atherogenic particles. LDL also includes the Lp[a], although the concentration of Lp[a] is relatively speaking so small that it doesn't generally show up as much in the ApoB. So we treat ApoB, and basically what it comes down to is you want ApoB to be as close to the level as it was when you were born. So we start developing heart disease when we're born. That's just the way it is. The autopsy studies make this abundantly clear. When you look at autopsies of young people who are dying in their 20s, and this was first done in the 1970s, it was again repeated. Again, it's always done after we have a war, right? So in the 1970s, it was done on people, you know, who died in Vietnam. In the early 2000s it was done on mostly young men, but some young women, who were, you know, dying in Iraq and Afghanistan. And we saw without any ambiguity that cardiovascular disease is already taking hold in people who are 18, 19, 20-years-old. - [Andrew] Wow! - And to be clear, they aren't going to die of atherosclerosis at that age. They're still 40, 50 years away from it. But this is a lifelong disease. And we also know that the disease can't really develop until ApoB reaches a certain threshold. And that's the threshold that most of us get to by the time we're sort of in our teens. So it's this really young ApoB level of kind of 20 to 30 milligrams per deciliter, that makes it impossible to get atherosclerosis. So ApoB is necessary, but not sufficient to develop ASCVD. Now that, go ahead. - Oh, I'm sorry, I was just going to ask, what are some of the top behavioral nutritional supplementation, if any, based, and prescription drug-based ways to target ApoB? - Well, nutritionally, you basically have two big tools, right? And it depends on what's driving up ApoB. So ApoB, remember, is the concentration of LDL and VLDL particles. And what do they carry? Cholesterol and triglycerides. So anything that reduces cholesterol and reduces triglycerides, is going to reduce ApoB. Triglycerides are generally driven by carbohydrate intake. So more insulin-resistance, more carbohydrate intake, more triglycerides. So we, I mean clinically, this is readily apparent to anyone who treats patients. If you restrict carbohydrates, you will reduce triglycerides. That just happens all day long. But if you reduce triglycerides by raising fat intake so much, it can still raise ApoB. So you have to be able to think about it. So in an ideal world, it's can you lower saturated fat, which tends to be the one that is most driving ApoB, while lowering carbohydrate, and then see what you can get. But here's the reality of it is, there's nobody with dietary intervention that's going to get to a level of 30 milligrams per deciliter. I mean, I've never seen anything. - Pure dietary intervention. - Yeah. - So what are the other things that- - [Peter] It's got to be pharmacologic at this point. - Statin type interventions? - Well, now you have multiple classes of drugs. So the tried and true is the statin. So statins work by inhibiting cholesterol synthesis, and the net effect of that is that the, so the liver is really sensitive to cholesterol levels. It doesn't want too much, it doesn't want too little. When you inhibit cholesterol synthesis, the liver says, I want more cholesterol. So it puts more LDL receptors on its surface, and it pulls the LDL out of circulation. That's what lowers the LDL in the circulation. So, you know, again, nine statins in use today, we typically use four of them. The side effect profile, contrary to kind of all the sort of statin-hating propaganda out there, very benign, right? 5% of people experience muscle soreness, which reverses upon cessation. - Cognitive effects? - Again, I think it's, in terms of actual comparing it in a placebo, no effect whatsoever, right. So does that mean that you put a patient on it, they won't complain of something? No, but if you look at clinical trials, there's no evidence whatsoever that statins impair cognition. There's also no evidence in clinical trials that they accelerate the risk of neurodegenerative disease. In fact, it's the opposite. Now we will, there's a very nuanced case we make, Andrew, which is we'll look at patients with highly suppressed desmosterol levels. We will back off. We do want to maintain desmosterol above a certain level, because of some evidence that is still, I think, very preliminary, but enough for us that we say, why take the chance? We have so many other tools to lower cholesterol, why would we over-suppress synthesis in a susceptible individual? So the next tool you look at is a drug that blocks the absorption, or the reabsorption of cholesterol. Remember that Niemann-pick C1-like 1 transporter? So that guy has a drug called ezetimibe that just mechanically blocks it. So in people, and that's why I mentioned earlier, we measure all those sterols in people, so we also measure things called phytosterols. And the phytosterols give us an indication of how active that transporter is. So the higher your phytosterols, the more likely you are to respond to ezetimibe. Next class of drugs is a drug that blocks cholesterol synthesis, but only in the liver. So the statin does it globally. This other drug called bempedoic acid does it only in the liver. So it has a very similar mechanism to statins. Different enzyme. Not quite as potent, but way fewer side effects. So any patient that's having a response to statins that's adverse, we'll try this other thing. - What's it called, one more time? - [Peter] Bempedoic acid. - Bempedoic acid. - The most potent drug of the lot is the PCSK9 inhibitor. So PCSK9, it's a protein that was discovered in the late '90s, I believe, is responsible for the degradation of LDL receptors. This was first discovered in people who had a condition called familial hypercholesterolemia, or FH. So these are people that have incredibly high cholesterol. Typically their total cholesterol level is 300. Their LDL cholesterol is typically, you know, north of 200 milligrams per deciliter. This is a disease that is defined by the phenotype, not the genotype. So the phenotype has a very clear definition, which I basically just gave you. The genotype is, there's a million paths to get there. There's over 3000 mutations that are known to produce that phenotype. This was discovered to be one of them. In people who had hyper functioning PCSK9, this protein was just constantly hammering and destroying the LDL receptors. And so their LDL would be huge. And by extension, their total cholesterol would be. So in 19, no sorry, in 2006, Helen Hobbs and colleagues discovered an opposite group of population. People who had LDL cholesterol naturally of 10 to 20 milligrams per deciliter, which would be an ApoB of about 20 milligrams per deciliter, and who never got heart disease. They were immune to heart disease, no matter how long they live. And they had the opposite, they had hypofunctioning PCSK9. And so that was 2006 in the "New England Journal of Medicine." That basically got a whole bunch of drug companies hot on the trail of producing a drug to mimic it. So now we have these antibodies, and they're wildly effective. - What percentage of your patients over 45 do you have on either a statin or on one of these other classic compounds? - Well, often it's in combinations, and I would say 80%. - [Andrew] Eight zero? - Well you have to remember what our objective is. Like, we're in the business of trying to make sure people live as long as possible. And you have to take a sort of world view of this, right? If you, like what's the most prevalent cause of death globally? - [Andrew] Say cardiovascular disease. - Yeah, and like, how close is it? So the last year before COVID, COVID kind of messes up these numbers a little bit, but if you go to 2019, 18.6 million people died of heart disease. Number two, cancer, 10 million. Like nothing's in the zip code of atherosclerosis. And if you remember what I just said, if you took everybody in their 20s and reduced them to a level of that of a child, you'd make ASCVD an orphan disease. - So. - So the question is can you do that? - Why don't we hear more, why don't we hear more about this? I realize there's some nuance. It's not straightforward, it's not as simple as saying, eat less cheese, red meat and watch your LDL, get on a statin. But why do we hear so little about ApoB, in the general discussion? Social media is such a skewed landscape, as we know. People shouting into tunnels of varying clarity. Some are beautiful bronze tunnels with clean walls and others are sewer lines, right. And they all converge in the same place. - Yeah. - Right, as we know. But why do we hear so little about this? I mean, I'm not on a statin, but now I'm beginning to think that maybe that might be a good idea to consider one of these other compounds. I don't know the last time I looked at my ApoB specifically, I'm guessing my physician did. But why don't we hear more about this? This sounds so important. It sounds like the most important conversation, 'cause all the hormone stuff and all the stuff about smoking, and head injuries, and ADHD and all the rest, I mean, is irrelevant if you're dead, right? - Yeah. It's a great question, I don't think I have a great insight as to why this isn't more front and center. I think the bigger problem is why don't we even understand how to think about it? I mean the, and there's a whole chapter in my book I'm working on that really gets to this problem of, why aren't we looking at atherosclerosis in terms of treating the causative agent? Instead, we look at modifying 10-year risk. So that's the fundamental difference between what I call medicine 2.0 and medicine 3.0. Medicine 2.0, which is what we're generally practicing today, when it comes to ASCVD says, look, we will treat you, we will lower that LDL cholesterol, they still don't talk about ApoB, but that's a very American thing. If you go outside of the United States, everybody's talking about ApoB, it's in the guidelines in Europe and Canada, and everywhere else. The United States is very stubborn on this, and it's due to a couple of really weird personalities in the lipid world. But the paradigm is, when your 10-year risk reaches 5%, when there's a 5% chance that you're going to have a heart attack, stroke, or die in the next 10 years, now it's time to treat you. Medicine 3.0 says that's not the way to think about it. You treat the causative agent. If there's a causative agent, you treat it. If blood pressure raises the risk of heart disease, you lower blood pressure. If smoking raises the risk of something, you treat smoking. And the reason that the risk model is so bad when you're looking at 10-year risk, is age is the biggest driver of risk. I mean bar none, right? So if you take a 70-year-old with perfect lipids and perfect blood pressure and perfect everything, their 10-year risk of ASCVD is probably four to five times higher than the most unhealthy 30-year-old. It's not even close. - It's a lot like eye disease. You know, there are exceptions, of course, but we always say that the biggest risk factor for going blind from glaucoma is being an older person, frankly. - So if you could identify what the risk factors are for glaucoma, imagine if the paradigm was, we're only going to treat it when your risk of blindness reaches 5%, which isn't triggered until you're old enough anyway. Wouldn't you rather know that when you're 30? - Absolutely. - And say, wait, if maybe being in the sun without sunglasses, or, you know, using this type of eye drop or something like that, has a negative impact, I would rather know that sooner. So that's the fundamental difference. It's a philosophical difference, with respect to prevention. And I will acknowledge that in one element of prevention, I make no consideration. I am only coming at this through the lens of the individual. I am never coming at this through the lens of society. That makes my life easier, and it makes the problem I'm solving easier. I don't have to answer the quality adjusted life year problem. I don't have to ask the question, is it economical to treat people at 30? I don't know the answer to that question. But I also know that when you're trying to solve really complicated problems, the more you can simplify the better. So I've just acknowledged openly, not solving that, if you want to criticize me for it, that's fine. Let's be transparent. But all I care about is the person I'm sitting across from, and in that situation, it's really their decision if they can justify the cost of treatment. - An esoteric question, and then a less esoteric question. The esoteric question relates to something that I think is a little bit niche, but not necessarily so, which is, peptides and stem cells and PRP. I don't want to go off on too much of a tangent on rehab, but I know you've done a number of posts on social media recently that were, I have to just tell you were really thoughtful, and I really appreciate that you're willing to share your own tissue rehabilitation experience, and point people to that, because this is a landscape that a lot of people are in and they don't know how to navigate it. And a mutual friend of ours, not to be named, sent me a text and said, I'm going to be talking to Attia, and what do you know about studies on things like BPC-157, this gastric peptide that anecdotally, again, anecdotally, people report getting injections of this into the shoulder, knee, et cetera, and feeling so much better, so much faster, but there really aren't good studies, controlled studies. And you hear all the same sorts of things about platelet-rich plasma, PRP, which, if someone tells you there are a lot of stem cells in them, they're lying. There are not a lot of stem cells in them. And you also hear about stem cells, which are not FDA approved, at least in this, for most uses in this country, but are certainly, people are flying down to Colombia and getting injections. And what is your understanding or experience with things like BPC-157, specifically, 'cause peptides is a huge landscape. We should probably do a whole episode on peptides. Things like PRP. PRP is now approved for, I mean, women are getting injections of this into their ovaries to improve follicle count. We know this. People are getting injections of PRP into every tissue and organ and, hell, men are getting injected into their penis, so I hear, for all sorts of reasons that are unclear to me. What's the deal with PRP, BPC-157, and stem cells? Do you ever see interesting effects? Are you curious about these compounds? Do you prescribe or direct people towards these? The FDA approved ones of course. - Yeah, so short answer is, I'm definitely curious about them and I'd love to see the work done, but I also think this is about as wild wild west as it gets. PRP less so, but certainly stem cells and peptides. And, you know, I just think, if you're going to do something without a clinical trial, you got to show up with a lot more data, right? So let's use rapamycin as an example, right? I'm a huge proponent of rapamycin. And you can say, well, Peter, how can you take or prescribe rapamycin for GRo protective effects, when we do not have a human clinical trial demonstrating that it lengthens life? And the answer is, because I have 84 other pieces of data that all point in the same direction across every model organism going back more than a billion years. And that's really different from, Joey, Sammy, and Sally did this thing, and I think it works. And they just can't be compared. Now I have no idea if stem cells work. I have no idea if BPC-157 works. I have no idea, frankly, if PRP even works, though it might seem to have some efficacy and some indications. For example, maybe when it comes to early hair loss. Maybe when it comes to, you know, certain joint issues. But the reality of it is like, I think we just have to accept the fact that everything we do has an opportunity cost, and that opportunity cost is sometimes financial. But I actually find a lot of times it's in time and effort and energy that goes into something. Now, when I was, you know, waiting to get my shoulder surgery, this is an injury that I've had forever, right? This is an injury, you know, this injury was actually probably the greatest source of discomfort I had swimming the Catalina Channel the last time in 2009. So that tells you how long I've had this injury. But, you know, I sort of knew at some point, like, I'm going to have to have it fixed. And I sort of went down this rabbit hole like, hey, is there anything I can do to avoid having surgery? You know, would infusing a million stem cells into it work? And in speaking with as many orthopedic surgeons as I could, the answer was kind of unambiguously no. And by the way, it doesn't mean you wouldn't feel better if I injected a bunch of stem cells into your shoulder. There are a lot of reasons that might make you feel better. Just like there are a bunch of reasons you can feel better if somebody injects saline directly into your joint. So the question is, is it going to fix the underlying problem, and if so, will it do so by what mechanism? So I'm pretty sure that if you took a thousand people with my particular injury, and injected them with stem cells, it wouldn't do a thing, because of the nature of my injury. I had a complete labral tear. Are there some injuries that might benefit from it? Yeah, possible. So the question is, how would you design the trial to narrow down your patient population correctly, so that you might see a signal? 'Cause the other risk of doing a trial is you have too much of a heterogeneous patient population. You don't know what the heck you're really doing, and you get meaningless results. You get a null result, when in fact there's a small signal, but you were underpowered to pick it up because, you know, you only had 10% of your patient population that was the right patient population to get that. So, you know, will we ever get there? I don't know, because I don't see what the incentive is, right. You have people who are making money hand over fist, doing procedures on the basis of I'm not sure what, what would their motivation or incentive be to sort of see this legitimized? You'd really have to be able to say, well, there really needs to be sort of a pharma angle to this. It's sort of one of the wishes I had, right? Like if I was a billionaire, I feel like the way I would probably waste all of my money would be running clinical trials on stuff nobody cared about. - Yeah. - It would just be- - Likewise, I will join you, because that would be, yesterday we recorded a sit down with somebody from Caltech who works on aggression and rage, and other things related to that, and has identified peptides that are approved the FDA for other reasons that seem to adjust anxiety, might even adjust aggression and pathologic aggression, and went off on to a long description of why none of these drugs exist on the market for the treatment of psychiatric illness, and yet probably would work. And what's missing is a billionaire, or a billion dollar company, that is willing to invest in something that very likely will work, but the market value isn't quite there. Or it failed in a previous trial, and so no one wants to touch it with a 10-foot pole. Hopefully someone listening to this will be incentivized to provide this sort of a venue for that. The kind of work that we're talking about. I have to ask. - But I want to make one other point, Andrew, which is, to me, the problem with a lot of these things is it gets, it's a crutch. You know, it's sort of like what we talked about with like, hey, just fix my T man, and everything's going to be fine. And it's like, no, that's just the beginning. You know, what I worry about when I see people who are clamoring for this stuff is a lot of times they don't realize that, whether it's psychologically or otherwise, they sort of say, well, now that I've had this thing done, I don't have to do the hard work of the real rehab. I mean, if I've learned anything through my shoulder surgery, and I'm now 3 1/2 months out. - How does it feel? - Amazing. I mean, look, I still can't do a lot of stuff. It's going to be, you know, a while. I haven't even been able to shoot a bow yet. And it'll probably be a year before I'll go back to, you know, long dead hangs and heavy deadlifts. I mean, I dunno, maybe nine months. But it's, you know, I'm not there yet. But what I learned through a really amazing prehab and rehab process is, like you just got to do the work, and it's freaking hard. Shoulders are the most tedious, boring thing in the world. I mean, three days a week I am doing, four days a week I am doing one hour of just dedicated stuff for this shoulder, that is super uncomfortable, super boring, super frustrating. But, I mean, I have faith in the methodology, right. And I think a lot of people are saying, just shoot the stem cells into me and I don't have to do any of that stuff. And the reality of it is, I think that's a very dangerous place to be. - Have you ever tried BPC-157? - Yeah, we tried it. We had, you know, again, maybe seven, eight years ago, we had a bunch of patients ask about it, so, you know, my view is, okay, I was pretty convinced that there was no safety downside to it so I was like, well, I wouldn't prescribe it to a patient unless I tried it myself. So me and another doc in the practice, Ralph, we did it for, I don't know, a couple months. I didn't notice a single thing. - Interesting. Well, thank you for that. Shifting to a less esoteric, but, and I think probably more important topic overall. Metabolomics. We're talking about this before we sat down to record. What is, what are metabolomics? Why should we be thinking about them? I have some idea of what it might be about, but most people I think are not thinking about metabolomics at all. And for those that are, I'm sure they could learn more. So tell us about metabolomics and what you'd like to see more of in the world of metabolomics. - Yeah, so omics is just the term that we use to describe the study of something. So genomics right, is like the broad study of genes, and, you know, proteomics, the broad study of proteins and things like that. So metabolomics is just study of metabolites, and metabolites, unlike a lot of these other things, they're a relatively finite number of these things, many of which are known, but some of which are not known. So glucose is a metabolite. Acetyl-CoA is a metabolite. Lactate is a metabolite. And so the question is, what do we know about these things and how they work? And more importantly, what do we know about certain physiologic states, and the metabolomic profile that results from them? So let's use two extreme examples, like exercise. Everybody understands, the data are unambiguously clear, exercise produces about the most favorable phenotype imaginable. So if you wanted to take a genomics approach to understanding that, you might look at, is there a change in the genome when you exercise? And the answer is probably not, but maybe if you looked at the methylation patterns and epigenome, you could look at epigenomic studies. But you might instead look at kind of the proteomic side of that. Like, what is gene expression doing? And there you would see a lot of changes. Well, what I don't think people are really understanding, although there was a very interesting paper that just came out two weeks ago that looks for novel metabolites that are changing, is they're a huge signal in a metabolomic profile that looks different in the state of exercise versus non-exercise. And could that represent part of how exercise is transmitting its benefit through the body? You know, people always talk about the holy grail of metabolomics would be can you find a pill to mimic exercise? And I think the answer to that question is going to be undoubtedly no. For a couple of reasons. One, even if you could mimic the longevity sort of lifespan parts of it, you could never mimic the health span parts of it. But what if you could do both, right? What if there were small molecules that can replicate some of the protective benefits of exercise, and you could combine those with exercise? What if those could be treatments for other disease states, like diabetes, things like that? So that's why I think this field of metabolomics is relatively untapped, and I think potentially the next sort of frontier. - Speaking of frontiers, I hear a lot nowadays about GLP-1 and pharmacology, that prescription drugs that mimic or increase GLP-1 directly, glucagon-like peptide. People are talking about this as the blockbuster obesity drug. I haven't heard this much talk about a drug to adjust human body weight favorably, since the discussions of fen-phen when I was in college, and then of course fen-phen was pulled from the market because people were dying. Not left and right, but enough people died that they pulled it from the market. - Which, by the way, is an interesting story. You know, it was the enantiomer that they chose to use that was the wrong enantiomer. And what it resulted in was, God, I think it was like. - Was it mitral valve prolapse? - It was an MVP, yeah, it was something in the mitral valve. Yeah, I think the chordae tendineae were rupturing in the mitral valve, and it was mostly young women I think were getting, you know, horrible pulmonary disease as a result of it. Probably pulmonary hypertension or something like that. But there were, you know, there were two enantiomers of the drug, and had they just used the other one, this issue wouldn't have happened. And there was a stupid reason why they made the choice to use the one they did. And it's one of those things where once you make the mistake, you're never going back. It's not like that company could say, okay, wait, we want to do over, but we're going to do it with the right version. So it's a tragic outcome. But you're absolutely right. I think the GLP-1 agonists have more efficacy, and, you know, for all intensity and for everything we can see, certainly seem safer. - Are you excited about them? - Yeah, I am, yeah. I mean, I think we're just seeing the kind of tip of the iceberg. They're not miracle drugs, right. They come with problems, right, which is, you know, they're catabolic across the board. So patients are losing fat, but they're losing muscle as well. So, you know- - You just sent all the gym jockeys running from [indistinct], that's all you have to say. All you have to say nowadays about something is that it's going to drop testosterone, lower fertility, change someone's skin, hair or nails, and it's like people, it could extend life to being 250-years-old and people are gone. Humans are humans. That's a neuroscience and psychology issue, not a biology medicine issue. But I'm pleased to hear that you're excited by them, 'cause I hear a lot of excitement. I haven't heard anything disastrous about them. - It takes a while to get people up to dose. So if you're looking at semaglutide, the dose that was studied, so did a one-year trial, or maybe it was a little over that, maybe 60 weeks. But it took about 16 weeks to get the patients comfortably up to 2.4 milligrams weekly, which was the dose that they ultimately stayed on. In our experience, when we use it, we don't even usually go up to 2.4 milligrams. We can usually get enough benefit between one and two milligrams. And we usually move people along a little bit quicker. But we've definitely had our share of patients who can't tolerate it due to the nausea. - Interesting. - Which might be part of how it's working, right, is the sort of suppression of appetite, which, if taken to an extreme can produce nausea. - Interesting. - Yeah, I think most of the effect of semaglutide is central, not peripheral. - Huh. So I don't know, I saw one paper that GLP-1 is acting both on cells in the periphery, to cause gut distention in some ways, or sort of make people feel full, through promotion of literally mechanical receptors that make people feel as if their stomach is distended, even though their stomach is empty. And then perhaps some central hypothalamic effects. Is that what- - Yeah, I think it's doing, I would bet 80% of it's in the hypothalamus. It is also improving insulin sensitivity in the periphery, but I don't think that that's accounting for much of its benefit. - Super interesting. - And there's next gen versions of these that seem to be more long-lasting. So right now, if you look at coming off semaglutide, you're going to see a weight regain. So there's newer versions that seem to preserve the weight loss, even off the drug. So it begs the ultimate question, which is like, what's the total use case for this going to be? Is this going to be a drug you cycle on and off? Or is it going to be a drug that a person has to stay on indefinitely, and if so, will they become tachyphylactic? Will they gain resistance to it? So it's still super early days on these things. - My hope is that it would be a little bit like the way that you describe testosterone and estrogen therapies, that it would allow people to do more of the behavioral work that's absolutely required for health span and lifespan. - Yep, and we've also seen, on the flip side of that, you can cheat through semaglutide, right? You can drink a lot of calories, and sort of get around the drug. So, you know, for example, like, you know, we always encourage patients who want to lose weight to really just eliminate alcohol. That's like, that's the cheapest, easiest trick to lose weight. And so if you're still drinking a lot of alcohol, which is incredibly caloric, and just drinking a lot of caloric stuff, we've seen that that's less, this is just anecdotal with our patients, but we've seen that that's, it's easier to get around the benefits of the drug that way. - Interesting. I so appreciate your answers today. First of all, they were incredibly thorough and pointed towards real world application. I also just want to thank you more broadly for the work that you do, because obviously you have this incredible clinical experience and patient population that you work very closely with. But I see you really as one of the few, both clinicians, and I realize you're an MD, did you do a PhD as well? No, but I consider you a scientist clinician, a clinician scientist is the appropriate wording of that of course, in the way that you really still drill into studies in detail. I know a lot of clinicians, not all of them do that for sure. And the fact that you're so hungry for the new incoming knowledge, as well as the old literature. So, it's an incredibly rich data set in that brain of yours, and I really appreciate you sharing it with us, both in your podcast, in the upcoming book, which I think that we'll certainly have you on here again in anticipation of that. But I know I, and a ton of other people, are really excited for the book. And in the way that you approach social media and your podcast and going on podcasts. So thank you so much. I learned a ton, I know everyone learned a ton. - Thanks Andrew. Great to be here, man. - Thank you. Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Peter Attia, all about the things that we can do in order to maximize our lifespan and health span, I highly recommend people check out Dr. Attia's podcast, "The Drive" is excellent, as you can imagine, based on today's conversation, and it's easily available on Apple Podcast, Spotify, Overcast, and Google. Please also check out Dr. Attila's website. It's peteratillamd.com. There you can find links to his podcast episodes as well as a signup for his excellent weekly newsletter. That newsletter provides terrific information related to health that anyone can benefit from. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a simple zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover, or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those comments and we do take them to heart. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, and check out Momentous supplements, our new partners in the supplement space, and check out Athletic Greens. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so. We are hubermanlab on Twitter, and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram, and both places I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is unique from the content covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram, and hubermanlab on Twitter. Please also check out our Neural Network monthly newsletter. This is a newsletter that has summaries of podcast episodes. It also includes a lot of actionable protocols. It's very easy to sign up for the newsletter. You go to Hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to newsletter. You supply your email, but we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear and rigorous privacy policy, which is we do not share your email with anybody. And the newsletter comes out once a month, and it is completely zero cost. Again, just go to Hubermanlab.com and go to the Neural Network newsletter. I'd also like to point out that that the Huberman Lab Podcast has a clips channel, so these are brief clips anywhere from three to 10 minutes, that encompass single concepts and actionable protocols related to sleep, to focus, interviews with various guests. We talk about things like caffeine, when to drink caffeine relative to sleep, alcohol, when and how and if anyone should ingest it relative to sleep, dopamine, serotonin, mental health, physical health, and on and on. All the things that relate to the topics most of interest to you. You can find that easily by going to YouTube, look for Huberman Lab clips in the search area, and it will take you there. Subscribe, and we are constantly updating those with new clips. This is especially useful, I believe, for people that have missed some of the earlier episodes, or you're still working through the back catalog of Huberman Lab Podcast, which admittedly can be rather long. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 263 ---
Video ID: h2aWYjSA1Jc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h2aWYjSA1Jc
Title: Sleep Toolkit: Tools for Optimizing Sleep & Sleep-Wake Timing | Huberman Lab Podcast #84
Published: 2022-08-08 12:00:25 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I describe a comprehensive toolkit consisting of behavioral and supplement-based tools that you can customize to enhance the quality, duration and impact of your sleep. This has an enormous positive impact on your overall health and daytime functioning, brain, hormones and immune system. I teach you how to effectively harness light (and darkness), temperature, food, exercise, caffeine, supplements, and digital devices in order to fall asleep faster, stay deeply asleep longer and overall, and achieve better quality sleep. I also describe how these tools can be modified to recover quickly from a poor night’s sleep, jet lag or bouts of shift work. Given that sleep is the foundation of all mental health, physical health and performance, this episode should benefit everyone as it provides an essential toolkit of science-supported, low- to zero-cost strategies that can be tailored to optimize your sleep routine. 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles: 
Early evening light mitigates sleep compromising physiological and alerting responses to subsequent late evening light: https://go.nature.com/3zIAk1X
Recommendations for daytime, evening, and nighttime indoor light exposure to best support physiology, sleep, and wakefulness in healthy adults: https://bit.ly/3bAwzTZ
Meal Timing Regulates the Human Circadian System: https://bit.ly/3zECxLF

Books
Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams: https://amzn.to/3dfsncH
Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art: https://amzn.to/3zEvF0P
 
Resources
Ring lights: https://amzn.to/3p2jDJD
Drawing tablet: https://amzn.to/3bEbpVc
Light Meter (Apple): https://apple.co/3P70ZLe
Light Meter (Android): https://bit.ly/3P8N3Ax
Reveri: https://www.reveri.com
Madefor NSDR: https://youtu.be/pL02HRFk2vo
Huberman Lab Toolkit for Sleep: https://bit.ly/3Syq3hd
Huberman Lab Podcast episode on shiftwork & jetlag.  : https://bit.ly/3SqX8LY

Timestamps
00:00:00 Tools to Optimize Sleep 
00:03:02 Momentous Supplements 
00:04:16 InsideTracker, Eight Sleep, LMNT 
00:08:24 Factors to Control Circadian Rhythm & Sleep
00:15:10 Morning Tool: Morning Sunlight Viewing, Cortisol 
00:20:44 Morning Sunlight: Circadian Rhythm, Artificial Lights, Cloudy Days 
00:26:18 Evaluating Light in Environment, Compensating for Missed Morning Light
00:29:26 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:30:46 Morning Tools: Temperature & Deliberate Cold Exposure, Exercise
00:34:58 Timing Caffeine, “Afternoon Crash,” Exercise
00:40:08 Timing Eating, Alertness & Circadian Rhythm 
00:45:20 3 Daily Critical Periods 
00:46:49 Afternoons: Naps, Deep Relaxation (NSDR, Self-Hypnosis), Exercise & Body Temperature, Caffeine 
00:51:59 Afternoon Tools: Viewing Sunlight in Late Afternoon, Evening Light
00:56:45 Evening/Night Tools: Overhead Artificial Lights, Light Sensitivity 
01:04:40 Evening Tools: Hot Bath/Sauna, Temperature & Sleeping Environment 
01:09:40 Alcohol, THC & Reduced Sleep Quality; CBD, Anxiety & Falling Asleep
01:11:45 Sleep Supplements: Magnesium Threonate, Apigenin & Theanine
01:16:34 Melatonin Supplementation (Caution)
01:17:44 Additional Sleep Supplements: GABA, Glycine, Myo-Inositol & Anxiety
01:20:08 Falling Back Asleep: Reveri App, NSDR, Yoga Nidra 
01:22:55 Staying Asleep: Eye Masks, Ear Plugs, Elevating Feet 
01:24:58 Tool: Sleep Apnea & Nasal Breathing 
01:28:20 Sleep Schedule Consistency, Weekends, Compensatory Sleep & Caffeine
01:31:14 Tools: Temperature Minimum & Jet Lag, Shift Work & Red Lights
01:37:38 Behavioral Tools for 3 Daily Critical Periods 
01:39:26 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Huberman Lab Clips, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we're talking all about sleep and how to optimize your sleep. This is a topic we've covered previously on this podcast in the episode called "Master Your Sleep." However, since the airing of that episode, there's been some terrific new science to come out. I've also received thousands, yes, literally thousands of questions related to the specific protocols covered in that episode as well as in the episode on jet lag and shift work. And while today's episode is not specifically about jet lag and shift work, we are going to cover tools that will allow you to shift your schedule if you need to for work or travel, and we will also cover tools that will allow you to fall back asleep if you happen to wake up in the middle of the night or if you get a poor night's sleep, how to actually recover from that poor night's sleep more quickly, and yes, indeed, even replace sleep that you've lost. So today's episode is going to be filled with practical tools. We will touch on some of the underlying science, but it's really designed to be a practical toolkit for optimizing your sleep depending on your specific sleep needs. Various times throughout today's episode, I will refer to studies that form the backbone of the tools that I'll be describing. But whereas most of the podcast episodes here tend to be deep scientific mechanism and then tools, scientific mechanism, then tools, today I'm mainly going to focus on the practical tools that anyone, indeed, all people, I believe, should use in order to optimize their sleep. Why should everybody want to optimize their sleep and put considerable effort into optimizing their sleep? Well, put simply, sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance of all kinds, cognitive performance, physical performance, et cetera. It also controls things like our immune system, wound healing, our skin health and our appearance, whether or not we can think clearly or not, whether or not we will live as long as we possibly can or not, whether or not we suffer from dramatic age-related cognitive decline or not. In other words, whether or not we keep our memory as we age. I could go on and on about all the terrible things that can happen to somebody if they don't sleep well. Thanks to the great work of Professor Matt Walker at University of California, Berkeley, and the wonderful book that he wrote, "Why We Sleep," I think the world is largely onboard now that sleep is critical to our health, our mental health, our physical health, and our performance, but what's not often discussed is how great life is, that is, how much more focused and energetic and how positive our mood gets, when we are sleeping for the appropriate amount of time at the appropriate depth and when we are doing that regularly. Basically everything in life gets better when we're sleeping well. So today I'm going to teach you the tools that will allow you to optimize your sleep. That is, get to sleep and stay asleep, fall back asleep if you wake up in the middle of the night, and adjust your sleep given the various life demands you may be experiencing. I'm pleased to announce that The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States. That's valuable. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single-ingredient supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. This is really hard to do if you're taking blends of different supplements or if the dosages are such that you can't titrate, or that is, adjust the dosages of a given supplement. So by using single-ingredient supplements, you can really build out the supplement kit that's ideal for you and your specific needs. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA test, you can also get insight into, for instance, what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological age. And, of course, your biological age is really the age that counts. The problem with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get information back about the levels of metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that all very easy to navigate. They have a personalized platform. So this is a web portal where you can go, you'll see the numbers from your blood tests and DNA tests, and then it will tell you, for instance, how you could adjust various aspects of your nutrition or your exercise or supplementation in order to bring those numbers into the ranges that are best for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capabilities. It turns out that your body temperature and your ability to fall and stay asleep are very closely related. If your body does not drop by one to three degrees, you are simply not going to get into deep sleep or stay in deep sleep. And waking up, it also turns out, is related to body temperature. Every time you wake up in the morning, your body is warming up in order to wake you up, and this has an enormous number of hormonal and metabolic and other cascades that are vitally important, not just to what happens while you sleep, but your health and your energy and focus throughout the day. Eight Sleep is an incredible device. It's one that I've been using for six months or so, and it's completely transformed my sleep. And I already thought I was sleeping pretty well. The way it works is that you can cool or heat your mattress according to different times throughout the night. So for instance, you can cool your mattress if you tend to run warm and that will help you fall and stay deeply asleep and then toward morning, you can have the mattress programmed or, I should say, the mattress cover programmed, so that you warm up your sleeping environment and you wake up when you want to wake up. If you've been sleeping pretty well but waking up in the middle of the night, you might also find that by cooling your mattress even further toward the middle of your sleep about, well, you'll stay in deep sleep much longer. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to check out the Pod Pro Cover and save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships within the US, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need in order to get your brain and body to function at its best, but none of the things you don't, in particular, sugar. Electrolytes are vitally important to the way that your neurons, your nerve cells, work and, indeed, to the way that all the cells of your body work. But your nervous system and your neurons particularly depend on electrolytes because you need the electrolytes, sodium, magnesium, and potassium, in the proper ratios, in order for those nerve cells to fire what are called action potentials, which are the electrical signals that allow your neurons to work and to allow you to do everything from remembering information to moving your muscles deliberately. When you exercise, or even if you don't, you can get quite low on electrolytes, especially on a hot day. You can get dehydrated. There are lot of different ways to replenish your fluids and electrolytes and there are a lot of different electrolyte drinks out there, but many of them contain a lot of sugar. And some of those that don't contain a lot of sugar don't have the proper ratios of sodium, magnesium, and potassium. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's L-M-N-T, .com/huberman to claim a free LMNT Sample Pack with your first purchase. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Let's talk about sleep and tools to optimize your sleep. I want you to conceptualize yourself as contained within a room that has only very few windows or very few entry points. What do I mean by this? Well, your brain and your nervous system control whether or not you move or don't move. They control whether or not you're digesting food or you're not digesting food. They control whether or not you're stressed or not stressed, happy or sad, et cetera. All of that stuff that controls all that stuff is housed inside your skin and skull, et cetera. That might seem pretty obvious, but what that means is that for your brain and body to feel alert and focused, ready to move and exercise or do some work, or if your brain body are going to lie down and go to sleep, well, that brain and body needs cues, it needs inputs, to determine when to do those different things. And those cues and inputs arrive through a defined set of what I'll call stimuli, but you can also think of these as levers or tools. The main levers and tools that are going to allow you to control when you are awake and when you are asleep and to get better sleep every single night are light, literally photons, light energy, could be from sunlight, could be from artificial light, we will discuss those particulars in a moment, as well as darkness. That is the absence of light. So we've got light and dark. Those are two very powerful tools to encourage your nervous system to be in one state or another, meaning awake or asleep. Temperature is another tool or lever. Turns out that when your body is cooling down, you have a greater tendency to fall and stay asleep. In fact, every night when you actually sleep, your body is dropping by one to three degrees and that drop in temperature is required. It's like a gate that your body has to go through in order for you to get into sleep. And in fact, the converse is also true. If your body heats up by one to three degrees or so, you will wake up. So you've got light, dark, temperature, food. And when we say food, we mean what we eat, when we eat, and the amount that we eat. Okay, so light, dark, temperature, food, exercise. And of course, exercise comes in different forms. We can do cardiovascular exercise that can be low-intensity, long-distance exercise. It can be high intensity, so-called high intensity interval training. It could be weight training. It could be yoga. It could be swimming, any number of different activities. But exercise, in general, causes an increase in body temperature and tends to make us more alert, not just during the exercise, but in the immediate hours after that exercise. Exercise does some other things that relate to our sleep as well and we'll talk about those today and how you can leverage them. Another potent lever for adjusting your sleepiness and wakefulness is caffeine. This, of course, comes as no surprise to people, but why and how caffeine works might come as a surprise. Very briefly, we have a molecule in our body called adenosine and the longer we have been awake, the more adenosine builds up in our brain and body and adenosine is part of the reason why we get sleepy. Caffeine effectively operates as a adenosine antagonist. It works by basically occupying the receptor for adenosine. So it's a little bit of a convoluted mechanism. But basically all you need to know is that caffeine prevents the actions of adenosine. That's one of the reasons why caffeine makes us feel alert. But how much caffeine we drink and when we drink caffeine turns out to be vitally important for adjusting our wakefulness and for optimizing our sleep. So we'll talk about that as well. The other category of lever or tools which are immensely powerful for optimizing sleep are supplements. There now exist as many as eight different supplements that can powerfully modulate sleep in healthy ways and that have huge margins for safety. So we're going to talk about what those supplements are. In previous episodes of this podcast and as a guest on other podcasts, I've talked about three particular supplements, magnesium threonate, apigenin, and theanine, which together can really enhance the speed at which one falls asleep and people's ability to stay asleep and to really get into those deep stages of sleep that are particularly restorative. Today we're going to talk a little bit more about each of those three and how they can best be used in combination, but we are also going to touch on some other supplements that I have not talked about much before, if at all. Things like glycine and GABA, as well as inositol. Many people are going to find inositol interesting and of particular use to them, especially if they're following a low-carbohydrate diet or if they are fasting before sleep or just trying to avoid eating too close to bedtime and yet they're having a hard time falling asleep. Inositol also turns out to be especially useful for people who have a tendency to wake up in the middle of the night and have a hard time falling back asleep. It also has some interesting and potent effects on anxiety throughout the day. So we're going to talk about inositol as a tool as well. And then last in our list of general categories of levers and tools for optimizing sleep are digital tools. Now, when we say digital tools, I don't necessarily mean devices. What I mean are things like non-sleep deep rest scripts. These are zero-cost scripts that you listen to that take your body through some deep relaxation and that can help people both fall asleep, stay asleep, fall back asleep, and get better at sleeping. And also going to talk about digital tools related to self-hypnosis. This is distinctly different from stage hypnosis. So I know some of you hear hypnosis and you think, oh, you know, people clucking like chickens and doing things that are outside their control. That's not at all what I'm referring to here. I'm talking about clinically and research-supported tools that have been shown to enhance people's ability to fall and stay asleep and that can get you far better at sleeping. So again, to recap the list of levers and tools, we've got light and dark, and that includes the intensity of light, the timing of light, et cetera. We've got temperature. We have food. We have exercise, caffeine, supplements, and digital tools, not just limited to devices, but zero-cost tools that you can access on YouTube and elsewhere in various apps that can really help you optimize your sleep. So today we're going to talk about all of these. I really want to provide you as many tools as possible, give you the logic behind each of those tools and when and how best to apply them so that you can develop the sleep toolkit that's ideal for your sleep needs. As we head into our description of tools for optimizing sleep, let's consider what the perfect 24-hour cycle would look like. Let's start this 24-hour cycle with when you wake up in the morning. So for some of you, that will be 5:00 a.m. For others of you, that will be 10:00 a.m. Most people, I believe, wake up sometime between 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. But regardless of when you wake up in the morning, one of the first things that happens is that your body temperature is increasing and that's just going to happen naturally. Some of it is going to be the consequence of your moving around a bit, but really the increase in body temperature is one of the main triggers for why you woke up in the first place. That increase in body temperature in turn causes an increase in the release of a hormone called cortisol. Cortisol is often discussed as a stress hormone, but it's not just associated with stress. It also enhances your immune system provided cortisol is elevated at the right times, and the right time for cortisol to be elevated is when you first wake up in the morning. That increase in cortisol is also going to increase metabolism. It's also going to increase your ability to focus mentally and for you to move your body. So again, cortisol is often demonized and consider this bad thing. And indeed, you don't want cortisol to be chronically or consistently elevated throughout the day or night. But you do want cortisol to reach its peak early in the day right about the time you wake up. One way that you can ensure that that cortisol peak occurs early in the day right about the time that you wake up is to view bright light, ideally from sunlight, within the first 30 to 60 minutes after waking. That's right, view bright sunlight within the first 30 to 60 minutes after waking. I'll get into all the caveats about what happens if you wake up before the sun is out, what if you live in the UK where there is no sun, or people claim there is no sun. Hate to tell you this, folks, but there is sun in the UK. We'll talk about all that. But everybody, whether or not you live in a cloudy place or a sunny place, whether or not there's cloud cover or not that day, should really strive to get bright light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight, within the first 30 to 60 minutes after waking. The reason for that is very simple. You want to trigger that cortisol increase to occur very early in your day, and you don't want that cortisol peak to happen later, which is what will happen if you wait to get outside and see sunlight. The reason for this is that you have a set of neurons, nerve cells, in your eye. They're called intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin cells, but you do not need to know that name. Those neurons respond best to bright light, and especially right after waking early in the day, they are best able to signal to a set of neurons that reside over the roof of your mouth called the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is a cluster of neurons that then sends a huge number of other signals, electrical and chemical, out to your entire body that triggers that cortisol increase, provides a wake-up signal for your brain and body, and sets in motion a timer for you to fall asleep later that night. So again, we're not trying to go into too much mechanism today. We are trying to really hammer on tools and I'll substantiate those tools just a bit with some mechanism. But here's what you do, or at least here's what I do. I wake up in the morning and I want to reach for my phone, but I know that even if I were to crank up the brightness on that phone screen, it's not bright enough to trigger that cortisol spike and for me to be at my most alert and focused throughout the day and to optimize my sleep at night. So what I do is I get out of bed and I go outside. And if it's a bright, clear day and the sun is low in the sky or the sun is, you know, starting to get overhead, what we call low solar angle, then I know I'm getting outside at the right time. If there's cloud cover and I can't see the sun, I also know I'm doing a good thing because it turns out, especially on cloudy days, you want to get outside and get as much light energy or photons in your eyes. But let's say it's a very clear day and I can see where the sun is. I do not need to stare directly into the sun. If it's very low in the sky, I might do that because it's not going to be very painful to my eyes. However, if the sun is a little bit brighter and a little bit higher in the sky, sometimes it could be painful to look at. So the way to get this sunlight viewing early in the day is to look toward the sun. If it's too bright to look at directly, well, then don't do that. You just look toward it, but not directly at it. It's absolutely fine to blink. In fact, I encourage you to blink whenever you feel the impulse to blink. Never look at any light, sunlight or otherwise, that's so bright that it's painful to look at 'cause you can damage your eyes. But for this morning sunlight viewing, it's best to not wear sunglasses, that's right, to not wear sunglasses, at least for this morning sunlight viewing. It is absolutely fine to wear eyeglasses or contact lenses, so-called corrective lenses. In fact, those will serve you well in this practice or this tool because they will focus the light onto your neural retina and onto those melanopsin intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells. If your eyeglasses or contact lenses have UV protection, that's okay. There's so many different wavelengths of light coming from the sun and they are bright enough that they will trigger the mechanisms that you want triggered at this early time of day. So try and get outside, ideally within the first five minutes of waking or maybe it's 15 minutes, but certainly within the first hour after waking. I want to share with you three critical things about this tool of morning sunlight viewing. First of all, this is not some woo biology thing. This is grounded in the core of our physiology. There are literally hundreds, if not thousands, of quality peer-reviewed papers showing that light viewing early in the day is the most powerful stimulus for wakefulness throughout the day and it has a powerful, positive impact on your ability to fall and stay asleep at night. So this is really the foundational power tool for ensuring a great night's sleep and for feeling more awake during the day. Second of all, if you wake up before the sun is out, you can, and probably should, flip on artificial lights in your internal home environment or apartment or wherever you happen to live if your goal is to be awake, right? If you wake up at four in the morning and you need to be awake, well, then turn on artificial lights. Once the sun is out, however, once the sun has risen, then you still want to get outside and view sunlight. Some of you will wake up before the sun comes out. And if you're asking whether or not turning on artificial lights can replace sunlight at those hours, unfortunately, the answer is no. Unless you have a very special light, and we'll talk about what kind of light, the bright artificial lights in your home environment are not, I repeat, are not going to be sufficiently bright to turn on the cortisol mechanism and the other wake-up mechanisms that you need early in the day. The diabolical twist, however, is that those lights in your home or apartment or even on your phone are bright enough to disrupt your sleep if you look at them too late at night or in the middle of the night. So there's this asymmetry in our retinal, our eye biology, and in our brain's biology, whereby early in the day, right around waking, you need a lot of light, a lot of photons, a lot of light energy, and artificial lights generally just won't accomplish what you need them to accomplish. But at night, even a little bit of artificial light can really mess up your so-called circadian, your 24-hour clocks, and all these mechanisms that we're talking about. So if you wake up before the sun is out and it's still dark, please turn on as many bright artificial lights as you possibly can or need, but then get outside once the sun is out. On cloudy days, you especially need to get outside. I repeat, on cloudy days, overcast days, you especially need to get outside and get sunlight. You just need to get more of it. Now, how much light and how much light viewing do you need? This is going to vary depending on person and place, literally where you live on earth, whether or not there's a lot of tree cover, whether or not you're somebody who has sensitive eyes or less sensitive eyes. It's really impossible for me to give an absolute prescriptive, but we can give some general guidelines. In general, on a clear day, meaning no cloud cover or minimal cloud cover, you want to get this sunlight exposure to your eyes for about five minutes or so. Could be three minutes one day, could be seven minutes the next day, about five minutes. On a day where there's cloud cover, so the sun is just peeking through the clouds or it's more dense cloud cover, you want to get about 10 minutes of sunlight exposure to your eyes early in the day. And on days that are really densely overcast or maybe even are rainy, you're going to want to get as much as 20 or 30 minutes of sunlight exposure. Another key thing is do not, forget about, just don't try and get this sunlight exposure through a windshield of a car or a window, whether or not it's tinted or otherwise. It takes far too long. It's simply not going to trigger the relevant mechanisms. You would be standing there all day trying to get enough light into your eyes from the morning sunlight and by then the sun will have already moved from low solar angle to overhead and it simply won't work for all sorts of mechanisms related to your circadian rhythm functions. So just don't try and do it through a windshield, sunglasses, or a window. It's just not going to work. Get outside. If the weather is really bad or for whatever reason, safety reasons, you cannot get outside, well, then I suppose try and get near a window. That would be the last, last resort. But you really want to get outside to get this sunlight exposure. Now, if you live in a part of the world where it's extremely dark and overcast or the weather won't let you outside or you live in a cave or some other small box that does not allow any natural light into it for whatever reason, well, then you're going to need a replacement for that sunlight. And there are sunlight simulators or daylight simulators that you can purchase. Those are quite expensive in general and therefore I suggest cheaper options that work just as well because they get just as bright. Things like ring lights that are sold in order for people to take selfies and this kind of thing. A drawing LED tablet will work pretty well. I actually have one of those and I put it on my desk all morning even though I still get outside and look at sunlight first thing in the morning, again, also, especially, I should say, on cloudy days. We do not have any affiliation to any ring lights or LED lights or these panels. So we will provide a link to a couple of different options if you want to explore the various options. I don't know what people's different budgets are. I don't know where people live. I just know that many of our listeners live in locations throughout the world where, for instance, during the winter, it gets very, very dark, so they can't get sufficient sunlight. But get that morning light, ideally from sunlight, and take into account all the specific points that I've given you here. And, I should say, enjoy this practice. It's really nice to get outside first thing in the morning and get this sunlight. In fact, when you start doing this, you'll notice that your body will start to feel more energized and it will feel more energized more quickly. You'll actually start to notice this mechanism kicking in each day, especially if you're paying attention to your physiology. So enjoy this practice of getting outside. Yes, you can take your morning beverage outside. Yes, you can take your dog with you. In fact, animals intuitively know to get this morning sunlight. They actually seek it out at the right times of days. We human beings need to be told by podcasters and other people about the science that supports these kinds of practices. Our pets apparently do not. But get outside alone or with somebody, with your kids, with your dog. However you go about this practice, make sure you do this practice at least 80% of the days of your life. That's right. If you miss a day, for instance, you're bedridden for a day, try and get next to a window. Let's say you are traveling, or for whatever reason, you are not able to get outside first thing in the morning, well, then try to get twice as much sunlight in your eyes, or I should say extend the duration of sunlight viewing in the morning for twice as long the following day. This is a slow, integrative mechanism that underlies this whole thing of wakefulness during the day and sleep at night due to sunlight viewing and if you miss a day, you can make up for it the next day, but you have to get twice as much light or twice as much duration of light. If you really want to get technical and you really want to measure how much light is in your environment, you can download a free app, something like Light Meter, and that will allow your phone to act as a bit of a light meter. It'll give you a pretty accurate measurement of how many lux, which is a measure of brightness, are in your environment in the morning. And in general, that's just going to be a good tool for evaluating your environments. Here's what I suggest you do. Wake up in the morning, take Light Meter, point it at the brightest light in your home, and take a measurement, and what you'll probably find is it's about a thousand lux. Now go outside and if there's some sunlight out and there's cloud cover, point it at the sky and press that button. You can actually hold it down and it'll give you a dynamically updated lux measurement. And what you'll find is like 5,000, 10,000, sometimes even 90,000 lux, even though you don't experience it as so much brighter, and that's because an indoor artificial light is very concentrated over a small spatial area whereas the sunlight is very diffuse. But it's that diffuse, very bright sunlight, that photon energy, that you really want that's going to set all the rhythms of your brain and body in the proper way. Not just that cortisol peak, but it's going to trigger proper metabolism, it's going to set a timer for you to be able to fall asleep about 16 hours later, and on and on and on. And I should mention within the on and on and on, it's also going to suppress any melatonin, a hormone that makes you sleepy that happens to be swimming around in your bloodstream at the time you wake up. It does a number of other things too, including interact with the adenosine system and kind of wash out some of the adenosine that might still be residual if you didn't sleep enough. Fundamentally speaking, get that morning sunlight viewing. I promise you will be grateful that you did. It makes everybody feel better, feel more alert, and it will greatly assist with your ability to fall and stay asleep later that night. Before we continue with today's discussion, we're going to take a brief pause to acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, also called AG1. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012. So I'm delighted that they've been a sponsor of this podcast. Athletic Greens contains vitamins, minerals, probiotics, digestive enzymes, and adaptogens. So it's got a lot of things in there. That's actually the reason I started taking it and the reason I still take it once or twice a day. It essentially covers all of my nutritional bases. And the probiotics in particular are important to me because of the critical importance of what's called the gut-brain axis, that is neurons and other cell types in the gut, in the digestive tract, that communicate with the brain and the brain back to the digestive tract in order to control things like mood, immune function, hormone function, and on and on. Whenever somebody has asked me what's the one supplement they should take, I always answer Athletic Greens. I gave that answer long before I ever had this podcast and it's the answer I still give now for all the reasons that I detailed just a moment ago. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3K2, which are also very important for a huge number of bodily factors and brain factors that impact your immediate and long-term health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. Okay, so now we're still focusing on this early part of the day when you've woken up, the first hour or so after waking. And we can go to our list of other levers and tools, right? We have light and dark. We already talked about light and sunlight in particular. We've got temperature, food, exercise, caffeine, supplements, and digital tools. Now, once you've woken up and you want to be awake, okay? So this is likely to be early in the day if you're following a more standard schedule. You will also want to leverage not just light, but temperature as a tool. If you are inclined, it would be wise to try and increase your core body temperature a bit more quickly than it would otherwise if you were to just, you know, shuffle around outside, get your sunlight, maybe read a little bit, et cetera, and there are two main ways you can do that. The first way is to get into cold water of some sort. So this could be a cold shower of anywhere from one to three minutes. This could be an ice bath if that's your thing. It could be a cold tub, or if you own a cold tub that's specifically designed for deliberate cold exposure. Get under some cold water. That will certainly wake you up. And if you've ever jumped into cold water or had a cold shower, you know it really wakes you up because you release adrenaline, epinephrine, from both your brain and body, the body from your adrenals and your brain from a little cluster of neurons called locus coeruleus. Again, the names don't matter. One to three minutes of cold water exposure will wake you up because of that adrenaline release and, and I want to highlight the and, it will serve to increase your core body temperature. That's right, your body and brain interact as a bit of a thermostat system where if you put something cold on the surface of your body, your brain, a little cluster of neurons in the so-called medial preoptic area, act as a thermostat and say, "Ah, the external of my body is cold and therefore I'm going to heat up my core body temperature." So it's a little bit paradoxical. People think, oh, if you get into cold water or an ice bath, your body temperature is going to drop. And indeed, that's true if you stay in for a while, but if you just get in for about one to three minutes, or under the cold shower for one to three minutes, your core body temperature will increase. So then when you get out of that cold water, your body temperature is increasing at a rate, at a slope, that's steeper than it would otherwise and you're going to feel more alert. It also has the advantage of increasing not just adrenaline, but dopamine, which is a molecule involved in motivation, focus, et cetera. So this is great for waking up. So we've got sunlight, we've got temperature triggered by cold water, and we have exercise. One of the best ways to increase your core body temperature early in the day is to do exercise. Now, some of you might choose to do your full-blown workout for the day first thing when you wake up in the morning, I would say the best time to exercise, at least what the research points to, is immediately when you wake up in the morning or three hours after waking or 11 hours after waking. But that's really getting down into optimization for sake of muscular strength and grip strength and it's very hard to give a strict prescriptive. Here's what I suggest. If you want to be alert early in the day and you want to sleep great at night, get that bright sunlight, get into some cold water, and if you don't want to get into some cold water, try and get some movement. It could be a walk. So you can get your sunlight exposure while you're taking a walk first thing in the morning. It could be a light jog. It could be skipping rope. These days, I skip rope for about 10 minutes or 20 minutes while looking at the sun. So I'm trying to layer in these different things for waking up. And then I take a cold shower afterwards. This is what I've been doing as of lately, but I don't do that all year long necessarily. Or some of you are going to be working out mid-morning. I sometimes do that. But try and get your core body temperature increased first thing in the morning, and a great way to do that is with the cold water and/or with exercise. And again, it doesn't have to be your full-blown workout for the day if you're doing workouts consistently, which I hope everybody is because everybody really should exercise at least, I believe, five or six, or maybe even seven days a week. For me, it's six days a week, sometimes five, rarely is it seven. So get that exercise or even just a modest amount of movement, walking, jogging, skipping rope, some light calisthenics. That will further increase your core body temperature and help you feel more awake. Then we have the category of caffeine. And again, we're just talking about this early part of the day, and you might be saying, "Wait a second, I thought this was an episode about tools for sleep." Well, everything that we're talking about doing in these first 60 to 90 minutes of the day really set in motion a wave of biological cascades that carry through the entire day and into the evening and into the night and really do serve to optimize sleep. So just hang in there with me. And for those of you that are interested in focus and attention, your ability to learn, all of these tools and practices are going to greatly enhance those as well. So the next category of tool for use early in the day is caffeine. Caffeine is a very important compound to think about. I do realize that some people who are prone to anxiety, especially panic attacks, anxiety attacks, might avoid caffeine entirely. That's absolutely fine. You do not have to drink caffeine. So what I'm about to describe are ways to leverage caffeine use to optimize sleep and wakefulness if you are comfortable with caffeine, if you like caffeine, I happen to love caffeine. I like it in the form of coffee or espresso or yerba mate tea, in particular non-smoked varieties of yerba mate tea. Non-smoked because the smoked varieties seem to carry some carcinogenics, some cancer causing risk. There's increasing data on that. So non-smoked varieties of yerba mate. So caffeine is something that a lot of people consume early in the day. How much depends on your tolerance, and there's a lot of individual variability here. Again, caffeine is an adenosine antagonist, or effectively works as an adenosine antagonist and limits sleepiness. I highly recommend that everybody delay their caffeine intake for 90 to 120 minutes after waking. However painful it may be to eventually arrive at that 90 to 120 minutes after waking, you want, and I encourage you, to clear out whatever residual adenosine is circulating in your system in that first 90 to 120 minutes of the day. Get that sunlight exposure, get some movement to wake up, and then, and only then, start to ingest caffeine because what you'll do if you delay caffeine intake until 90 to 120 minutes after waking is you will avoid the so-called afternoon crash. And you may still get a little bit of dip in energy in the afternoon, but it's not going to be that massive crash. I've talked about the reasons for that crash on previous episodes. But if you delay your caffeine intake 90 to 120 minutes after waking, you are doing yourself a great service towards wakefulness and to avoid the crash. And the afternoon crash has another liability to it, which is typically people will emerge from that afternoon crash either grumpy or groggy and then they'll lean into drinking more caffeine, which can then disrupt their sleep. So wait 90 to 120 minutes after waking in the morning to drink caffeine. And if you drink caffeine at any point throughout the day, really try and avoid any caffeine, certainly avoid drinking more than a hundred milligrams of caffeine after 4:00 p.m. and probably even better to limit your last caffeine intake to 3:00 p.m. or even 2:00 p.m. And for many people, shifting that caffeine intake from immediately after waking in the morning to 90 to 120 minutes gives them a much longer arc of energy throughout the day and they don't feel the need to drink more caffeine later in the afternoon. If you do drink caffeine later in the afternoon, really try and limit the total amount or drink decaf. Certainly keep the total amount to less than a hundred milligrams if you are interested in getting into the best possible sleep. And I say this knowing that many people, including myself, can drink a double espresso with 200 milligrams of caffeine or more at 5:00 p.m. or even 6:00 p.m. or after dinner and still, quote, unquote, fall asleep fine or still sleep fine. However, there are terrific data, Matt Walker and I talked about this, and there are more and more papers all the time that point to the fact that caffeine intake late in the day, after 4:00 p.m. that is, can really disrupt the architecture of your sleep. So you might think you're sleeping well, but you're not sleeping nearly as well as you could if you avoided caffeine in those afternoon hours. Now, some of you might be doing your main about of exercise first thing in the morning and you want your caffeine before that about of exercise. In that case, I say, go for it. Drink your caffeine, do your workout right after waking up. I don't have a problem with that. You will find, however, that you're going to get an early afternoon dip in energy and that dip in energy is going to be substantial because it's going to be a dip in energy that naturally follows that workout from the morning. So it's dependent on temperature, and it's going to be related to the elimination of that adenosine blockade by caffeine. So you're getting a kind of a one-two punch on your energy levels by taking a lot of caffeine and exercising early in the day. You can sort of expect that you're going to get a drop in energy in the early afternoon. That's okay if that works for you, but just know that delaying that caffeine 90 to 120 minutes after waking would be the ideal scenario most days and most scenarios. All that said, I absolutely respect the fact that people have different work schedules, kid schedules, et cetera. So if you want to do some or none or all these tools, that's really up to you. I'm just providing them to you in the simplest form that I can possibly provide them. Now, the other lever or tool that you have available to you is food. Not just what you eat, but when you eat. And it turns out that if you eat early in the day, you support a biological clock mechanism that will make you more alert early in the day. That said, many people choose to fast in the early morning hours of the day or in the first part of the day. I'm one such person. I generally don't ingest any food until about 11:00 a.m. or 12 noon. Sometimes I'll have a protein shake. Sometimes I'll have some almonds. Sometimes I'll have breakfast. If people are meeting for brunch or breakfast, I will have breakfast for social reasons every once in a while. But most of the time I don't eat until about lunch time. However, some people are really hungry when they wake up in the morning. Just know that if you eat early in the day, you are further triggering an increase in metabolism and in temperature that will make you more alert. So you don't have to eat early in the day, but you can start to see how these different tools layer together. Sunlight viewing, exercise, cold water, eating. Many of them are converging on the same mechanisms. In fact, when you drink caffeine, there's also a small increase in body temperature due to the adrenaline increase that it stimulates. So all of these things can be layered on top of one another or you can use them individually or think about them individually. Now, food is an interesting lever or tool because it's not just about when you eat, but it's also about what you eat. And I've talked a lot about eating for energy and what that means in terms of caloric energy versus neural energy, et cetera, in previous podcast episodes. We're not going to focus on that now because, frankly, to get into a description of whether or not somebody should eat fruits or vegetables or animal proteins or dairy, et cetera, early in the day, that's very nuanced. What you eat for your breakfast, or if you choose to not eat breakfast, is really up to you. All that said, if you eat a very large meal, it doesn't matter if you slept terrifically well 10 hours the night before or if you are about to go to sleep or if it's the middle of the afternoon, if your gut is full of food, there's just a large volume of food in your gut, it's going to divert a lot of blood and other critical resources away from other organs of your body, in particular, your brain, and you're going to be sleepy after eating a big meal. So this is sort of a duh, but I think oftentimes in the discussions about what to eat for energy, people neglect to consider food volume as a strong parameter or variable in that discussion. So if you eat a huge breakfast, it's likely that you are going to be tired immediately after eating that breakfast unless of course you exercise very hard prior to that and you metabolize all that food very quickly. So it's up to you whether or not to eat first thing in the morning or not. But if you do eat in the first few hours of the morning, just understand that you are setting or you are helping to set a food entrained, as it's called, circadian clock. Light, temperature, timing of food intake, movement and exercise, all of these things literally funnel in in a neural sense, they funnel into this thing that we call the circadian clock and they let that clock, that set of neurons, predict when you are likely to be eating and active and viewing sunlight the next day and the next day and the next day. I say all this because there are some beautiful studies, and I'll highlight one, again, in the show note captions, that show that if people are having a hard time waking up in the morning, one of the things they can do is maximize sunlight viewing, exercise in the morning, drink caffeine. Although, again, I support the idea that that would best be done about 90 to 120 minutes after waking. Eating some food in those early morning hours, et cetera, et cetera. You can layer in multiple levers or tools in order to be more alert. And that's what these levers and tools are really there for in this sense of what we're talking about today, which is optimizing sleep. Yes, they will make you more alert. Yes, they will provide some adrenaline and dopamine, for instance, the cold water, et cetera, et cetera. But the reason we're talking about these things in the context of sleep is that they start to give your body some predictable autonomic timing. What is predictable autonomic timing? Well, your autonomic nervous system is the components of your brain and body that cause wakefulness and sleepiness and you can start to create some predictability in that autonomic timing. You can start to do things that really make it such that you naturally wake up at six in the morning or five in the morning. That's right, if you're somebody who naturally is a night owl, who likes to stay up until two in the morning and sleep until 10:00 a.m., and you now have a job or you have to go to school or you have a partner that likes to get up early and go to sleep early, well, you can make that happen and you can make that happen pretty painlessly if you take a week or so and go to sleep 30 minutes or an hour earlier each night, set an alarm and wake up 30 minutes or an hour earlier each morning until, of course, you're waking up at the time you want to wake up, and then even in that groggy state, get some exercise, get some sunlight viewing. If the sun's not out, turn on those bright artificial lights. Have some breakfast, even if you're not hungry. In fact, for those of you that engage in shift work because you have to, or travel and you're jet lagged, one of the quickest ways to shift your circadian clock and get onto the local schedule is to eat on the local schedule. So what all these tools do is they really set up a cascade. Think of it as kind of a wavefront of wakefulness and focus throughout the day. It'll take you through the middle of the day and the afternoon stage we'll talk about in a few minutes, but really they take you to this period that is about 5:00 p.m. until your bedtime. I realize some people are going to bed very early, like 8:00 p.m. or 9:00 p.m., which to me seems very early, but very few people go to sleep at 5:00 p.m. right? Unless you're doing that for shift work or other reasons. But from 5:00 p.m. until bedtime is really a critical period in which you need to leverage particular tools in order to get and stay asleep optimally and to be able to sleep through the night. So really there are three critical periods throughout each 24-hour cycle. And during each of those critical periods, you're going to want to do as many specific things as you can to optimize your wakefulness and focus and mood throughout the day and your sleep at night. The first critical period is the one that we've been talking about up until now. Things like morning sunlight viewing, caffeine 90 to 120 minutes after waking, exercise, and so on. We can call that critical period one and it really encompasses the time from which you wake up until about three hours after waking. Although, I should just mention 'cause there are always those people that say, "Wait, I wake up at 4:00 a.m. and the sun isn't out until 8:00 a.m.," okay, so it might be four hours. But really it's those early morning hours of your day once you're awake. The second critical period is the time throughout the day and afternoon leading into evening. So you may ask what are the things that you can do throughout the day, the middle of your day and into the afternoon and evening hours, that are really going to set you up for the best possible sleep later that night. Well, there are a few dos and there are a few don'ts. First of all, be careful about ingesting too much caffeine throughout the middle of the day. That's kind of an obvious one for the reasons that we talked about earlier. Second of all, if you are a napper, and I raise my hand now, for those of you listening, I'm raising my right hand because I love naps. I've always loved naps. Nowadays I do NSDR or a Reveri sleep hypnosis almost every day. And I tend to do that, as I mentioned, in the early afternoon hours if I'm feeling kind of sleepy, because even though I optimize my caffeine intake timing, et cetera, I tend to get a little sleepy in the afternoon. Most people get a little sleepy in the afternoon. Some of that is related to hitting that peak of body temperature. And you might think, wait, I thought high body temperature is associated with alertness, and it is, but right as you crest that high body temperature and your body temperature starts to drop, there's a tendency to be a little bit sleepy. So some of you might opt to take a nap in the afternoon. Should you nap, should you not nap? That's a question that I get asked a lot and that I asked Dr. Matthew Walker when he was a guest on this podcast. Here was his answer and here's what the data support. It is fine to nap in the afternoon, but don't nap so late in the day or for so long that it disrupts your ability to fall and stay asleep at night for your major sleep about, okay? So naps are fine, but don't sleep so long during the day or too late in the day that it disrupts your ability to fall and stay asleep. I should also say you do not have to nap. It's kind of an interesting phenomenon that happens on these podcasts and on social media where we'll talk about naps and the fact that naps are great, but don't make them longer than 90 minutes, but then all the non-nappers get really worried. Like, wait, am I supposed to nap? I don't like naps. I wake up groggy. You do not have to nap. In fact, if you can make it through your whole day without napping, great, more power to you. But if you do nap and you find that naps serve you well, keep those naps shorter than 90 minutes for reasons related to ultradian cycles and so forth, and make sure that you don't nap too late in the day that you are then staying up too late at night and having a hard time waking up the next morning. I will say that for a lot of people who do not like naps or that find they wake up really grumpy from naps or groggy from naps, I encourage you to try the Reveri app, try an NSDR script, try yoga nidra. Try something of that sort for anywhere from 10 to 20 to 30 minutes. I tend to do this every day now. I'll just lie down, and I love yoga nidra, I love NSDR scripts, I love using the Reveri app. In particular, the portion of the Reveri app that gets you better at sleeping. It really is beneficial for me because it serves as very replenishing while I'm doing that hypnosis, but it's also gotten me much better at falling and staying asleep and falling back asleep in the middle of the night. So this critical period throughout the day is one in which most people are doing a lot of stuff. They're emailing and picking up kids and they're exercising and they're commuting and doing all sorts of things, taking phone calls and Zooms, et cetera. But if you can get that period of deep relaxation through a nap or NSDR, that's going to serve you well. Try not to drink too much caffeine, certainly no more than a hundred milligrams of caffeine, after 4:00 p.m if your goal is to fall asleep at a reasonably normal time. And for those of you that exercise in the afternoon, understand that if you exercise very intensely, so this might be weight training or running or some other very intense exercise, typically that's going to further increase your body temperature. Makes sense, right? Based on everything we know about metabolism and body temperature. And it's going to so-called delay your circadian clock. It's going to make it such that you want to fall asleep a little bit later, maybe even a lot later. So if you're exercising in the afternoon or evening and that's the only time you can exercise or that's the time that you prefer to exercise, great, but be careful about ingesting too much caffeine in order to get the energy to do that exercise 'cause that caffeine will disrupt your sleep and just know that you are delaying your circadian clock. You are making it such that you will naturally want to go to sleep later and wake up later. Contrast that with if you exercise early in the day, say, immediately after waking up or in the first zero to four hours after waking, in most cases, that's not going to shift your circadian clock much. And toward the end of the episode, we'll talk a little bit about forced exercise prior to wake-up times. That doesn't mean doing exercise in your sleep. That means deliberately setting an alarm and getting out of bed much earlier than you naturally would. That turns out to be a very potent tool to so-called advance your circadian clock. So we can talk about that a little bit later in the episode. But this critical period, too, in the middle of the day is when you're going to want to leverage specific tools, and we've talked about those: limiting caffeine intake; being mindful of the clock-delaying effects of exercise; the fact that, also, if you're going to nap, you don't want to nap too long or too late into the day otherwise you'll disrupt your nighttime sleep. So this critical period two, or second critical period, I should say, during the middle of the day is a time in which you should be doing certain things and avoiding doing certain things. So that raises the question of whether or not you should also be getting a lot of light, in particular, sunlight, throughout the day. Now, that's something that hasn't been explored too much in the literature until recently when Dr. Samer Hattar who's the director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, decided to do a number of experiments exploring the effects of light on mood and other aspects of brain function and body function when that light is delivered not just in the morning, which is great for us, but also throughout the day. So should you be looking at sunlight or bright artificial lights throughout the day? Now, on the face of it, you might just think, yes, you know, sunlight's great. Provided we're not getting a sunburn and we're not staring at the sun and damaging our eyes, we should get as much sunlight as we possibly can. In fact, we talked about this in the episode on hormones about how getting light onto as much of our skin as we can throughout the day can really help in the production of testosterone and estrogen in both men and women in healthy ways that improves mood and libido and all sorts of things that are associated with wellbeing. However, because light is such a powerful stimulus for controlling the timing of your sleepfulness, or sleepiness, I should say, and wakefulness, we might want to be cautious about how much light we are viewing in the afternoon, in particular, in the early evening hours, right? Well, turns out it's not so straightforward. Viewing, so sunlight to the eyes, sunlight in the late afternoon and evening hours, so again, depends on time of year, depends on location that you happen to be in, but getting some sunlight in your eyes for, again, maybe five or 10, maybe 30 minutes, depending on how much cloud cover there is, doing that in the afternoon serves an additional beneficial purpose, which is you protect or you inoculate your nervous system against some of the negative effects of bright artificial light or even dim artificial light in the nighttime hours between 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., which is really critical period three. And we'll talk about what to do and what to not do during critical period three of every 24-hour cycle. But to make it very clear what I'm saying here, get that morning sunlight in your eyes, but also get some sunlight in your eyes in the late afternoon and evening hours when the sun is at so-called low solar angle, when it starts to descend in the sky. Again, you don't have to stare directly at the sun, although if you can catch a nice, beautiful sunset, go for it. But as the sun starts to descend, it triggers those same neurons in your eye that communicate with your circadian clock, but it communicates with a different component or different compartment within the circadian clock. That circadian clock is not just one thing. It's multiple things. And you have what are called morning oscillators and evening oscillators. And to make a long story short, the tool that I'm describing of looking at the sun in the late afternoon and evening, again, blinking is fine, don't stare at the sun, but getting that sunlight in your eyes in the late afternoon and evening signals to that clock that it's evening time and that sleep is coming. It also serves as a second anchor or reference point for your body and your brain to know where it is in time. Remember back to the beginning of the episode when I said your brain and your body and all your organs are locked inside this skin and this skull and they don't know what's going on in the outside world. Well, that morning sunlight viewing and the other things you do during critical period one, those provide one strong set of signals that it's wake-up time and time to be alert and time to be focused. And then in the evening, by getting sunlight in your eyes again, in particular, sunlight that comes from low solar angle sunlight, well, that provides a second stimulus or a second reference point that tells your brain and body, "Hey, it's evening. The sun is descending." Now, you might say, "Wait, how does the brain and these neurons know the difference between morning light and evening light?" It turns out has to do with the particular wavelengths of light that are present in morning versus evening. It's an incredible mechanism. And you are probably familiar with the fact that when the sun is directly overhead, it's really bright white and yellow and the sky's often blue, and if there's cloud cover, it just comes through as a bunch of bright light, well, next time you're out in the morning, take a look at what a sunrise looks like. There's a lot of yellow-blue contrast, and those yellow blues signal important specific sets of cells in your eye and brain that it's morning. In the evening, you're also going to see yellow and blue, but the ratio of yellows and blues has now changed and you also see some oranges, and in a really brilliant sunset, you'll see some reds. If you haven't noticed this already, you'll really want to look for this. It's really kind of fun and cool to look at. Well, those yellows and blues and oranges that you see in the evening sunsets, those signal to your brain and body that evening is there and that nighttime is coming and they're really establishing a second reference point or wavefront of biological signals that are going to optimize your nighttime hours and your transition into really terrific sleep. So now let's talk about what I'm calling critical period three of each 24-hour cycle. So this would be the period of time of late evening, So it might be 6:00 p.m. for some, depending on when you go to sleep, or 7:00 p.m. extending into the hours in which you decide to get into bed and go to sleep and then throughout the night. There are a number of things that you're going to want to do and there are a number of things that you are going to want to avoid doing in order to optimize your sleep. First of all, you're going to want to avoid bright artificial lights of any color. Yes, of any color. We haven't talked a lot about blue blockers, you know, lenses that block blue wavelengths or short wavelengths of light. I don't have anything against blue blockers. In fact, many people find that blue blockers provide them some relief from headache and some eye strain if they wear blue blockers throughout the day and certainly at night. But you don't need them, and even if you do wear them, you will find that if lights are very bright, doesn't matter if it's a blue light, a yellow light, or a red light, those bright lights will wake up your brain and body. They will activate the same mechanisms that were activated early in the day by sunlight. However, and here's the really diabolical twist, I mentioned this earlier, but the diabolical twist in the way that your brain and body respond to light is that early in the day, in the morning hours, you need a lot of bright light, ideally from sunlight, to be very alert and to wake up, but in the evening hours and nighttime hours, it takes very little light, very few photons, in order to wake up your brain and body and to disrupt your circadian clock and disrupt your sleep. So what that means is that once the sun goes down, which, of course, is going to happen at different times of year in different places on earth, but once the sun goes down, you would be wise to try and dim the lights in your indoor environment most days, right? I realize some nights you're going to throw a party and have people over. You might not want to dim the lights. Some nights you're going to go out, you might view a lot of bright lights. But most nights of your life, you're going to want to dim the lights in your internal environment. And ideally, the lights that you do use you would place low in that physical environment. So you would try and not use overhead lights, but rather rely on desk lamps or lights even placed low to the floor, even on the floor. If you are going to use light at night, and most people do, I would encourage you to use as little artificial light as is required to carry out the activities you need to require safely. That could be studying, in which case you might need a little bit more light in order to read or study. If you're watching a television show or you're watching something on your computer, dim that screen way, way down, as dim as possible while still, of course, being able to view what you need to view. Even better, I should say, ideally, you would use candlelight and/or moonlight. Now, some nights the moon is really bright and you actually can use moonlight to go about your usual activities. Moonlight might seem very, very bright, but, actually, moonlight is fairly low light intensity, and candlelight, which can also seem very bright, actually is very low light intensity. If you're sitting across a table with some candlelight there and it's a really bright candle, chances are it's only about three to 10 lux, which is very, very little light energy compared to, say, an artificial desk lamp or an overhead light, which is going to be in the area of anywhere from a hundred to a thousand lux. So candlelight is fine. Of course, be cautious with open flame, but candlelight is fine. Moonlight is fine. Dimming artificial lights is fine provided they're dimmed way, way down. And again, try and avoid using overhead artificial lights. The absolute worst lights are going to be overhead fluorescent lights of the sort that you would have in the supermarket or that you would see at a gas station or something of that sort. And I confess, there are times in which I'm driving home and it's late at night and I want to be able to get to sleep and I'll need to stop at the grocery store or a gas station or something like that, I've actually put on sunglasses at night in order to avoid getting that bright light exposure at night. Although that's a little bit extreme, I have done that from time to time because that bright light exposure will absolutely quash, it will eliminate, any melatonin that happens to be circulating in your brain and body. Now, melatonin, a lot of people think of it as a supplement, but melatonin is naturally released as the evening comes about and into the nighttime hours. It's the hormone that makes you feel sleepy and allows you to fall asleep. So viewing bright light in the late evening hours and nighttime hours is really not good for your sleep quality and your ability to fall and stay asleep. So for most people, a simple rule of thumb is going to be avoid bright artificial lights of all colors, and in particular, overhead bright artificial lights, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. That's right, between 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., avoid those bright artificial lights as much as possible. Use only as much light as is absolutely necessary in order to carry out the routines and activities you need to carry out safely. I should mention that the reason overhead lights are problematic is the same reason why sunlight is so great early in the day, which is that the cells, that is, the neurons, that can wake up your brain and body through activation of the circadian clock reside mainly in the bottom half or 2/3 of your neural retina and the way the optics of your eyes work is that the cells on the bottom half of your eye view the upper visual field. So this is a beautiful adaptive mechanism that allows these cells to respond to overhead light from sunlight in the early part of the day and throughout the day. But in the evening, if you have bright artificial lights on and those bright artificial lights are overhead lights, it's going to more closely mimic what sunlight does in the evening time, and that turns out to be a bad thing if your goal is to eventually go to sleep. So again, do like the Scandinavians do. Use lights that are set low in the room at night, and if you really want to optimize your sleep-wake cycles, I suppose you could also do the opposite throughout the day. You could really emphasize the use of bright artificial lights and sunlight that comes from above. And of course, sunlight always comes from above. But if you're working in a given office environment and, you know, it's 2:00 p.m. or 3:00 p.m. and you want to be as awake as possible, really crank up the overhead lights. And then in the evening, which is this critical period three that we're referring to, really try and dim those lights or have them off or just rely on candlelight or moonlight from the hours of about 10:00 p.m. until 4:00 a.m. Our good friend Samer Hattar, who's been on this podcast before, Samer is director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, well, he's absolutely obsessive about this light stuff and avoiding light at night. In fact, he lives in what I sort of joke is like a cave at night. From 9:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m., which is really his kind of sleep cycle, he has his house so dark that you'd be lucky to be able to find a spoon in the kitchen. In fact, you'd be lucky to find your way down the hallway if you're me. But in any case, dim the lights. Turn them way, way down. It will serve you well. It will make it much easier for you to get sleepy and stay sleepy and fall asleep and stay asleep throughout the night. Now, not to depart from this critical period three, but if you recall, viewing that afternoon light, the low solar angle light as the sun is heading down in the sky, so it could be sunset or what I call circa sunset, around sunset, well, doing that is going to slightly, but not completely, offset any of the negative effects of viewing artificial light at night. So I don't want to give people a pass here, but let's say you know that you're going to watch some Netflix at night or you're going to be up late studying and yet you still want to be able to fall and stay asleep. Definitely make sure you see that evening light. There's a great study. We'll provide a link to this study, which showed that if people view evening sunset light or evening sunsets or sunlight right around the time of sunset, it really serves to inoculate or offset some, again, some, not all, of the negative effects of artificial light between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. Now, that's light. But as you recall, we also have this tool related to temperature, and you're probably not going to be surprised that the way to leverage temperature in the evening is the exact opposite of the way that you want to leverage temperature early in the day. Early in the day, temperature increases from cold showers or exercise, et cetera, wake you up. What that means is that taking a cold shower late at night is probably a bad idea. Rather, taking a nice hot bath or a sauna, you might think would heat up your body, and indeed, that's what happens if you stay in a very long time, but if you do hot tub or a hot bath or a sauna in the evening, and you don't stay in for more than 20 or 30 minutes and you get out, you take maybe a cool-ish shower or a warm shower, then what happens is there's a compensatory cooling off of your core body temperature for the reasons we discussed earlier, and your body temperature will drop by one to three degrees and it will make it much easier to get into sleep. So if you're somebody that enjoys hot baths, hot showers, or hot tubs, evening and nighttime is going to be the best time to do that if your goal is to facilitate sleep. Similarly, you should try and make your sleeping environment pretty cool, if not cold. Now, that doesn't mean you need to be cold while you're asleep. You can get under as many blankets as you need, but it's a good idea to make your sleeping environment cool. In fact, drop the temperature in that sleeping environment by at least three degrees and you'll be happy that you did. Now, some people rely on things like Eight Sleep. I use that. One of these controllable temperature mattress covers. Other people would simply do this by putting a fan in the room or opening a window. Again, depends on time of year, depends on technology, depends on budgets, et cetera. But you're going to want to sleep in a relatively cool or cold sleeping environment and then layer on the blankets as needed to stay asleep. And I say as needed because one of the things that you're going to do in your sleep, or if you happen to wake up, is if you're too warm, you're going to put a foot or a hand out from under those blankets. And the reason for doing that is very logical once you understand the mechanism. You have special portals, you essentially have ways of passing heat, excuse me, in and out of your body primarily through the palms of your hands, the upper half of your face, and the bottoms of your feet through so-called glabrous skin. This was covered in the episode with Dr. Craig Heller from the biology department at Stanford. If you lower the temperature in your sleeping environment, so lower the temperature in that room or use a controllable mattress cover that can cool down like Eight Sleep or something of that sort, it's naturally going to make your sleep environment cooler, and if you're too warm under the blankets, all you have to do is extend a hand or a foot out from under those blankets. Whereas if the sleeping environment that you're in is too warm, there's very little you can do to cool off besides push off those blankets. So for instance, if you're too warm and you're waking up in the middle of the night, which is what happens if you get too warm, you'll push off those blankets. But if the room is too warm, well, what are you going to do? You'd probably have to put your hands into some cool water or take a coolish shower or something for a couple of seconds. That's not very practical. Better to just keep the sleeping environment cool. I'm not a big fan of people putting socks on while they sleep, or I should say, I'm not a fan of putting socks on while I sleep, because that eliminates this glabrous skin portal on the bottoms of one's feet. So for those of you that have heard, you know, wear socks while you sleep, that works great for people that tend to run too cold while they sleep and wake up because their feet get cold, but if you're somebody who wakes up in the middle of the night, chances are you're waking up because you're getting too warm and the best thing that you could do is to cool or lower the temperature in the room that you're sleeping and not wear socks, get under as many blankets as you need to fall asleep, and then across the night, you'll naturally just move a hand or a foot or all hands and feet out from under those blankets to cool off because of the relationship between temperature and sleep. That is, dropping your core body temperature one to three degrees gets you into sleep and helps you stay asleep. So let's say you do exercise late in the day and you're finding yourself very alert in the evening and you need to fall asleep, or let's say you've exercised and you needed four cups of espresso in order to do that exercise. Well, there are a few things that you can do to try and bring your nervous system down into more state of calmness, and you can do that also by lowering your core body temperature. One of those I already talked about before, taking a nice hot shower or a hot bath and then getting out and cooling off will decrease your body temperature. Maybe not enough to get you into sleep if you have a ton of caffeine in your system. But again, you can use this mechanism of temperature shifts to wake up or temperature shifts to fall asleep in ways that really can help you overcome some of the irregularities in your sleep-wake cycle and exercise cycle, et cetera. Because, of course, nobody's perfect. Some days we end up having to workout in the afternoon or we'll miss the workout entirely. Other days, we end up having that cup of coffee in the afternoon with a friend and then we have a hard time falling asleep. So you can use these tools not just in their optimized form, you know, being absolutely obsessive and compulsive about exactly when you do each of those tools. That would be wonderful, but life happens as they say and some days you're going to feel too alert at night and you want to fall asleep, or you've got to get up especially early the next morning and you're not somebody who normally goes to bed at 10:00 p.m. Well, that's when a something like a hot bath or a sauna can really benefit you because it can adjust your temperature rhythm accordingly. I would be remiss if I didn't touch on alcohol and CBD and THC. I always get questions about these. And I should say, of course, many places, but not all, THC is illegal. Although, there are medical uses and in some places, it's decriminalized, other places it's legal. Alcohol, of course, is consumed almost as frequently as caffeine is consumed. I personally don't drink alcohol. I don't have anything against it per se. I just don't tend to enjoy it. One of the reasons I don't enjoy it is if I drink alcohol, I simply fall asleep. So that doesn't really accomplish any of the things that I really want to accomplish because the sleep that one gets after drinking alcohol is greatly disrupted sleep. Hate to break it to you, but that's the truth. And when Dr. Matt Walker came on this podcast, he said exactly the same thing. While THC and alcohol do help some people fall asleep and maybe even stay asleep, the architecture of that sleep is suboptimal compared to the sleep they would get without alcohol or THC in their system. So I'm not here to tell you what to do or not to do. I'm certainly not the substance police. That's not my role. I'm just reporting to you the biology. If your sleep is not restoring you to the extent that you feel it should, or if you are regularly relying on a drink or two in order to fall asleep, or THC in order to fall asleep, that is disrupting your total pattern of sleep. However, I do realize that nowadays a lot of people are relying on THC and/or CBD, especially edible forms, in order to fall and stay asleep. And, you know, we can just acknowledge the data. It does seem that there's an anxiety lowering effect of some of those compounds that do help people who have a hard time falling and staying asleep because of reasons related to anxiety. Although, in a moment, we'll talk about some supplements and supplement protocols that can also assist in the ability to fall and stay asleep and that can adjust anxiety and that do not seem to disrupt sleep architecture in negative ways and, in fact, can enhance the depth and quality of sleep architecture. Okay, so you've done everything correctly up until now. You got your morning routine from critical period one. You've got your afternoon routine. You saw some sunlight in the afternoon. You avoided caffeine in the eight hours or 10 hours before bedtime. You're not drinking alcohol. You've cooled down the room. You're doing all these things right. You've dimmed the lights, et cetera, et cetera. What else can we do in order to optimize our sleep? Well, I always say behavioral tools first, then look to nutrition, then, if necessary, look to supplementation, and then, if still necessary, look to prescription drugs obviously prescribed by a board certified physician. Well, we've talked a lot about the behavioral tools for critical period three. We have not talked a lot about the supplementation-based tools. There are supplements that for most people will greatly improve their ability to fall and stay asleep and the three main supplements in that category or that kit of sleep supplements, and I've talked about these before, are magnesium threonate, so T-H-R-E-O-N-A-T-E, apigenin, A-P-I-G-E-N-I-N, apigenin, and theanine, T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E, theanine. Now, some important things to point out about mag threonate, as it's called, apigenin, and theanine. First of all, you don't necessarily need to take all three, although, many people get a synergistic effect from taking all three. In fact, you may not even need to take even one. What I recommend is that if you're already doing all the behavioral tools regularly and you're still having trouble falling asleep and staying asleep, well, then you might try one of the supplements within this sleep stack. They do have fairly wide margins for safety. Although, I should also say, anytime you're going to add or remove something from your supplement protocol or your nutritional program, you definitely want to talk to your physician. I don't just say that to protect us. I say that to protect you. But for most people, the margins of safety on these things are going to be pretty broad. A couple of notes about dosages. For some people, the dosages of any one or several of the supplements I mentioned will be zero. That is, you won't need them in order to get and stay asleep most nights of your life. That's terrific if you don't need them. For many people, however, taking 145 milligrams of magnesium threonate can be very beneficial. That's the dosage that most people will benefit from. Some people need to go a little higher. Some people need to go a little bit lower. One of the reasons that we've been pointing people towards single-ingredient formulations these days is because it allows people to adjust the dosage of one component of a so-called sleep stack without having to disrupt the dosage of another component, and so on. It also allows people to try just one element within the sleep stack without having to purchase and try the others, which is a problem if you're buying a blend of a lot of different ingredients. So 145 milligrams of magnesium threonate. 50, 5-0, milligrams of apigenin. And again, you could just take the apigenin on its own. And 100 to 400 milligrams of theanine taken, again, alone or in combination with the other supplements mentioned in the stack many people find allows them to get really drowsy and fall asleep, sleep really deeply, and they feel much more refreshed the next day and they don't have a grogginess to them. Now, a couple of notes about these different supplements. About 5% of people report that magnesium threonate really disrupts their gut. It gives them diarrhea or gastric distress. In which case, don't take it. If magnesium threonate disrupts your gut or your digestion to a point where it's uncomfortable or at all and you don't like it, don't take any of it. The proper dosage for you, in other words, would be zero milligrams. Now, in a slightly different way, many people who can tolerate magnesium threonate or really thrive on magnesium threonate and like apigenin might find that theanine, even at the lowest dose of a hundred milligrams, 'cause, again, the range is a hundred to 400 milligrams, that theanine gives them such vivid dreams that they actually find it disruptive where they wake up in the middle of the night or they find that the sleep that they're getting is kind of anxiety ridden because of the intensity of those dreams. So some people might choose to leave theanine out of the sleep stack and just take magnesium threonate or apigenin And again, some people might leave magnesium threonate out of the sleep stack. Again, all of this is really about finding the supplementation protocol that's ideal for you. I should mention that whether or not you're taking one or two or three of the components of the sleep stack, the ideal time to take those is 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime, especially if you haven't had anything to eat for the three hours or so before bedtime. I confess that oftentimes I'll have a little bit of a snack late in the evening, some berries or something. I try not to eat too close to bedtime, but some evenings just because of work schedule, I'll get home late, be 9:00 p.m., and I'll eat a big meal and then I'll take the sleep stack and fall asleep. Every once in a while, that just so happens. Nobody's perfect. Certainly I'm not. But that sleep stack can be very beneficial. And I do think that it's preferable to melatonin. Here's the reason. First of all, melatonin is a hormone that you endogenously make. You now know a lot about melatonin and it's controlled by light, meaning light inhibits it or eliminates it, darkness promotes it. And melatonin indeed can help us fall asleep, but the dosages of melatonin that are contained in most commercial products is far, far, far greater than what we would make endogenously. So it's really supraphysiological. So that's of concern because melatonin is not just responsible for making us sleepy and fall asleep. It also does things like interacts with other hormone systems, testosterone and estrogen, even in the puberty system, in kids. Is taking melatonin every once in a while a problem for adjusting to jet lag, et cetera? Probably not. I would even say no. But taking it chronically over time, especially kids taking it chronically over time, can potentially be problematic. So at least in my opinion, these other supplements are going to be preferable to melatonin. Now, as I mentioned in the beginning of today's episode, there are some other things that I certainly take every once in a while and that other people might consider taking in addition to the sleep stack I talked about before or in place of that sleep stack if that sleep stack doesn't work well for them. So every third or fourth night, I will take two grams of glycine and a hundred milligrams of GABA in addition to the standard sleep stack that I talked about before. So I'm taking mag threonate, apigenin, and theanine, and then I will also take two grams of glycine and GABA, which I find greatly enhances my ability to get into sleep. But the reason I only add glycine and GABA every third or fourth night is that if I take it too often, I find that the entire sleep stack doesn't work quite as effectively. I don't know exactly why this is the case, but in any event, that's what I do. And more recently, I've also started using inositol, in particular myo-inositol. Every other night, I'll take 900 milligrams of myo-inositol in addition to mag threonate, apigenin, and theanine, and not on the nights when I take glycine and GABA. So I'm adding 900 milligrams of inositol to the standard sleep stack of mag threonate, theanine, and apigenin. And what I find is not only does it greatly enhance my ability to fall asleep quickly, but if I wake up in the middle of the night, which I often do to use the bathroom, I find it very, very easy to fall back asleep. Whereas when I don't take inositol every other night or so, I find that if I wake up in the middle of the night, it's a bit more of a challenge to fall back asleep. So inositol has a number of different uses that have been discussed in terms of mental health and in terms of adjusting anxiety for its daytime use. What I'm talking about is taking 900 milligrams of myo-inositol also 30 to 60 minutes before sleep along with the standard sleep stack and I found that to be immensely beneficial. I also noticed that it has a pretty long tail of anxiety suppression throughout the day. And I'm not somebody who suffers from anxiety, but I have to say it just has led me to feel a bit calmer throughout the day, and I don't really know how to say this except in subjective terms, to feel a bit more buffered against or resilient against stress events. And if you look at the literature on inositol and its interactions with the serotonin system and other systems, that all makes sense as to why that would be the case. So we'll provide links to our so-called sleep kit, which is part of our Neural Network Newsletter. It's a zero-cost newsletter where you can access this information about supplements and other behavioral tools for sleep in list form. But that sleep kit doesn't include some of the newer information that I've provided this episode, in particular, the information about inositol and what I'm finding to be the very beneficial use of inositol for the ability to fall back asleep after waking up in the middle of the night, which is something that a lot of people struggle with. Now, that's supplementation for falling and staying asleep, but we can return to the behavioral tools also as powerful levers and tools for falling asleep and getting back to sleep. And again, we look to NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, or the Reveri app as a way to do that. As I mentioned earlier, the Reveri app has been developed on the basis of really high-quality, peer-reviewed research, both clinical and non-clinical, by my colleague, David Spiegel, who's our associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford. It's a wonderful tool. It does carry a cost after the initial seven-day trial. I can tell you what the cost on that is so you can get a sense because I do realize that anything that carries a cost, for some people, it won't be accessible. Right now, Reveri, and I should just mention, they didn't pay us for an ad read. I'm just telling you what they told me so that I can accurately report what it costs to use Reveri. They have a monthly subscription to use the Reveri app at 14.99. You do get the seven-day free trial. They have a yearly subscription of 99.99 with a seven-day free trial. And they have a lifetime purchase, one-time purchase, of 249 with no trial. It right now is only available for Apple, not for Android, but they are, yes, going to have it available for Android soon. There's a signup list there. I should mention that while the cost might seem high, if you compare that cost to, say, supplements, or you compare that cost to a poor night's sleep over time, the cost, at least to me, seems somewhat modest, certainly within range for a number of people. But I acknowledge not within range for other people, which is why I also want to point to zero-cost tools and the zero-cost tool for getting asleep, staying asleep, and falling back asleep is going to be NSDR. We'll put a link to a non-sleep deep rest protocol that's available on YouTube, so available to anybody zero cost provided you have a internet connection. Again, dim the screen if you're going to turn that on late at night. And there are a number of other yoga nidra scripts and apps and sources around the internet, in particular, on YouTube, that are zero cost that you could use if the Reveri app is outside your price range or is not preferable to you, et cetera. When I wake up in the middle of the night, it's usually to use the restroom. I'll go use the restroom. I'll keep the lights as dim as possible. I'll get back into bed. And if I find that it's easy to fall asleep, great, I'm asleep. And if not, then I will generally plug in the Reveri app. They have a fall back asleep hypnosis, and 99 times out of a hundred, I'm back asleep within minutes and I don't wake up until morning. Now, very briefly, I just want to touch on some tools that are very commonly used by many people out there, and believe it or not, there is peer-reviewed science on things like eye masks. Do eye masks improve your ability to stay asleep? And indeed, they do, provided they are not too tight and provided that the room is cool enough. Why? Well, eye masks cover the upper half of your face, which is where glabrous skin is localized. Remember, palms of the hands, bottoms of the feet, glabrous skin on the face. So a lot of people who wear eye masks will wake up because they're too warm if the room is too warm. So if you're going to use an eye mask to keep light out, definitely make sure the room and your sleeping environment and your bed are cool enough in order for you to stay asleep. In addition, I get a lot of questions about earplugs. Here's the deal with earplugs. Some people find that earplugs are very beneficial because, of course, they prevent the entrance of sound into the ear that could wake us up. But some people find that the sound of their own beating of their own heart can be disruptive and they get a sort of humming in their head when they have those earplugs in. I'm one such person. Although, I have family members that like using earplugs when they sleep. So it's really up to you. You have to see whether or not those earplugs help or disrupt your sleep. For me, they're no good. For some people, they really enjoy them. I don't use an eye mask unless I'm sleeping in a really bright environment or I need to sleep on a plane and things of that sort. Other tools that I'll just mention that have peer-reviewed research to support them. Elevating your feet either with a pillow or by elevating the end of your bed by about three to five degrees can be really beneficial for increasing the depth of sleep because of the so-called glymphatic washout. This is the movement of and circulation of fluids in your brain at night that lead to more wakefulness and actually can improve cognitive function and a number of other things related to brain health. There's one caveat to that. For people that suffer from acid reflux, having your ankles elevated above your chest or above your heart in the middle of the night can actually exacerbate that acid reflux. You want to do the opposite. You want to actually elevate the head side of your bed by about three to five degrees. Now, one of the common causes of sleep disruption that has tremendously detrimental effects is so-called sleep apnea. So this is basically bouts of suffocation or lack of oxygenation during sleep. This is particularly the case for people that are very heavyset, and that heavyset could be from obesity, it could also be heavyset from having too much muscle. A lot of people who are carrying too much muscle will actually have sleep apnea without realizing it. Sleep apnea is actually very dangerous. It's associated with a number of cardiovascular issues. It's associated with sexual dysfunction. It's associated with issues with cognition. Sleep apnea is bad. A lot of people will have to use the PAP, which is a, it's a device. It looks like a sort of like a snorkel mask or a dive mask. It's a whole apparatus that people will go to sleep with. However, many people can relieve themselves of sleep apnea provided it's not too serious and can sleep much better, in fact, I think all people can sleep much better, if they train themselves to be nose breathers while they sleep. There are a lot of reasons to be a nose breather unless you are breathing very hard due to exercise or talking or eating. That was all covered in James Nestor's book, "Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art." It's been covered in a number of different podcasts. We've talked about it on this podcast as well. It's a good idea to be a nose breather unless you need to mouth breathe. And it's a great idea, it's a superb idea, to be a nose breather in sleep. And one way to really get good at that is to take a little bit of medical tape and to tape your mouth shut before going to sleep. You heard me right. Put some medical tape over your mouth and force yourself to nose breathe during sleep. It also prevents snoring in most cases. Really offsets sleep apnea. Sleep apnea, again, being a very serious health concern. I should also mention as a tool that if you have a hard time being a nose breather in sleep, you can try doing your cardiovascular exercise, at least the lower-intensity cardiovascular exercise, through purely nasal breathing. And one way to do that, again, is to tape your mouth shut or put a gulp of water in your mouth, but don't actually swallow that mouth full of water, or to use a mouthpiece or just deliberately keep your mouth closed and insist on breathing through your nose. Most people find that when they start doing cardiovascular exercise that way, it's really challenging at first, but over time, they actually can feel quite calm and still can generate a lot of physical effort purely using nose breathing. The reason that doing nose breathing during cardiovascular exercise translates to being a nose breather during sleep is that your sinuses actually can dilate, they're plastic, and over time, plastic meaning they're malleable that is, and they can become wider. You're not going to get giant nostrils. Don't worry about it. Your airways within your skull, 'cause that's what the sinuses really are, these little passages within the skull, and, of course, within the nasal passages, will dilate and will allow you to breathe more easily through your nose. But for those of you that are waking up in the middle of the night breathing on your back [breathing heavily] or your partner is telling you that or other people are telling you that or you're that person on the plane with your mouth hanging open and drooling and your mouth breathing, terrible, terrible, terrible for health reasons and other reasons, put some a medical tape over your mouth, learn to be a nose breather during sleep. Your sleep will improve and your daytime feelings of wakefulness and focus will improve, your cardiovascular health will improve, and on and on and on. So now we've largely covered the tools that one could use to get and stay asleep, and we talked about exercise, we talked about temperature, we talked about supplements, and we talked about, of course, keeping the sleeping environment both cool and as dark as possible. I do want to mention a couple of broad contour tools that will impact your ability to sleep really well on a consistent basis and the one that impacts the most number of people is weekends. Turns out that most everybody feels the impulse to sleep in on the weekend, especially if they've been out late the night before. However, the data show that keeping relatively consistent sleep and wake times is really going to enhance the quality and depth of your sleep. So if you stay out late one night, sure, you might allow yourself to sleep in an extra hour or so, but you should really try to avoid sleeping in longer than an hour beyond your normal wake-up time. That's right. If you normally get eight hours of sleep and you wake up at 7:00 a.m., probably okay to wake up at 8:00 a.m. on the weekend or after a night out the night before, but try not to sleep until 11 or noon thinking that you're going to catch up on your sleep or that's better than waking up at a consistent time. It would be better to wake up at a consistent time plus or minus an hour and get a nap in the afternoon provided that nap, again, isn't too long. And the other tool that relates to nights that you stayed out too late or that you feel like you want to sleep in a bit more in the morning is if you are going to wake up at your consistent time. So for example, normally you go to bed at 10 and you wake up at six. Let's say that's your schedule. And you end up staying up late one night until midnight or one for whatever reason and the next morning you wake up at seven and you're still groggy. In that case, you absolutely want to wait to ingest caffeine 90 to 120 minutes after waking. You really do because there are good data to support the fact that caffeine can disrupt sleep. Yes, that's obvious. Caffeine especially disrupts sleep if you take it too late in the day. That's very obvious as to why that would be the case. But caffeine especially disrupts what's called compensatory sleep. So if you start changing your waking time and your to sleep time and you start using additional caffeine to offset the sleepiness that you're experiencing because of those late nights out, well, that's when you really start to disrupt not just your nighttime sleep, but your daytime compensatory sleep, so those naps. You also are disrupting the total architecture of sleep in the early morning hours. There's a lot of great science that's been put to this, or that's emerged from this, I should say. So try and keep those sleep-wake times relatively constant plus or minus an hour, and try as much as you can to delay that caffeine intake 90 to 120 minutes after waking every day, but especially on days where you wake up and you feel you haven't gotten enough sleep. In that case, I highly recommend you just use NSDR or the Reveri app or some other form of deep relaxation to try and compensate for the lack of sleep, knowing, of course, that there's no complete compensation for lack of sleep. There are just things that we can do to partially offset lack of sleep. Now, a couple of final points and additional tools that I think are going to be useful to everybody, in particular, people who have young children or are following a shift work schedule or who are experiencing jet lag. Keep in mind, jet lag can be due to travel, which is obvious, but jet lag can also be due to getting woken up in the middle of the night, right? Your body doesn't know the difference between flying to a new time zone and getting woken up in the middle of the night. The tool that I'd like to offer you is an understanding of something called temperature minimum. And I'm going to make this as simple as possible and I'm confident that everyone can understand this even if you don't have any science background. Here's the question you need to ask yourself. What is your typical wake-up time, okay? What's your typical wake-up time? If for you, your typical wake-up time is 7:00 a.m. plus or minus half an hour, and that could be 7:00 a.m. because you set an alarm clock or it could be 7:00 a.m. because you naturally wake up at 7:00 a.m., doesn't matter, if your typical wake-up time most days is 7:00 a.m., well, then your temperature minimum is 5:00 a.m. That's right, your temperature minimum is not a temperature. It's a time within your 24-hour cycle. Approximately two hours before your typical wake-up time, your body is at its lowest temperature that it will ever be in the 24-hour cycle. That's why it's called your temperature minimum. Here's what you need to know about your temperature minimum. If you view bright light, exercise, or drink caffeine or all of the above in the two to four hours before your temperature minimum, that will delay your clock. What that means when I say delay your clock is it will make you want to go to sleep later and wake up later the next night, okay? So let's run this exercise for you, the person waking up at 7:00 a.m. on a regular basis, I can predict with almost certainty that your body is going to be at its lowest temperature at 5:00 a.m.. So what that means is that if you get up at 3:00 a.m. or at 4:00 a.m. and you flip on bright lights in your house or in your bathroom or you have a cup of coffee or you do any kind of exercise or you get up and head to the airport, the mechanisms in your brain and body that control timing of sleep and timing of waking will shift. They will delay. It's as if you put your clock on hold for a little while and then let it start again, okay? That's the simplest way I can describe it. And you will tend to want to go to sleep later and wake up later the following night. Now, the opposite is true if you view bright light, drink caffeine, or exercise or socialize, I should say, in the hours immediately after your temperature minimum. So for you in this example, the person who's waking up at 7:00 a.m., your temperature minimum is 5:00 a.m., if you view bright light, exercise, maybe have a snack, maybe not, or socialize, move about, at 5:30 or 6:00 a.m. or 7:00 a.m. That will tend to phase advance your clock. It will tend to basically make you want to go to bed earlier and wake up earlier the following night. Now, I used this example of a person who wakes up typically at 7:00 a.m. whose temperature minimum is 5:00 a.m., but, of course, you need to adjust that for yourself if you're somebody who wakes up at 9:00 a.m. or at 5:00 a.m. et cetera. Why do I offer this as a tool? Well, this is an immensely powerful tool if, for instance, you are headed to a time zone where you need to go to bed earlier and wake up earlier once you arrive in that time zone. What it means is in the day or two before you leave, you can force yourself to exercise, drink caffeine, maybe even to eat a meal early in the morning, or maybe you still fast early in the morning and that's really up to you, but you force yourself to do the activities that are going to phase advance your clock. Whereas if you're traveling to a time zone where you are going to need to go to sleep much later and you're going to need to wake up much later or even a little bit later, you can do those things in the hours prior to your temperature minimum. Now, for those of you that work shift work, this can be especially useful, but I want to say a couple of things about shift work. There are a lot of details about shift work and jet lag in an episode that I did specifically about jet lag and shift work. So for the deep dive, go there, but suffice to say this for now, if you are going to do shift work, try to stay on the same shift for two weeks at a time. It's very detrimental to brain and body, it can even be horrifically challenging for your brain and body in a number of ways, if you are switching on the so-called swing shift, you know, you're working three days the night shift, three days the day shift, three days the night shift, three days the... Try and stay on the same schedule as much as possible. And I should say for everybody, people who are jet lagged and engaged in shift work or not, but just for everybody, if you need to be awake in the middle of your sleep cycle and it's not just a quick departure to the bathroom and back to bed, but you really need to be awake, you know, you're feeding a baby or you're taking care of a loved one or you need to do something that's critical or you need to work, if possible, use red light, okay? Now, for shift workers who really are trying to stay awake all night and sleep all day, this is not going to be ideal, but for people that, for instance, need to stay up really late one night or wake up especially early, like 3:00 a.m., to prepare for an exam that you're just not ready for or to head to the airport, et cetera, using red light has been shown to allow people to be awake enough and obviously see what they need to see in order to perform their activities safely but it does not seem to disrupt the cortisol rhythm that is the healthy, normal cortisol rhythm. Now, I realize this is kind of an advanced tool and many people won't have access to this. There are a number of different sources for red lights now. Companies like Joovv or KOZE light. These are different brands. I don't have any affiliation to any of these brands, I should say. There are a number of different red light bulb sources out there and commercial sources that you can explore if you want. But understanding this temperature minimum is really powerful because it allows you to adjust your schedule depending on travel, depending on changing work schedules or school schedules. And if you're not a morning person, you can use the tools related to temperature minimum to really become a morning person over time, and it actually is pretty easy. And I talked about this in a previous episode but I'll just mention that there have been shown to be important, positive effects on cognition, on even grip strength and physical performance, for people that are early morning risers, and that's especially true for night owls that deliberately shift themselves to become early risers. Okay, so that's a lot of information and a lot of tools and I suppose the one set of tools that I really didn't drill into too deeply, the ones related to jet lag and shift work. And again, please check out the episode on jet lag and shift work if that's relevant to you. But I think for most people who are going to sleep at night and are trying their best to sleep well at night and are trying their best to wake up in the morning at whatever hour and stay alert and focused throughout the day, maybe with a brief nap, the tools that I talked about today related to light, temperature, food, exercise, caffeine, supplements, and digital tools, I'm hoping will prove to be very useful for you. They certainly are all supported by excellent peer-reviewed research. And I should just emphasize again that most of the tools we talked about are completely zero cost. So while the supplements and some of the digital tools do carry some cost to them, I really want to encourage everybody to get your behaviors right. Get all of the things related to your timing of exercise and type of exercise in the best possible order and time of day. We talked about this critical period early in the day and then another critical period in the middle of the day and the late afternoon and then this third critical period in the middle of the night. Different tools for the different three critical periods. I promise that if you start to implement some, or ideally, all of these tools, the quality of your sleep will increase tremendously. And of course, in doing so, the quality of your daytime alertness and your ability to focus will improve tremendously. Again, sleep is the absolute foundation of your mental health, your physical health, and your performance in all endeavors. So if there's one area of your life to really focus on and try and optimize, if your goal is to be happier and more productive and just to have a better life overall, I can confidently say that sleep is really the thing to optimize. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. We also now have a clips channel. It's Huberman Lab Clips. Please subscribe to our clips channel for short outtakes from podcast episodes. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions about the content of these podcasts or you have suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to invite on The Huberman Lab Podcast, please put all that in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all those comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's the best way to support this podcast. During today's podcast and on many previous episodes of The Huberman Lab Podcast, we talked about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and focus and hormone support and so forth. For reasons mentioned at the beginning of the episode, we are now partnered with Momentous supplements. If you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you'll see many of the supplements described on today's and other episodes of The Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, all as single-ingredient formulations. They ship internationally, their quality is exceedingly high, and by largely focusing on single ingredient and various dosages of different supplements, you can create the optimized supplement protocol for you. If you're not already following us on social media, we are @hubermanlab on Instagram and also @hubermanlab on Twitter. There, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of The Huberman Lab Podcast, and other of which, I should say much of which, is distinct from the information covered on this podcast. If you're interested in obtaining protocols or summaries from these podcasts, you can get those completely free of cost by going to hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu at hubermanlab.com. Go to the Neural Network Newsletter. You simply provide us your email and you'll get the Neural Network Newsletter for free each month. You can also find previous newsletters there at hubermanlab.com. For instance, Toolkit for Sleep or Deliberate Cold Exposure and so on and so forth. Again, we don't share your email with anybody. So our privacy policy is made very clear there. And it's completely zero cost. So thank you for joining me today for our discussion about tools for optimizing sleep, and in doing so, tools for optimizing not just sleep, but your daytime feelings of alertness and focus and your overall health. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [bright music]

========================================

--- Video 264 ---
Video ID: 7YGZZcXqKxE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7YGZZcXqKxE
Title: Dr. Emily Balcetis: Tools for Setting & Achieving Goals | Huberman Lab Podcast #83
Published: 2022-08-01 12:00:10 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Emily Balcetis, PhD, Professor of Psychology at New York University (NYU). Dr. Balcetis’ research focuses on how our perception of the world, particularly our visual perceptions, influences our level and persistence of motivation, how we conceptualize goals, actual goal achievement, and our emotional state as we pursue goals. Dr. Balcetis explains how to best visualize and overcome challenges in pursuit of larger, complex goals. We also discuss the science of how to define goals and intermediate milestones, overcome obstacles, and effectively track progress. This episode highlights science-based, immediately actionable tools that anyone can use to set and achieve physical and/or cognitive goals more effectively. 

#HubermanLab #GoalSetting

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman 
Levels*: https://www.levelshealth.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman 

*Edit to 6:07: Levels enables members to see their continuous glucose data alongside their food and exercise logs — Levels itself is not a continuous glucose monitor.

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Dr. Emily Balcetis
NYU Profile: https://as.nyu.edu/faculty/emily-balcetis.html 
Clearer, Closer, Better: How Successful People See The World: https://amzn.to/3PQfhBk 
Why some people find exercise harder than others (TED Talk): https://bit.ly/3zHttqx 
Dustin Grue: https://bit.ly/3vNFSqD
Writer’s bloc: An online, real-time communal writing platform for enhancing writing pedagogies: https://bit.ly/3SviY17
Twitter: https://twitter.com/EBalcetis
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/emilybalcetis

Other Resources:
Anish Kapoor: https://anishkapoor.com 
Reporter App: http://reporter-app.com 
One Second Everyday App: https://1se.co

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Emily Balcetis, Visualization of Goals & Motivation 
00:03:24 Momentous Supplements 
00:04:38 Thesis, Levels, ROKA
00:08:08 Vision & Motivation 
00:11:37 Tool: Narrowing Visual Focus & Improving Exercise 
00:21:39 Adjusting Visual Attention & Perceived Fatigue 
00:25:14 Tool: Visual Focus “Spotlight”
00:27:57 Tool: Goal Gradient Hypothesis, Visual Spotlight to Increase Effort
00:33:38 AG1 (Athletic Greens)
00:35:00 Defining Goals vs. Accomplishing Goals, Dream Boards & Goal Lists  
00:41:28 Tool: How to Setting Better Goals & Identify Obstacles 
00:46:38 Vision is Unique, Challenging the Visual System, Realistic Goals & Micro-Goals
00:57:12 Do Fit People View the World Differently?, States of Body & Visual Experiences
01:05:54 Caffeine, Stimulants, Visual Windows & Motivation 
01:10:13 Tools: Goal Setting & Cognitive (Non-Physical) Goals, Data Collection
01:21:54 Year in Review & Memory 
01:26:32 Visual Tools & Mental Health, Depression & Visual Priming 
01:31:33 Focusing Attention & Increasing Visual Detail/Resolution 
01:36:12 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Neural Network Newsletter, Instagram, Twitter, Momentous Supplements

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Emily Balcetis. Dr. Balcetis is a professor of psychology at New York University, her laboratory studies motivation, goal setting and tools for successful goal completion. I learned about Dr. Balcetis's work some years ago because I'm a vision scientist, that is, I study the visual system, and I heard about this incredible psychologist at New York University who was studying how vision, that is, how we visualize problems can predict whether or not we will successfully overcome challenges and how we strategize in order to set and meet goals. And in 2020, I learned of Dr. Balcetis's book, which was written for the general public, entitled "Clearer, Closer, Better: How Successful People See the World". And I read both the hard copy of the book and listened to the audiobook, and I absolutely loved the material. As you'll learn directly from Dr. Balcetis today, how people visualize a problem, that is, whether or not they think of a goal or a problem as residing at the top of a very steep hill, or on the top of a shallower hill, or whether or not they visualize a goal or a problem as far off in the distance or closer to them in the distance, visually, in their mind, strongly dictates whether or not they will arrive at the challenge of meeting a goal or overcoming a problem with more energy or less energy. Indeed, it dictates whether or not they can push to immediate milestones, or whether or not they will think they have to overcome the entire task all at once. Basically, Dr. Balcetis's work has discovered that how we visualize a problem or a goal in our mind has everything to do with how we lean into that goal, whether or not we think of it as overwhelming or tractable, whether or not we think that we can overcome that goal and then it will lead to yet more possible rewards and goals, or whether or not we feel that we're going to arrive at the finish line and then just be overwhelmed with fatigue. In other words, how you visualize things in your mind, and when I say, "Visualize," I mean, literally, how you visualize them as a visual problem or a visual goal, has everything to do with whether or not you will be able to meet those goals and whether or not they will lead to still greater goals that you will be able to achieve. Today's episode is an especially important one, I believe, because you're going to learn about quality peer-reviewed science from the expert in this field of goal setting, motivation and pursuit, and you're also going to learn an immense number of practical tools that you can apply toward your educational goals, your career goals, relationship goals, goals of any sort. By the end of today's episode, you will be better equipped to set and achieve your goals. Dr. Balcetis also shares with us her own experiences of how to set, visualize and achieve goals, and she does that within the context of her role as a parent, as somebody navigating relationships of various kinds, and a demanding career. So again, I think that you'll find the information today to be both extremely academically grounded in terms of research, extremely practical and realistic in terms of how you might apply it in your own life. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. We partnered with Momentous for several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of the United States, that's valuable. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of their supplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single-ingredient supplements, and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build a supplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's really systematic and scientific. This is really hard to do if you're taking blends of different supplements, or if the dosages are such that you can't titrate, or that is, adjust the dosages of a given supplement. So by using single-ingredient supplements, you can really build out the supplement kit that's ideal for you and your specific needs. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There, you'll see those supplements, and just keep in mind that we are constantly expanding the library of supplements available through Momentous on a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics, and as some of you have probably heard me say before, I am not a fan of the word nootropics because nootropics means smart drugs, and frankly, as a neuroscientist, the notion of a smart drug is somewhat ridiculous, why? Well, it turns out that we have neural circuits in our brain that get engaged for creativity, and yet other neural circuits that are engaged for focus, and still other neural circuits that are engaged for task switching, so the notion of a smart drug or a drug that can induce smartness, if you will, is simply not grounded in science. Well, Thesis understands this and has developed custom nootropics that are tailored to the specific types of cognitive demands or physical demands that you might be facing. If you go to Thesis's website, you can take a quiz, and from that, they'll give you a sample of different nootropics that you can try so that you can create a customized kit of nootropics for your specific needs. To get your own personalized nootropics starter kit, just go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take that three-minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by Levels. Levels is what's called a continuous glucose monitor, some of you may have heard of these before, others of you perhaps have not. Basically, it's a small device that you wear on the back of your arm, it's an app that you install on your phone, and whether or not you are fasting, or you just ate, or you ate several hours ago, you can get a realtime measurement of your blood glucose, which turns out to be extremely informative. I first started using the Levels continuous glucose monitor about a year ago, and it's taught me so much about how I respond to specific foods in terms of blood sugar spikes, how I respond to exercise, even the sauna, it turns out, can modulate my blood glucose levels and your blood glucose levels in very interesting ways. So all of that is translated into a huge number of very directed changes that I've made in terms of what I eat, when I eat, and how I schedule exercise relative to eating and sleep, et cetera. If you're interested in trying the Levels continuous glucose monitor yourself, you can simply go to levels.link/huberman, that's levels.link/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA, ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality, and they also have some unique characteristics. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses can be worn while running or cycling. If you get sweaty, they won't fall off your face. And they're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I can't even remember that I'm wearing them. I wear ROKA eyeglasses when I read at night, so I wear their readers, and I wear sunglasses at various times throughout the day. The great thing about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is that even though they were designed for athletic performance, they have a terrific aesthetic. So unlike a lot of so-called performance glasses, that make people look like cyborgs, in my opinion, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are the sort that you could wear out to dinner, that you could wear to work, they have a terrific aesthetic. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A, .com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, that's R-O-K-A, .com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. And now for my discussion with Dr. Emily Balcetis. Well, thanks for being here. - It's my pleasure. - Yeah, I've been looking forward to this for a long time, because as a vision scientist, who is also very interested in real-life tools and goal setting and motivation, your work lands squarely in the middle of those interests. So just to kick things off, could you tell us just a little bit about the relationship between perception, and in particular, how we see the world, and goal setting and goal retrieval. It's a vast landscape, but you're the expert, so I'll turn that over to you. [Emily laughing] And then, as time goes on, I may have some additional questions as it relates to different kinds of vision, but what's the deal with vision and motivation? How do those two things link up? - Yeah, totally, I mean, when psychologists ask people, like, "What are you doing to help make progress on your goals?" they say all kinds of things, but a couple things always pop to the top, which is, "Try to shock myself in encouraging ways, and self-pep talks," or, "I remind myself of how important it is to do this job," or, "I'll put up Post-it notes around to constantly be nagging me about what I need to do." So those are common tactics that people use, and what we'll notice is that those are really effortful, having to constantly remind yourself, having to constantly talk to yourself, having to create those Post-it notes, remember to look at them, all of that takes a lot of time and effort and commitment, and so what a surprise that people burn out, right? It's exciting to work on a goal when you first set it, you might make some initial progress, but then eventually we get not even to the halfway point before things get real, [laughing] things are challenging, and we fall by the wayside. And that's, I think, because those tactics that are our go-to strategies are themselves a goal to maintain. So it's double sided, we're putting so much on ourselves to try to advance the thing that we originally set out to accomplish. So then, with my team, I was trying to think of, like, "Well, what are strategies that don't require as much effort, that we can automate, that we can take advantage of what's already happening within ourselves, within our body, within our mind, that might overcome one of those challenges, that'll be easier, more automated?" And that's when we started to land on the idea of vision, right? We look at the world without even thinking of it, for those of us that are sighted, and we thought, "You know what? There are strategies that we can use to look at the world in a different way and that we can automate that might help us to overcome some obstacles, to make progress on our goals, to maybe literally see opportunities that we hadn't been able to see before." So we started playing around with the idea of visual illusions to see, like, "Do people even know that there's other ways of seeing things around them? Can we tweak that, or is there room for intervention? Can we encourage people to take a new way of looking to see things that they hadn't seen before?" And that's what really opened us up to trying to look at that intersection between vision science and motivation science. - That's great, and I always say, and here, I'm strongly biased as a vision scientist, that vision is the dominant sense by which we navigate the world and survive. I love this idea of real-world, realtime access to vision. And I'm certainly familiar with how goal setting or Post-its and magnets on refrigerators can have an immediate impact, but then over time, they become so part of the visual landscape that you overlook them, and we know, as vision scientists, if something is stably in your environment, eventually, you're blind to it, so that makes good sense. So you've published a number of studies in this area, but maybe you could highlight some of the more, what you would consider important findings in the area of how people can adjust their vision in order to meet goals more quickly and more efficiently, and perhaps also how we all arrive at goals with different visual perceptions, and that, in some way, may divide us into highly motivated and less motivated people, in other words, what's the link between vision and motivation, and how can we leverage that in order to better reach our goals? - Totally, so we started thinking about, "What are the goals that are most important to people that they struggle with the most?" So we asked hundreds, thousands of people what their new year's resolutions are, we looked to all the other polls that do the same kind of work, and regardless of where you look, or who you ask, or when you ask it, people's number-one goal is something related to their health, right? To lose weight, to exercise more, to get out, get more steps, for mental wellbeing, physical wellbeing. And that's like the number-one goal every January 1st. So if we were able to accomplish that goal, you'd think it would drop [laughing] a little bit in the rankings, but it doesn't because it's really hard. So we thought, "I wonder if there's a way for us to make some progress on that, on helping people to exercise better, more often, stick to it longer, and make some progress there?" We know diets don't work. [laughing] Why don't diets work? For the same reason that that self-talk doesn't work, is that we go in it, full bore, hardcore, and it requires a major commitment and effort to a lifestyle change. So again, we were looking for something that might be easier than that, that could produce big payoff, right? That's the golden ticket, [laughing] is something that requires less effort for a bigger payoff. So one of the first things that I did was go over to Brooklyn, to this old armory building, it used to be a military armory space, yeah. - I think I know that building. - Yeah, it's beautiful. - It's a beautiful building, now, that houses a lot of businesses, right? With plants on the walls, is that the one? - Yeah, there's businesses, there's a couple of armories all around the boroughs here around New York City, and the one in Brooklyn in particular is now YMCA, right? So it's a family YMCA, that's within this beautiful old redbrick building that used to be a military establishment long, long ago. And what's really cool is that, one winter afternoon, somebody had invited me, a physical therapist said, "Hey, you should come out and check out what's happening here, with your interest in exercise and trying to find new ways of helping people, new tactics that they can add to their tool belt, I think you're going to find some interesting people that are working out there." So I showed up, I look around, there's families, there's new moms, there's kids, moms trying to get kids to burn off some winter energy that they have, there's people that look like they're just there for their, every couple of days, going out for a run. There's some people that look like they're training with a team, and that's who this physical therapist introduced me to, was the coach of this team. There's a bunch of people that were sitting down on the ground, and I would be hard pressed to know who is the high school student that's in this group, and then who, as it turns out, are some of the fastest runners in the world. One of the people that was in the last Olympics before I showed up, won the gold medal for the 400 meter. And from the looks of them, I mean, of course, their bodies are in better shape than mine, but there's nothing so, of course, they're not wearing their medals, there's nothing pretentious about how they're walking around or anything like that, that would lead me to know, like, "This person's amazing, and they probably have some insight that I don't have." So once I got introduced to them and knew who are these people that were part of this pretty elite training team that happened to work out at this family gym, I had the chance to talk with them about, "What strategies do you use?" Now, I am not an elite runner, and having recently had a baby, I'm not really a runner right now at all, but I thought, "When these people are running, I bet they are hyper aware of everything that's going on in their surroundings. Where are they relative to the competition, what's happening in their peripheral vision, what's going on on the side, who's behind them, who's in front of them? They probably have this master sense, this master visual plan at any point in time, and that's what probably makes them elite." So when I started asking them, "Is that the case, do you really pay attention to what's in your surroundings, what's behind you, what's on the side?" They said, "No," all of them said, "No, and sometimes when I do do that, it's a mistake, it doesn't work for me." So that was surprising and totally went against my intuition about what they do that likely contributes to their success. What they said instead was that they are hyper focused, they assume this narrowed focus of attention, almost like a spotlight is shining on a target. Now, when they're running a short distance, that target might literally be the finish line, the line that they're trying to cross. If it's a longer distance, they set subgoals, like the person, the shorts on the person up ahead that they're trying to beat, or they choose some sort of stable landmark, like a sign that they would pass by. And a spotlight is shining just on that, or they have blinders on the sides of their face, that's all they're paying attention to, this really narrowed scope of attention. And that was a strategy that all of these elite athletes said that they used, and those that were better rather than slower were ones that used it more. And I thought, "Oh, that's something we can play with, right? They are elite [laughing] and they are accomplished, but that visual strategy isn't necessarily something that you have to be in the perfect physical condition to be able to adopt, and so I wonder, can that help the rest of us who aren't competing for an Olympic gold and who have no chance of ever getting one, but who want to exercise better, have a better time doing it, and maintain a commitment to that exercise goal that they might have, that they might otherwise, by February or March, be giving up on, if they had said it at the beginning of January?" So that's really where the work started, was what you might call focus groups or case studies [laughing] of these incredible athletes. And then we did other studies, looking at people who aren't Olympic athletes, but who are competitive and New York Road Runners runners, and how are they running in races? And what we found is that those people who have better pace, faster pace, better time, they use that narrowed strategy more often than this more expansive or open scope of attention. And there seemed to be a correlation between that better performance among a wider swath of hundreds of runners, who are doing it competitively, but still, could be like the person that you're sitting next to in the office, or yourself, right? And the more often that they did it and the more consistently they had adopted that, that technique of the narrowed focus of attention, it seemed that they were doing better in their runs. So then we started thinking like, "Okay, what about people who aren't competitive runners? What about like my mom, [laughing] can she do that, or me when I'm trying to get back on the bandwagon and exercise more, is this a tactic we can teach people?" The answer is yes, you can tell people about what these Olympic athletes are doing, you can tell them about what the New York Road Runners runners are doing, and just using the same language that I just used with you, right? "Imagine that there's a spotlight shining just on a target, choose something up ahead, the stop sign two blocks up that you can just see, and imagine that you have blinders on so that you're not really paying attention to the people that are passing by, or the buildings, or the garbage cans, or the trucks that are on the road, tune those out and focus in on that target, until you hit it, and then choose another one, right? Sort of recalibrate, choose the next goal." And so we would test, like, "Can people do that?" I mean, if you're listening right now, you probably are imagining that experience too, and the answer is yes, like, "I can imagine that, I know what those words mean, and I can do that." And our work found that too, that people can do that, we have them say out loud, "What is it that's captured your attention?" And of course, "Sometimes something in the periphery, like movement, captures our gaze and we are pulled there for an instant, but then we can refocus up again and adopt that narrowed attention." Now, one of the first studies that we did was teach that strategy and juxtapose or compare it against a group that we said, "Just look around naturally, you might see that finish line up ahead and there's things on the periphery, whatever your eyes want to do, whatever you think is going to work best, feel free to do that, and tell us what you're looking at." Then we gave them a finish line, we created sort of an exercise that's moderately challenging, but possible. We put ankle weights on that accounted for about 15% of their body weight, told them to lift their knees up, sort of high stepping to a finish line. So this would be challenging for them to do, but we said, "It's an indicator of overall health and fitness." Some of these people had narrowed their focus of attention and some were just looking more expansively or naturally. And what we found is that those people that we trained, just everyday normal people doing this moderately challenging exercise, they were able to move 27% faster. They could do the exercise more quickly, and they said it hurt 17% less. The exercise was exactly the same for all of the people, we set the weight, [laughing] we set the distance, it was in our lab space, so it was a constrained environment, everybody was in the same sort of circumstance, but yet their experience was really different, we helped them to move faster, burn calories at a higher rate, right? Exercise more efficiently, the amount of time they put in is going to produce a better physical outcome, and also, it didn't hurt them, right? They're saying, "It doesn't hurt as much." So we were really excited about that, right? Because it meant that this strategy, we could use it on people who were not elite athletes. It could be easily adopted, a quick training session, right, can teach people to look at the world in a different way. Again, this narrowed attention was different than whatever they do naturally, the comparison group, but it had a big outcome, it had a big difference on the way that they were engaged in the exercise. It was some of the first work that we did, and then, since then, we've done, I don't know, dozens more studies to look at, "Well, what happens with that and what else can we do with playing around with this?" - Yeah, those are impressive differences as a consequence of narrowing visual attention. Couple of questions about the actual practice of narrowing attention, is there any indication of whether or not subjects are constantly updating their visual attention? So for instance, if let's say the goal line is in view, literally, from the beginning, I could imagine just holding visual attention on the goal line, but if it's a oval track, or it's a trajectory along a trail, or through a city, how often do you think they are updating their visual aperture and setting a visual goal? And I could imagine that there's some energetic expense to that, so meaning, you wouldn't want to do every crack on the sidewalk, unless those cracks on the sidewalk were very far apart. - [laughing] Right. - Because I think, at some point, that itself would be exhausting. So is there an optimal strategy or a semi-optimal strategy? - Yeah, so those Olympic athletes that we started by interviewing, they tended to be sprinters, they were more often sprinters, short-distance sprinters. So when they said like, "Yes, I narrow in more than I assume an expansive focus," that's because they're not going that far, right? They have to do it as fast as humanly possible, but they're not going that far. And so we started asking that question too, about, like, "Well, wouldn't that be tiring?" And the answer is yes, so when we start to look at, well, people who aren't sprinters, who are accomplished, but who are more long-distance runners, that's what we find that they do, is that they're using that narrowed attention strategy strategically, and it increases in use, they use it more often as the race progresses, and they really start to do this major switch [laughing] at about the halfway point of say like a 10-kilometer run. So people who are seasoned runners, they really start making a switch with what they're looking at about halfway through, and that's where they more often, more frequently and are more intentionally adopting a narrowed focus of attention when they're in the last couple miles of a run, when maybe their resources are starting to get more thin, maybe their motivation is starting to fade. That tipping point in the middle is, with any kind of goal, where people struggle the most, and that's when they're doubling down on a strategy that they know to be effective. So at first, longer-distance runners are not using that narrowed strategy, they're looking more expansively, because I think that that, well, first of all, distraction [laughing] is a thing, it's useful. Not necessarily that they're distracting themselves, because people are still trying to hold pace and jostle among probably a more concentrated group of runners, but it is a strategy that they use, and then sort of wean off of as the race goes through. And it's particularly effective when we're looking for that last push, right? The last push to get over the finish line, when you might be literally neck and neck with somebody that you're trying to just beat out, or when you're most tired, but you know that last push, you don't want to drop off, and when you want to push through hard through that finish line, that's when people are using it at its peak level of intensity. - I see, yeah. To me, this makes total sense why it would work, without going down the rabbit hole of visual neuroscience, something for another time, that when we do these vergence eye movements, when we bring our eyes to a visual target, it's clear that some of the brainstem circuitry for alertness gets engaged to a greater degree. The other thing is that we know that when we focus on an object, that the optics of the eye change and narrow the visual field. So that brings about, this is a very detailed question, but I'm sure the audience is wondering, if let's say I'm focused on a goal line or an intermediate goal, are they focusing on a specific point or is it kind of the entire horizon of that goal? Because the finish line is indeed a line. And of course, it's impossible to know what someone is actually doing in their mind's eye, but how do people report this? Do they see it literally as a spotlight? And if so, how broad is that spot? - Yeah, so what is the length [laughing] of their aperture rather than maybe the diameter or the sphere size of it? In our interviews with people, our sort of focus group studies, it seems like it's more like a circular point. And that's in fact what we're teaching people, what we're training them to do, so rather than going broadly, looking across a line from left to right, we are encouraging them to imagine a circle of light that's shining on some target. Now, of course, a finish line is a line, but if they're staying in their lane, if they're on a track, right? You can imagine that there is a circle shining just on where in their lane they'll cross that finish line, or if it's a stop sign, you could imagine a circle of light illuminating that. So that's what we're teaching people to use and that's what seems to be effective to maintain that focus rather than sort of being pulled to engage with peripheral vision. And there's some amazing people, some runners in history, like Joan Benoit Samuelson, she's one of the first female marathon competitors, who has won multiple marathons. She's Canadian, I think she's won, feel free to correct me, like 10 marathons in her life. And she talks about sort of not assuming this wide but narrow, [laughing] wide but not deep or tall attentional focus. She talks about, like, "Finding the shorts on somebody ahead of me and focusing on those shorts," until she passes them, and then resetting that goal. So in her interviews that she's done with runners magazines, she talks about it in terms of this circle of attention. - Mm, I think I've experienced this a little bit, because we're visiting New York now to do this interview, and runners here seem more competitive, recreational runners here seem more competitive. People walking on the street seem competitive. - Yeah. [laughing] - You're walking at near pace to somebody, they'll quickly speed up. If you speed up, they'll speed up. - Yeah. - I think there have been some studies about walking speed in different cities, and New York ranks among the fastest walkers around. I won't mention the slowest-walking cities. [Emily laughing] 'Cause we don't want to cast any judgments. But fascinating, and again, makes total sense based on the way that the visual system measures both space and time. - Yeah. - Something maybe we'll get into a little bit later, but I'm curious whether or not the whole thing works in reverse as well. Meaning, do people who are very motivated to exercise, do they think this way naturally? People who are averse to exercise or who find it hard to get motivated to exercise, do they view the world differently, literally? - Yeah, yeah, I have so much that I can say about this, so [laughing] if you'll humor me, I'll give you a couple different stories about how we can answer that. - Please. - So you don't have to do a deep dive into vision science, which, of course, you are capable of doing, but what I can share with you is some animal studies where this work kind of first started. This is in the 1940s, 1950s, rat labs, mice labs. And they were looking, those were the first models of human behavior that people were trying to understand motivation, motivation science within. So they would deprive these poor rats and mice of food or water, so that they were motivated to get it. [laughing] They were hungry and they were thirsty and they had practice running a maze so they knew where they could find that food or water, whatever that they were looking for. And what these researchers were studying was the pace of movement through the maze. So as the rats were going through the maze, they found that even though these rats were hungry and they're having to expend limited caloric energy to make it to the finish line, they actually ran faster the closer they got to that finish line. So once that finish line became nearer to them, they actually used their resources, probably suboptimally, to make sure that they crossed the finish line and got their reward. So that was some of the first early work that was showing that proximity to a goal increases the investment in resources that people, that animals use to meet that goal, even when they don't have that much spare. And with the mice, the same kind of thing, they actually had these little harnesses on them, they were looking at how hard do the mice pull to try to make it to the food or the water that they were trying to get. And same deal, the closer they got to getting their reward, the harder they were pulling, even though they didn't have that much energy to spare and they had already used some up getting to that finish line. So that early animal research from the 1940s, 1950s, then spurred a whole wave of work in humans. Do humans do the same thing? Even when they're tired, but they can see or they can feel that their goal is close, do they double down and work even harder to cross that finish line, either a literal finish line, if we're talking about exercise, or a metaphorical finish line if we're talking about any other kind of goal that people might have? And the answer is yes, they called that the goal gradient hypothesis, the closer you get to the goal, generally, the harder people and animals work to finish that goal. That's what led us then to think, "Okay, those rats, those mice, those people are seeing a finish line, right? And it's when they're maybe seeing that finish line, seeing that reward, seeing the goal they're hoping to accomplish, that is what's leading them to try harder, to invest more so that they can finish it off. What if we induce that illusion of proximity? What if we can induce a visual illusion, a visual experience that approximates what the real rats and mice were actually experiencing as they got closer?" So that is what is happening, that's what's happening visually when we create that narrowed focus of attention, when we tell people, "Imagine there's a spotlight on the shorts of the person up ahead, or the stop sign that you're seeing," it induces an illusion of proximity that then is responsible for people trying harder, walking faster, or feeling that it defied their expectations and that it wasn't as bad as they thought it would be. So we do things like measure, like measure their visual experience, like, "How far away is that finish line?" Of course, we can ask them to report in feet, "How many feet is it?" Ah, but that's challenging, right? Nobody really knows what three feet versus four feet really looks like, but they do, so we can ask them how many feet it is. We also use these other measures of, like visual matching measures to know that distance to the finish line looks about as far away as this other target, their matching up their visual experiences. So what we know is that inducing that narrowed focus of attention is creating an illusion of proximity, that goal looks closer to them. And then there's all kinds of downstream, motivational and psychological effects that happen from feeling like you're closer, by visually misperceiving that space, it can have a really positive consequence. So your first question was, "Which way does it go? Does it go both ways, that people who are better runners happen to do this thing?" Yes, some of our research shows that, that if they, for whatever reason, happened upon this strategy and continued to practice it, they tended to be the better runners. But we also know from our experiments in the lab, where we take people who don't know about these strategies, and by a flip of the coin, we randomly assign them to either learn the strategy and use it or do whatever comes naturally to them, we can create that illusion of proximity, that has a direct and causal impact on improving their performance when they're exercising. So yes, it goes both ways, but you can also teach yourself that you don't have to just rely on luck, luck of the draw for being a person who happens to be better at exercising or whose eyes happen to do this on their own. - Before we continue with today's discussion, we're going to take a brief pause to acknowledge our sponsor, Athletic Greens, also called AG1. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they've been a sponsor of this podcast. Athletic Greens contains vitamins, minerals, probiotics, digestive enzymes [laughing] and adaptogens, so it's got a lot of things in there, and that's actually the reason I started taking it, and the reason I still take it once or twice a day. It essentially covers all of my nutritional bases, and the probiotics in particular are important to me because of the critical importance of what's called the gut-brain access, that is neurons and other cell types in the gut, in the digestive tract, that communicate with the brain and the brain back to the digestive tract in order to control things like mood, immune function, hormone function, and on and on. Whenever somebody has asked me what's the one supplement they should take? I always answer, "Athletic Greens." I gave that answer long before I ever had this podcast and it's the answer I still give now, for all the reasons that I detailed just a moment ago. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3K2, which are also very important for a huge number of bodily factors and brain factors that impact your immediate and long-term health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. The most pressing question I have in my mind is, can we, I, all of us, use this strategy to make the starting line a goal point? Because for a lot of people, it's not about going from start to finish, it's about getting to start. And I would say, here, I'm estimating, but 15% of the content on social media is about motivation and how to get motivated to do things. Neurochemicals like dopamine, of course, being at the heart of motivation. In my mind, I'm making strong links between some of these visual aperture effects and goal lines and dopamine that we could also dive into. But the simple question is, can I use this finish line strategy to make the start line a goal and get my system more engaged or motivated? And is there any physiology, or physiological changes, I should say, to reflect the idea that maybe just visually focusing on the start line would actually get me more excited as opposed to make me less excited to engage in effort? - Mm-hmm, there's certainly vision science that's tied up in that very first stage of goal setting, like identifying what that goal is in the first place and taking those first steps. A lot of people's go-to strategies that involve vision are vision boards, or dream boards, or Post-it notes, right? They're creating some sort of visual representation of what it is that they want to accomplish, "Where is it that I want to be in five years, 10 days, 10 years?" Whatever that timeline is that they're working under. The idea of vision boards or dream boards is that you, almost like a scrapbook, [laughing] collect visual icons that reflect where you want to be to motivate yourself. It's a really common tactic that people use, and it's not bad to do that, right? For some people, just even knowing what they want in life is a major accomplishment, defining the goal can be really challenging for people, and that's a strategy that works and involves our visual experience, right? It's not just, people aren't saying like, "Why don't you just sit around and imagine what you want your life to be like in 10 years?" The strategy that people are suggesting is like, "No, cut out the pictures, put it on a board and stick it by your bathroom mirror so you see it every day," right? - Or make a list. - Or make a list, yeah. - People are big on these lists, I have a lot of friends that are like, "Have you made your list?" The list of things that you insist on having in the context of fitness, relationship, job, et cetera, et cetera, this seems more and more common now, yeah. - Yeah, totally, and the idea, like, "Write it down," right? They're telling you, "Write it down," or, "Create a visual manifestation of it." And so yeah, that's effective for identifying what you want, but it may not actually be effective for helping you to meet the goal, to get the job done. So colleagues of mine at New York University have probed, "Well, why, why is that? Why is just thinking about what you want in your life and sort of putting yourself vicariously into those shoes, imagining what my life will be like if I can accomplish everything on this list, why doesn't that work?" Well, first of all, "Does it work?" The answer is no, "And why does it not work?" Because what happens, these colleagues, Gabriele Oettingen and her research team have found is that going through and dreaming about or, "Visualizing how great my life will be when I get X, Y and Z done," that is like a goal satisfied. "I have identified what it is that I want, I have experienced it, even if just in an imaginary way, I've had that positive experience of thinking about, well, how great my life is going to be when I get this thing done," and they start to sort of rest on their laurels. She's actually measured systolic blood pressure and heart rate, and they found that people who do that, who go through that experience of, "Visualizing how great my life will be when I get X, Y and Z done," their systolic blood pressure, the bottom number on your blood pressure reading, decreases. Okay, now, I'm all about finding ways to relax, especially in New York, right? You're constantly living at a high level of stimulation, and so like, "Cool, great, so maybe I should just think about how awesome my life will be when I get my bucket list done," but motivation scientists know that systolic blood pressure is actually an indicator of our body's readiness to get up and act, to do something. Now, that can be the going out for a walk, going out for a run, hitting the gym, it can also be things like doing math problems, [laughing] right? Even if it's something that's just mental, systolic blood pressure actually goes up in anticipation of your body or your mind needing to do something, taking the first steps on a goal. So then it helps us to understand of like, "Okay, if I've just created this dream board, this vision board, and put myself psychologically in that space of a goal satisfied, why is it bad that blood pressure goes down?" Because it means your body is chilling out, it's like, "All right, cool, I just accomplished something pretty major," right? "I actually now don't have the physiological resources at the ready to take the first step right now to do something about that." So that was a pretty monumental finding for motivation scientists, to understand that creating these dream boards, these vision boards, or to-do lists, might actually backfire, because it in and of itself is the creation of a goal and the satisfaction of the goal, and then people understandably give themselves some time to just enjoy that positive experience. - So much for "The Secret". - [Emily] Yeah, exactly, [laughing] exactly. - I guess now "The Secret" folks will come after me with pitchforks, but. - I try to never say the name, [laughing] right? For that reason. - Well, I'm not afraid to say the name, I mean, I imagine that certain strategies might work for other people, but everything you're saying, again, is consistent with what we know about the physiology of dopamine circuits for motivation. I have a good friend who perhaps incidentally, perhaps not, is a cardiologist at a major university, said that one of the major errors that people make with book writing and completion is they will tell people they're going to write a book and people will say, "Oh, you definitely should write a book, everyone's going to love your book," and they never end up writing it. And his theory is that they get so much dopamine reward from that immediate feedback, with all the protection of never having the book criticized, that they never write the book. I'm sure there are exceptions to this, but I guess it raises the question, what's the better strategy? - Yeah, so I'm not saying that people who enjoy dream board creation should stop what they're doing, that's not the take-home message here. - Nightmare board. - [laughing] Oh, definitely not that, no. - Okay, okay. - There's enough anxiety and fear in the world, we don't need to encourage more of it. But the process of goal setting shouldn't stop with articulating what the goal is. So at that same point that we're trying to figure out, "What do we want to do, what is my vision for the future?" in those planning sessions, we need to simultaneously think about a couple of other things. One is how are we going to get there? So take it out of the abstract, take it out of this idyllic visual iconography and start thinking about the practical day to day. We need to break it down into more manageable goals, not just, "My 10-year plan for myself," but, "My two-week plan, what can I accomplish in the next two weeks and the two weeks after that's going to set me on the right trajectory?" That's probably not surprising to anybody [laughing] who's been thinking about, "How do I set goals better?" Plan big picture, think big picture abstractly, but then also break it down more concretely, that's probably not surprising, but it's an important aspect of the goal setting process. Then, again, Gabriele Oettingen in my department has identified a third often overlooked or underappreciated stage that has to happen in the goal setting process, and that's thinking about the obstacles that stand in your way of success, and that, it will actually help improve motivation in the long run. And sometimes people think that that is counterintuitive, "You're saying if I want to increase my motivation, have more motivation, then I need to think about how hard it's going to be, all the ways that I'm going to fail? How is that going to jazz me up? How's that going to help me get through when things get hard?" But it does because it's like coming up with a plan B, a plan C, plan D, in advance of actually experiencing that. If you were on a boat and the boat started to sink, that's not the time you want to start looking for life jackets. You already want to know where one is so you can go to it right away. And it's the same thing with goal setting, is that you want to know, "What am I working towards? How am I going to get there? And if I experience this obstacle, here's what I'm going to do about it." You may never experience that obstacle, but if you do, you're probably going to be shy on time, thin on resources, maybe experiencing an anxiety that hijacks your brain so you're not functioning at that optimal level of judgment and decision making. You want to already have the snap next step in place so you can just hop to it, right? We're not going to do our best thinking when we're in crisis mode, but we don't have to if we have already used our resources in advance to come up with that plan B or that plan C. Michael Phelps, incredible athlete, right? This is something that he and his coach have routinely incorporated into their training. So I love this story that, back in 2008, he was hot for the first time on the international stage. It was the Beijing Olympics, Michael Phelps was on the brink of doing something that no one else in the history of the Olympic Games has ever done, which was win eight gold medals in a single Olympiad. At the time of this story, he had already won seven and he had just the 200 fly in front of him before he could do what no one else has ever done, win the eighth gold medal. And the fly is his thing, right? This should've been easy, a no-brainer, he's going to win this, he's going to break Olympic history. As soon as he dove into the pool, his goggles started to leak. And by the time he had done three lengths of the pool, he just had to flip around and come back to the starting line slash finish line, back to the edge. By the time that happened, his goggles were completely filled with water and he was swimming blind. I would've panicked, I would've sunk to the bottom of the pool, I wouldn't have even been in the pool to be honest, I'm not a swimmer, definitely not going to be in the Olympics, but for him, he didn't, it wasn't a moment of panic, like it probably would've been for nearly every other person in that situation, because he had foreshadowed that kind of possible failure. He had imagined that obstacle hitting him in advance, and not even just imagined it, but practiced it, "What will we do?" He routinely practiced swimming with his goggles not fully secured on his face, his coach notoriously would rip the goggles off of his head, smash 'em on the ground for maybe dramatic effect or something, so that he didn't even have any goggles possible to grab as he's in practice. So because he had foreshadowed that possibility and the solution, "If my goggles start to leak, then I will do," in his case, "start counting my strokes, then I'll make it through." He knew exactly how many strokes it would take from him to get from one end of the pool to the other, he started counting his strokes. He won that race, the 200 fly, he won his eighth gold medal and he'd go on to win 15 more in his career. So we might not all be swimmers, we might not all aspire to Olympic-level performance, but I love that example because I think it helps sort of demystify or give us an alternative perspective on the importance and the motivational reasons why thinking about obstacles in advance, thinking about the ways, the two, three, four ways that your plan might go awry is actually effective at helping us to overcome the obstacle that might otherwise lead us to throw in the towel. - That's a beautiful example. I'm going to springboard off that example to ask a question that has also been on my mind, which is, is there really anything special about vision? Because in the example you just gave, it was indeed vision that Michael Phelps was deprived of and it was counting strokes. Counting is another form of incremental measurement, in the nervous system, obviously. There are others, they could be the sensation of the hands smacking the water or breaking the surface of the water, so there are any number of different variables or metrics that one could use. I could imagine that setting out on a, let's say, a three-mile run, which, for me, is a decent-distanced run, it's one I do a few times a week, I'm also not a runner, but I try and complete some runs a few times a week, at very slow pace, just for my health. [Emily laughing] I could count every step, that would be kind of exhausting, but if I knew that three miles was, I'm going to estimate here, I don't know, a couple thousand steps, I could count backward, I could count forward, I could count every 10. I confess, I spend every morning trying to find sunlight to get sun in my eyes to set my circadian rhythm, and I do 100 jumping jacks. So I'm the guy that people are looking at strange on the street. [Emily laughing] But sometimes I count every 10, sometimes I count backwards, sometimes I count forward. Is there any indication that it matters or is it simply that we attach some sort of meaning to that increment and the mode of reaching that increment? Because it does seem like there's something special about vision, and we could maybe dive into a little bit more why that is, but at a very basic level, how broadly or finally should one set the increments, and does it matter if you're counting steps or counting strokes, maybe it's every other song, you're going to listen to an entire album. That's something that I don't know if people do anymore. [Emily laughing] Or you're going to listen to a whole playlist, and then listen to it again, and you're going to run as long as the playlist is completed twice, you can obviously see what I'm getting at, but I know people are going to want to implement these tools. And I have to guess that the nervous system is somewhat indiscriminent when it comes to these things, but that there might also be some specificity. - I think vision is special, and I think you do too, and for a variety of reasons. When you start, you can really nerd out on how cool the brain is and how cool vision is within the brain. And when you do, then you start to find some things that make vision unique, right? More real estate, more neurological cortex real estate is taken up by the visual sense than any other sense, more than taste, touch, smell, right? Vision gets more real estate, gets more neurological processing space than any other sense, why is that? Well, because evolution has led us to prioritize the visual experience. There's some cool illusions where maybe somebody's mouth is doing something different than what you're hearing, when people sort of create these weird tricks that might go on YouTube and go viral, and people are trying to figure out, "What did I hear? What did I see his mouth doing?" And what comes up is that people prioritize what they see over what they're hearing when the two are incompatible or kind of out of sync. - Every time. - Yeah, every time, right? If you have to bet on it, bet on what it is that you're looking at rather than what you're seeing. And why is that? Well, [sighing] I guess, a couple other things too, right? We can see super far, you can see a flickering candle on a horizon if it was a totally clear sky several miles away. You can see the International Space Station floating up in the night sky, right? Hundreds of miles away, our eyes are amazing. And we prioritize what we see, and I think that's because we never, we rarely [laughing] get the experience of having our visual experience second guessed. Oftentimes, we're having a conversation maybe in a loud restaurant and we know that we didn't hear the person, right? And so we say like, "Oh, did you say that?" Or like, "Oh, I thought you said this," and they're like, "No, I didn't say that," right? So people will correct us when our ears get it wrong, or we're tasting something amazing and we can't quite figure out what spices were in here, and so we know that our tongue isn't quite picking up the taste the right way, and that's why we read the menu to see what are the ingredients or we ask the chef, like, "What did you put in this? It tastes amazing." So we know that our tongue is getting it wrong, or you might be touching something and you look at the tag to see what sort of textile was used in this really amazing piece of clothing that you're looking to buy. So we know that our sense of touch isn't quite getting it right. But rarely do we have that experience of having our eyes get updated, where we're looking at something, "Oh, I think I'm looking at my mom. Oh, no, actually, it was actually my husband." Okay, that never happens, [laughing] right? That we have gotten vision as wrong as we might get any other thing that we're experiencing through any other sense. We trust our visual experience, we have a sort of a naive realism that what we see reflects the world the way it actually is, because it's never really fully tested, we never get the input or the feedback that you've seen something wrong, until a visual illusion pops up on social media, right? Like the dress example, or the last week or so, there's been that horse-seal-lion drawing that's been all over social media too, "What do you see?" "I see a horse," someone says, "I see a seal," and then chaos erupts, or, "I thought the dress was blue," "No, I thought it was gold." I don't remember the options 'cause I see it as blue, so, [laughing] right? [Andrew laughing] And it's dividing up families and friendships because you've seen something that the other person just literally cannot see. And that's why we love those examples when they pop up in social media when they do, is because it defies all of our previous expectations. If this interests you, there's a really amazing visual artist, Anish Kapoor, who plays with these ideas too, and his installations are just fascinating. I saw one at a museum once, where I walked down this long hall and it's just a big black rectangle that's painted on the wall. And I was like, "This guy's super famous, what the hell? It's just a big black rectangle painted on the wall. What is this about, what a hoax? [laughing] This museum paid how much, what?" or whatever. But then as you get closer, you get closer, and your eyes start to settle in and they adapt to the different visual lighting, you realize it's not a black square painted on the wall, it's a huge hole he's carved into the wall, and there is a whole other world that's back behind there that you can't see right away, until your eyes adapt to the different lighting conditions. - Beautiful. - It's amazing, yeah. - As a vision scientist, I have to see, where is this exhibit? - It's not up right now, there was a retrospective several years ago that was done in Sydney, but his work is all over the place. - Great. - So Anish Kapoor, definitely worth looking up, because, like the dress example, or the horse-seal-lion drawing, or artists like Anish Kapoor's work, that is a moment that gives us a different unexpected insight about the world. That it challenges us to see something that we hadn't seen before, or it induces, or tricks us into seeing something that we wouldn't have otherwise have seen. And so it's those rare moments that I think are actually really important for understanding what do our eyes normally do? Because we wouldn't find these examples so surprising, so engaging, so shocking, if we had routinely gotten the experience of realizing we're not seeing the world the way that it is. So that is why I think vision is special, and why it can be thought of as a tool that we can add to our toolkit for how to better accomplish our goals. I'm not saying that we should just only focus on imagining the world through an attentional spotlight, but maybe that's something that we can employ strategically on occasion when we think it's going to best help us, when we need an extra little push to cross that literal or metaphorical finish line, but it doesn't have to be the only tactic that we use, just like it's not bad to use vision boards, but let's use something else also. It's not bad to talk to ourselves in encouraging ways, but let's try adding another tool to our tool belt in case that's not enough to get the job done. So I do think that there's great power in thinking about our visual experience alongside other tactics that we might use for meeting our goals. And another one of those tactics might be like the numerics that you're talking about, "Do I think about my jumping jacks in terms of groups of 10 or as a set of 100?" You do it routinely, so you might be able to set a goal of 100 and have that sustain you through number 60, number 70, when maybe it's starting to get harder, but for somebody who's just starting out and wants to be able to make it to 100, that's probably not going to work, that could be quite challenging for them if it's the first time that they're trying it. And so instead, setting those micro goals of groups of 10 is going to be useful, because as we start to get to number eight or nine, or number 88 or 89, and it's really getting hard, we need that extra little hedonic hit of pleasure of accomplishment, the micro dopamine rush that you might get by hitting another decade milestone, another group-of-10 milestone. And once we get that little hit of pleasure, excitement or self-congratulations, that might be enough to sustain us through the next challenging physical obstacle, the next group of 10 that we might experience. So there isn't any prescription that I would give and say, "Every person should decide that 25 jumping jacks is the goal." No, we have to be idiosyncratic and introspect about, "Where are we at with this goal, this thing that I'm trying to accomplish?" and set those goals realistically, but inspirationally as well. We want to set a goal that will challenge us, but isn't impossible. We don't want to set goals that are too easy, because we're not going to trick ourselves into feeling so great about doing one jumping jack, okay? Great, I'm pretty sure most people, if that's a goal, they can do one, so are you going to feel so great when you hit that goal? No, because it was too easy, you didn't have any doubt that you could do that one, but what about 25? Okay, yeah, I might feel pretty good about that. Well, what about the next group of 25 and now I'm at 50? Those are goals that might seem just beyond the brink of what's possible, but I will feel good when I hit that, and that's going to give me the next sort of boost of energy that I'm going to need to go a little bit further, either that time or the next time. - Yeah, I think vision is special, again, I'm strongly biased here. The reason I initially learned about your work was, well, now you have this amazing book, but at the time, there wasn't the book, there were just the scientific papers, and of course, upon which the book rests, and those papers are really important, but was the relationship between vision and obviously is our sense of space, but how the sense of space and time are related. And to make the idea quite simple for those listening, when you narrow your visual window, you're measuring, the time bin also gets smaller, right? Which makes sense when you hear it, whereas if you take on a huge visual landscape, you're actually carving up time differently. It's sort of like moving from a slow frame rate to a fine frame rate, slow-motion camera is actually taking a lot more snapshots, right? So you're measuring distance over time more finely. And so, whereas strobe would be the other example, which a strobe is very low frequency, so you're going here, here, here, as opposed to slow motion, right? Strobe gives a course view into the time domain and high-speed photography gives a fine view into the time domain. So I'm almost certain, without any knowledge of underlying data, but knowledge of the mechanism, that I'm almost certain, if not certain, that by placing a narrow visual aperture, we change the way we perceive time. Now, I have a question, and to be honest, I know the answer in advance, but I'd love for you to tell us a bit about how some of this works still further in reverse, meaning how unfit people view the world versus how fit people view the world, or how unmotivated people visually see the world, as opposed to highly motivated people. You talked about these elite runners, you gave them Michael Phelps's example, but maybe you could describe that study, I think it's a particularly important one, mostly because, yes, it identifies perhaps the physiological or psychological differences between motivated and unmotivated, or fit and unfit people, but it also provides a path to remedy that. - Mm-hmm, yeah, out of my lab, but also out of several other labs, there's been work looking at that relation between states of the body and visual experiences. They haven't necessarily tried to integrate the motivation science element to it, but they were looking to see do visual experiences change as a function of different states of our body? So they've looked at people who experience chronic fatigue, the elderly, people who are overweight, those that are wearing heavy backpacks, and so who are sort of put into that experience of being overweight, what happens to their perceptions of the environment? Well, what they find is that distances look further to those that are overweight, chronically tired, older rather than younger, weighted down with extra baggage, distances look farther and hills look steeper. We've done some of those studies too, where we try to give people more energy, or deprive them of energy, and see does that change their perception of space. And we did that by sort of a classic technique of a double-blind study where the participant doesn't really know what they're experiencing. - I thought you were going to say, "A double espresso." - Oh. [laughing] That is also a good psychological experience to give people. Yeah, so a double-blind experiment where the participant doesn't really know the full extent of what they're doing or what they're experiencing, and the researcher who's interacting with them also doesn't. They do this a lot in medical studies, you give somebody a drug and you give somebody a placebo, a sugar pill, and then importantly, nobody really knows who's got what until you've analyzed all the data and the results are revealed that these are the people that had the drug, the active agent, same idea in the psychological research. In this case, what we did was give people Kool-Aid to drink. And for some people, that Kool-Aid was sweetened with sugar, an actual caloric entity, it could give them energy. Other people drank Kool-Aid sweetened with Splenda. So, yeah, it's sweet, but it actually doesn't have any caloric value, you're not giving people energy, you're just giving them that experience of sweetness. Now, some people, of course, are really good at identifying what's real sugar and what's Splenda, but when you put it into Kool-Aid, a pretty noxious powder, it actually masked it for everybody and nobody had any idea. - 'Cause it tasted like garbage to everybody. - It tastes like garbage, yeah. [laughing] - Sorry, Kool-Aid. I mean, I'm sure there are many people that love Kool-Aid, I guess the sales of Kool-Aid will reveal the data. - [laughing] Yeah, I grew up in Nebraska actually, where Kool-Aid is from, it originated in Nebraska. - Oh. - So I do feel like I'm betraying my roots slightly by casting some shade on Kool-Aid, but that's how it worked, is that we asked them to guess what they got, we tested them afterwards and they were wrong. So nobody's able to guess with accuracy, "What was your drink sweetened with?" Which is important because they were blind, the way that scientists use it, they didn't know what it was that they were drinking. We give them about 10 to 15 minutes for that sugar to metabolize, and we measured their circulating blood glucose levels to make sure that we had, in fact, given their body circulating glucose, energy that they might use in the next activity. And the researcher, again, didn't know whether they had just served sugar or Splenda, then we asked people to estimate distance. So we gave some people more energy, or we kept others sort of at whatever their normal level was, and what we found is that those people who didn't even know it but who had been given more energy by drinking Kool-Aid sweetened with sugar, perceived their space as more constricted, that visual illusion of proximity was induced, they felt that their finish line, again, in the context of an exercise task, was closer to them. So in just the same way that these other physiology labs, vision science, physiology labs, found that people who are chronically tired, who don't feel like they have as much energy, or those that are physically weighted down and for whom moving within an environment is more costly, we could create that experience for people. We did an experimental version of that, that if you have more energy, the world looks easier, the distances to a finish line don't look as far. So that was some of the experimental evidence that we had to show that people's states of their body do impact their visual experience. Now, I'm a motivation researcher, so for me, the big question is, well, what's the point of that study then, besides just showing this connection between the body and the eyes and the visual experience? We think that that's fundamental to one of the reasons that people experience difficulty when they're exercising, when it's really harder for your body, because of its physical state, to move within a space, you might say like, "Well, why don't they just go exercise?" Because the world looks harder to them, because that distance that they're supposed to walk because a doctor tells them to, or that a partner encourages them to, or a hill that they should hike up because someone told them that would be good for their health, it looks more challenging to them than it does to somebody who's in better physical health. Now, if it looks that way, if it looks harder, if it feels like it might be harder, then psychologically, we know that it is. When you have set yourself up, psychologically, mentally, for that kind of failure experience, like, "I don't know that I have the resources to get this job, this looks really hard," you're already motivationally in a place for this task to be closer to impossible for you. So to put it all together then, what we know is that people whose bodies might make it more challenging for them to exercise are seeing the world in a more challenging way and that is having these downstream motivational and psychological effects that makes it less likely for them to try to take on the task in the first place or to experience it as harder than other people would or do. - Is the solution the same, however? Meaning, if these people are taught to adjust their visual goal line or to set a visual spotlight on an intermediate goal, can they overcome some of this challenge that they face simply by virtue of their skewed perception? - Yes, so in all of the studies that we have done, looking at that connection between this narrowed focus of attention and improvements in exercise, we do not find that it only works for the people who are in shape or that it backfires for people who are out of shape, it works for everybody. This is a strategy that everybody can adopt, because it's just simply about like, "What do you allocate attentional resources to? What do you sort of ignore, and what do you focus on?" And that visually induces the same kind of illusion for everybody, regardless of whether you're overweight, or you're at your target weight, or if you're struggling to get there, or you've already accomplished where you want to be, that visual illusion can be induced for everybody and it has the same kinds of consequences. - Terrific, earlier I made a joke about double espresso, but now I'll make a serious statement about double espresso, which is that it contains caffeine and caffeine as a stimulant, like all other stimulants, cause a change in our visual world. The most salient one is the one that police officers look for, or parents suspecting that their kids have ingested substances of any kind look for, which is if somebody's pupils are unusually large for a given visual environment, that is an indication of high levels of autonomic arousal. In the street drug translation of this, people who take amphetamine or cocaine will have very big pupils. People who are very relaxed have small pupils. However, everyone should know that pupil size also is dynamically regulated by how bright a visual environment, so there are multiple things controlling pupil size. However, we know that when we are very stressed or very aroused in any way, positive or negative, the pupils get big, but within the visual system, what that equates to is a narrowing of the visual aperture. So rather than ingesting sugar, which I'm guessing most of the world, certainly the US needs to ingest less sugar, at least that's what we're hearing. I'm sure there are a few sugar sucro-nistas out there, sucrose-anistas. [Emily laughing] Who will also come after me with pitchforks, but let's face it, most people will probably be better off ingesting less simple sugar, but caffeine is a great motivator because of the internal sense of arousal, but it also narrows our visual window. I could imagine using healthy amounts of caffeine combined with maybe even blinders of the sort that horses wear, maybe like a hoodie and a hat. [Emily laughing] Maybe even blinders in order to get over some of those more challenging milestones. Is there any evidence that people are doing this without, well, obviously people are doing it without knowledge of how it works, but are there any studies looking at how adrenaline, or epinephrine, or any other stimulants impact motivation? - I don't know, honestly, yeah. - [Andrew] And energy drinks are a big thing now. - Yeah, yeah, for sure, they are, and if you actually are more physiologically aroused, or jazzed, or whatever, amped up, or you just think you are, in our studies, we have found that they work in the same way, that it can produce the same kinds of consequences. And I like that because it tells us you can actually change the state of your body to induce these kinds of experiences, or you can just think that, [laughing] you can trick yourself, you can placebo effect yourself out and produce the same kinds of effects. I had to give up coffee like 12 years ago, and not for any. - I'm so sorry. - I love the taste, [laughing] and so decaf is my jam, but I can't drink the caffeine, because it didn't actually do the thing that it does for so many other people, like make me feel more energized and more awake, I just got sweaty and jittery and anxious and I couldn't focus. - Yeah, some people who already have a fairly high baseline level of attention and motivation, they find that it puts the autonomic seesaw too far in the sympathetic tone. - Yeah. - Yeah. - And I happened to marry the same kind of person, he also can't drink caffeine, but loves the taste of coffee. The interesting thing is that we both have to have coffee in the morning to feel like we're ready to go for the day. So it's just part of our routine [laughing] or whatever, to have that taste and have that sensation to feel like I'm ready to take on the day, even though, I mean, yeah, decaf still has some caffeine in it, but we're not drinking that much of it to probably actually create a caffeinated experience in our body, but we're tricking ourselves psychologically into doing that thing that, in years past, used to work for us both. So I think that's something to keep in mind, like you might have a hoodie that you can wear to induce that visual illusion, or you can take advantage of the power of your mind. At the end of the day, I'm a psychologist, and I believe that we have some non-zero power over what our mind is doing, what we're thinking about, what we allocate our attention to, that can do the same kind of thing that a hoodie might do or that a cup of caffeine might do. - Mm-hmm, I completely agree, the visual aperture is under our conscious control. That's an amazing feature of our visual system, we can narrow or expand it. Takes a little bit of practice, I think, for people to learn how to do this without moving their head around to expand their visual aperture and how to narrow it, but what I always tell people is, "Just imagine a really troubling text message or a really exciting text message coming in, all of a sudden, you forget about the world around you." So it can be triggered by these outside events and we can learn how to anchor our visual attention. I'd love to ask about other kinds of goals, meaning non-physical goals, because many people are trying to read more, I would hope, or learn music, or a language, or things that really involve cognitive goal lines or internal goal lines. Reading one chapter out of a book each night is a tangible goal, the other that I've often wondered about are these systems that allow you to highlight individual lines or even words on a page, that's very visual obviously, and everything else is ruled out except that word, I've always wished for books that would naturally highlight each page. And as I say that, someone will put in the comments, this has probably existed for 10 years. [Emily laughing] And I'm just showing what Luddite I am, but is there any example or tactic that people could use to better approach cognitive goals, of school, work, recreational too, but that don't exist in the kind of fitness and sports domain? - Totally, yeah, so just to shout out to my brother-in-law, who has done some of that research, where it does highlight different parts of words in paragraphs, and he's found it to be an effective way for English-as-a-second-language learners to pick it up, that that is, that tying that vision to the process of learning language is effective. And so there's a whole cool body of work and researchers looking at that, so you're right about that. - If you want to mention what he does, is there a place that people can learn more about that? We can provide links if. - Yeah, let me. Yeah, yeah. [laughing] - Okay, we will provide links to those resources, 'cause I want those resources. - Yeah, yeah. - I've been trying to learn a second language for a long time. - Yeah, cool. - I speak Spanish pretty weakly, but I would love to get better at it. - Oh, yeah. - Okay, I'll approach you later about that. - My five-year-old son speaks Spanish better than I do at this point, so yeah. [laughing] - And clearly, better than I do too, thank you. [laughing] - Yeah, yeah, yeah, so I was thinking that too, we started this work within the context of exercise, but of course, that's not people's only goal that they have in life, and it isn't mine either, I have interests outside of improving my exercise game. A couple years ago, when I was writing the book, I also had a child, the same month that I had the opportunity to pull all this research together is the same month that my son came to be. And I started to realize I became a lot less interesting once he was around, he was fascinating, but I was changing diapers and feeding him and that was it. People would come over, be like, "What's up? How have you been? Tell me something that's going on in your life," and all I had to talk about was what was boring? And I just felt like, "I've lost myself," I used to pride myself on crazy adventures and problems I would get myself in and I was a great storyteller, and that, all of a sudden, disappeared as soon as he came into the world, because he became my world. So then I started thinking, like, "I need to pull back some coolness, if I ever had it in the first place, but I need to be a cooler person than I'm coming across right now," so I decided, "I want to learn to play drums, and I want to be a one-hit wonder as a rockstar drummer. I only want one song, 'cause I know I'm not going to be able to do more than that." I'm not coordinated at all, from the beginning of time, in fifth grade, I have this really vivid flash bulb memory of playing basketball for the very first time, I lost my footing, I knocked into my own teammate, pushed her out of bounds while she had the ball, we lost the game and I was not invited back [laughing] on the team for the next season. And so that fomented my self-definition of uncoordinated. I am a musician, but I am not a drummer, and the idea of coordinating four limbs in real time was like, "If I could do that, I would be so proud." So that's a goal that I set for myself, at the same time that my son came into this world, when I was also trying to think about goal setting and how to improve my ability and all of our ability to get a job done when you're faced with some pretty big obstacles. So I got to practice all these techniques that we're talking about on myself and see for myself, when I tell people, "Hey, try this thing, narrowed focus of attention, does it help with something like becoming a better drummer?" And the answer is yeah, these tactics at least work for me, sometimes, under some circumstances, and they do for other people who try them for other goals that aren't necessarily about exercise. One that I found particularly helpful was overcoming my bad memory, that everybody's memories are faulty, right? Everybody has sort of a warped perception of the past, it might be skewed more positively than maybe we deserve, or it might be skewed more negatively if you feel that what looms large in your mind, as you reflect on something from the past, or the mistakes that you've made, or the social faux pas that you had, or challenges that you faced at work when you got in trouble with a boss or with a colleague, if that's what really stands out in your mind, or the good side of all of those possibilities, we probably aren't getting the world right. And that is something that our brain has evolved, to give us a faulty memory, to level and sharpen, to not encode and remember and be able to recall everything that we've experienced with accuracy and precision. And that's a problem when it comes to assessing our own goal progress. When we want to be our own accountant and try to determine, "How are we doing? If I want to become a drummer, am I on track for getting there before X, before my time runs out? Am I going to make it or not?" And I think that's an experience, whether they want to be a drummer or not, that a lot of people can resonate with, of trying to determine, "Is this trajectory, is this rate of progress going to get the job done by X amount of time? Will I have my swimsuit body by summer?" Or, "Will I save enough for retirement by the time I hit 65?" For these goals where time is involved and there is a deadline, we do take moments to assess our trajectory. And if we just rely on our memory, we're probably going to do a bad job of assessing that trajectory, of knowing whether we're on pace to meeting our deadline. And I found that to be the case as I was thinking about, "Am I actually going to be able to learn this song? I mean, I know that it's going a lot slower than it probably would for anybody else, but to give myself a deadline and a commitment." I decided I was going to put on a show, I was going to invite everybody I knew and also people I didn't know, and I was going to play my one song for them, so. - This was while writing a book and having just had a child. - Yeah, yeah. - Yeah. - So when you read the book, you'll see my story, and it's the real truth of it. I mean, I did play that show and it was fine. And then, because I wrote about it in the book, then some other opportunities to play it publicly have come up. And it's like, "All right, I told people I can play drums, I better show them that I actually still can play this song." - [Andrew] I love it. - Yeah, so that that's been fun. I have become a one-hit wonder, if you ask me to play the song, like, "Encore," it's just going to get that same song a second time, so literally one-hit wonder. But so in the process of figuring out, "Am I going to be able to play this show? I sent out invitations, the date is committed, people are coming to listen to my one song, God bless them, how's it going to go?" And it felt awful, it just felt like, "I am not making progress here," because there's a lot more things that actually are pressing, right? Like the kid does need to get fed, I do have to go to my day job, the editor is asking for the next draft of this book, and that is going to take precedence, like it does for so many people, that things command your bandwidth, even when you have this goal that you've committed to and that you've got on the books. And so I just felt this looming anxiety about this goal that would require, didn't have to be daily practice, but you can't cram that kind of a goal, it does take committed investment for a sustained period of time. And so I had this looming anxiety that I'm not making good enough progress, but that's because I was relying on my memory and my brain to recall, like, "How many times did you practice? What was it like the last time you practiced? What was it like when you tried to play this bit or this riff like two weeks ago, have you gotten any better since then?" And it just felt like, "No, I haven't practiced enough. I don't remember when the last time I played was, but it definitely doesn't feel like I'm getting any better." Then I thought, "You know what? I should stop relying on my brain to tell me, where am I at and am I on an upward slope here? I need to look at the data." I love data, scientists love data, so I started to collect data on myself. What I did was download this app that a friend had told me about called the Reporter App, there's lots of these kinds of things out there. Basically, it just sets up your phone to randomly ping you with whatever questions you want your phone to ask. It records your answers, you can download the data, you can make pretty graphs to see, "What's my change and how I've answered these questions over time?" So I did that for a month, for a month, I had my phone ask me a couple of times a day, well, maybe twice a day really, "Did you practice, since last time I asked you," my phone says, "did you practice?" Mostly it was no, and if yes, then it would funnel a couple of other questions, like, "How did you do, how do you feel? Check a couple of different emotion words now about your experience when you played." And I did that for a month, after a month, went into my office, downloaded the data, and first took stock before I looked at the numbers, like, "How do I think I did over the last month?" And I thought, "Same as every other month, I didn't really get anywhere. Yeah, I practiced, but I still feel awful." And I cried, I cried having to practice. I was upset with myself for setting this goal and feeling so anxious about it. All I remember is that I cried, cried too much about this personal conquest that wouldn't matter to anybody else. Honestly, it really doesn't matter in the scope of things anyway, I'm not going to become a drummer professionally, so who cares if I embarrass myself publicly? But what I found from the data was my memory was totally wrong, I actually had practiced far more times than I remembered, and when I looked at my emotion words that I used, it was a clear upward trajectory. Yeah, I did cry, that part I hadn't misremembered or made up, but by the end of that month, I had gotten a compliment from my husband, who actually is a drummer, and said like, "Hey, that wasn't that bad." And then there was one expletive, "You were effing amazing [laughing] at that one thing you'd been practicing at." But like, "Okay, fine, he's my husband, right, is he just?" So at the moment, it didn't really feel that great, and I downplayed it, and as a result, it didn't stick in my brain, right? I remember how stupid it felt that I cried because I can't make progress, and I downplayed in my mind the thing that actually should've been a legitimate indicator that progress was being made. So all of which is to say, I needed to collect that data on myself and to look at it objectively, accurately and completely, because my brain wasn't doing that for me. That visual experience [laughing] of downloading that data and looking at what was my actual experience gave me better insight as I was trying to assess the trajectory of my progress, I became a more accurate accountant of my own progress, which is important for setting goals or resetting them when you need to calibrate in light of what's left to do and how much time do you have to do it in? - I love it, so basically, if I understand correctly, when the intermediate goals of say daily practice, or twice-a-day practice, or reading, or math, et cetera, are not a visual goal line, it really does help to visualize some aspect related to that non-visual goal line, in this case, the Reporter App was a useful tool. I've never heard of it, I plan to use it, I'm sure a number of people will be interested in it, sounds like there are others out there, but that's the one that you found most useful? - Yeah, yeah, there's another one too that is even more visual than that, [laughing] than the Reporter App, although that has visual components and is really effective if you like data and want to collect numbers on yourself or your experience, there's another one called the 1 Second Everyday app. This is really awesome because the app is a mechanism to record one second of your life. There's such an awesome community of people that just live by this and love having these experiences, and the creator of it I got to a chance to talk with, and he has done this, he's taken a one-second video of some aspect of his life, every day, for, I don't know, 12 years, 13 years or something. - One second? - Yeah, one second. And then what the app does is smash 'em together and give you a chronology of what your year, or your month, or your last decade of life has been like, and presents it as like a streamlined video for you. So you just see these flashes of your life over however long you tell the app to create a montage for you. And so when you see these videos that people have made, especially those that have been doing it for a really long time, it's fascinating. I did that for myself too, I tried it, one second of today's drumming performance, another second, it's not enough to capture, "Am I actually doing a good job of drumming?" or, "What's my trajectory for drumming?" But the guy who made it says one of the most awesome one-second videos that he ever made is of a brick wall. I was like, "Well, you didn't need a video of that, what's the wall doing?" It's not crumbling, it's not in earthquake land or something like that, it's just slightly jittery, one second of a brick wall. And I was like, "How is that motivating or exciting to you, why is that? You've been doing this for 13 years every day, one second, why is that the one second that matters to you most?" And he says, "Because when it comes up in my montage, it reminds me of a really horrific moment in my family. That was the first wall that I saw when I walked out of the room having heard that my sister-in-law had this awful, awful experience, her intestines started to twist up on themselves and knot up, and she was on the brink of death. And we had just found this out, she had just gotten into the hospital, they diagnosed this issue that required immediate surgery. And our family was there to hear about this, and we were all stunned that she might die, like, 'Right now, she might die.' And that's the first thing that I saw, and it reminds me of how precious life is, how important family is and how the rest of whatever we were doing that day didn't matter, because we all needed to be here together right now." And that is all of this emotion and purpose in life is conjured up or reminded when he looks at one second of a brick wall as it pops into his video feed. So if you're visually oriented and you do want ways to remember, "What was life like, what has my year in review, what does it look like?" that's an awesome app, 1 second Everyday, that can help you do that. - These are great recommendations. And a couple of reflections, first of all, the brick wall example is a beautiful way of highlighting this other feature of the visual system, which is that the brain largely thinks in symbols, it's very efficient, it batches entire experiences into symbols, and in this case, the brick wall can be attached to a whole set of experiences that are very meaningful to this individual, that brick walls don't mean that, or didn't mean that to me until hearing this. So I think that it highlights the fact that the actual symbol is less relevant than what we attach to that symbol, but that symbols are so efficient that even in a one-second view of something, we can attach to it, for better or for worse. The other is that I'm a absolute, almost rabid proponent of people getting morning sunlight in their eyes as the fundamental layer of setting their circadian rhythms and sleep and health as a zero-cost practice, that believe it or not, can be done any time of year, or anywhere. [Emily laughing] But it does take a little bit of effort, you have to get outside, you can't do it through a window or a windshield for it to be efficient, but it has huge outsize effects on human health, this has now been demonstrated again and again and again. And so I'm going to just do a sort of call to action, if people aren't already doing this, I'm going to start using the 1 Second app to record my morning sunlight viewing, and prove that even through cloud cover, you're getting more photons than you are indoors and that it's worthwhile. I also would love to do this for my next dog, to go from puppy to full-size dog, and maybe even to the end, who knows? Great, these are wonderful tools, you've given us a huge number of practical tools, which, frankly, isn't always the case on these podcasts. We always strive to do science and science-based tools as our kind of mantra, but you've given a rich set of tools here to apply. I just want to briefly backtrack to something, and then a final question. Earlier, we were talking about how unfit people see the world as more challenging, maybe even hills as steeper, distances as further, and how shifting people into a state of energy, either cognitively or through the ingestion of real glucose to get an energetic lift, or maybe through caffeine if that's within their practice and span of healthy behaviors, they could do that. There's so many people who are suffering from depression, which one of the key features of depression is a lack of energy, even though there can be an anxiety associated with depression, I have to wonder whether or not some of these tools are being deployed or will be deployed in the context of mental health, because depression is this vicious loop, right? People feel a lack of energy and hopelessness, and then things just look harder, and so then it just verifies their negative worldview and it's a downward spiral. That's why medication, in some cases, and social sport, et cetera, can be helpful, because they feel more energized, the side effects, often, are a problem, however. Have there been any efforts to implement some of these visual tools to create this increase in systolic blood pressure and a kind of readiness and willingness to lean into what people perceive as immense challenge? And if not, for anyone listening, I know we have a lot of listeners in the mental health space and in the helping space, so to speak, I can imagine these are zero cost, right? We all provide, with people that are sighted, have the apparati to do it. Are you aware of any studies like this or is your laboratory involved in any studies? 'Cause I just see an immense value of implementing the sorts of tools that you've developed. - Yeah, we haven't explored those ideas directly. So call to all the scientists that are out there, there's a great opportunity to start looking at these tools within the mental health space, you're right. Other researchers though have, not this use of inducing a narrowed attentional focus and can they now feel more energized to go for a run? But they have looked at the relationship between anxiety, depression and visual experience, and found, over decades, evidence that people with depression or with anxiety, what their attention is captured by within the bigger global surrounding world are those things that are negative or reinforcing of their worldview. Now, that happens for everybody, that things that are on our mind tend to pop out, [laughing] that whatever we're thinking about, we might start seeing some version of it showing up in the world around us that captures our attention. That's an idea called priming, what we're thinking about might then lead us to attend to the world, to see things in a way that aligns with what we're already thinking about, it's just that when what we're thinking about are those depressive, ruminative, anxiety, fearful thoughts, when that is what is cognitively accessible, when that's what's going through our mind, then that's also what captures our visual gaze. So when we think like, "The world is hard, the world is full of sadness," and that's the thought in our mind, and then we start seeing the people with frowns on their faces or who are experiencing anxiety, and that's what captures our attention, even when there's other people around that might not be seeing the world or experiencing the world that way, it becomes reinforcing. When I think that the world is threatening, and then I notice the threats that are around me, that confirms what I'm thinking, which heightens my anxiety or my fear, and then it further leads me to narrowly focus on those elements of the environment that are aligned with that worldview, it's really hard to get out of that, that's where the vicious cycle can come from. So that has been really well established within the medical community, this selective attention relating to states of mental unwellness, that's been pretty well established. And so there's been some interventions done with people that have depression or anxiety, saying like, "Here's an array, a photograph of a bunch of different faces. Yes, it's artificial, it kind of looks like a page from a yearbook, a high school yearbook, but look for the faces that are smiling, look at the faces that are smiling. Try right now, spend 10 minutes having your eyes focus on those and look at those people," that it is an effective intervention at improving [sighing] people's sense of self-efficacy, of, "What can I accomplish next?" They feel a little bit more energized. It doesn't cure depression, it doesn't cure anxiety. I mean, these are literal physical afflictions that we have, so it's not a quick fix, but it can produce a temporary change that might be a way to start getting out of that rut. - Mm-hmm, yeah, and I think nowadays there's an increasing attention on tools that will help people orient as they start to veer towards suicidal depression, or veer back into a depressive episode, or anxiety episode. I mean, trying to reverse an entire syndrome or set of syndromes is far more complicated. Likewise, in the health space, just trying to get people to deploy realtime tools to adjust their anxiety or to exercise more often and so on. As a kind of a final, but also kind of a high-level question, I'm imagining that, and I plan to use this visual goal setting of spotlighting, I've been using it actually for some time on runs, it works really well. Yesterday, I took a run near the waterfront here, and I think I did it somewhat incorrectly, the entire run, I was thinking about getting back to the statue, at which I started. - [laughing] Yeah. - But I did find that I ran fastest in the final 20 meters. - Cool. - Which, admittedly, wasn't fast at all, but it was faster than what preceded it. [Emily laughing] So it works and it makes perfect sense as to how it works. You've done other studies exploring some of the other features of vision, like the luminosity, how bright something is and how people perceive it. That was in a completely different context, but is there a kind of a higher level, a kind of a black belt version of what we're talking about here, where not only am I focusing on a specific visual location as an intermediate or a long-term goal, or I'm using an app to ask me a question and tap into how I'm feeling, create a visual representation of my motivational state, but that I'm also making my phone as bright as possible, I'm also trying to take that visual window and actually pay attention to more of the details at that location? Or is it simply a matter of kind of, in geek speak, visual neuroscience, we would just call this like low spatial frequency, just sort of grabbing a black and white snapshot of something here or there in my mind? If I attach more detail and effort to the specific thing that I'm focused on, is there any evidence that that's more effective? - It certainly changes what our brains are doing, [laughing] so how do we define effectiveness? That's a question for philosophers and that scientists will always debate. - Will it keep me running? - Yeah. [laughing] [Andrew laughing] It will when you use it towards the end of your run, just like you've picked up on. Yeah, so there's cool studies that neuroscientists, not I, not coming from my lab, that neuroscientists have done looking at, "What is it doing to your brain when you've decided that you're going to focus your attention on this element of the world and not pay attention to something else? Is that just sort of tricking your thoughts or is it doing something different, to something more basic, more low level?" And the answer is yes, so there's an area of the brain, the fusiform face area, it's a part of our brain that's really specialized for making sense of faces. It's important as a social species to pay attention to other people, pay attention to their faces, what they're trying to communicate through their face, and so our brain has developed a really specialized central area for doing that then. And so these neuroscientists will present a face to somebody, but superimposed over that is a house or something else that is less special [laughing] to us as a social human species. And so both of those things, because it's sort of like both images are sort of transparent, overlaid over one another, our eyes are getting both of those images in and our brain is getting both of those images in, but we can will ourselves to focus on the house. "Just really pay attention to the features of the house, even though everything about that face is still there too," or, "Pay attention to the face and just tell me, what is it that you are deciding that you want to hold on to, that you want to look at right now?" And you can see that the brain is responding to that, so when people are saying like, "I'm really seeing that face, the details of the face, 'cause I'm paying attention to the face," even though we know their eyes are also looking at and engaged with the contents of the house that's right there, smacked on top, the fusiform face area lights up. And when they're saying like, "Nah, I'm really focused on the house now," we see activation in the fusiform face area decline and other areas of the brain's neurological real estate start to engage. So yeah, I think there's something to it, that, at a high level, our brains are responding to our psychology as well. And we have that great power to really, with intention, with practice, decide, "How do I want to engage with the world?" And can it produce real change in our bodies and in the way that we experience the world? The answer is yes. - Fantastic, well, you've given us a ton of mechanistic and conceptual and practical information, so I'm speaking for a lot of people when I say thank you for taking the time out of your schedule, amidst kids and running a lab and teaching at the university and your book, which we will point people to and provide a link to, as a wonderful resource, and we hope to have you back again. - Thank you so much, it was a great conversation. - Thank you. - Thanks. - Thank you for joining me today for our discussion about motivation, goal seeking and research-supported tools for achieving your goals with Dr. Emily Balcetis. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel, that's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify, and on both Apple and Spotify, you can leave us up to a five-star review. Please leave us any comments, or suggestions, or ideas for future guests, or questions about particulars of any podcast episode in the comment section on YouTube, we do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, and check out Athletic Greens, that's the best way to support this podcast. In addition, please check out our Neural Network Newsletter, that is a zero-cost newsletter available to anyone, you just provide an email and we do not share your email with anybody, you simply go to hubermanlab.com, you go to the menu, you look for the Neural Network Newsletter. And by signing up for the newsletter, you can get summaries of podcast episodes, detailed lists of protocols related to podcast episodes, again, all zero cost, we don't share your information, and if you'd like to see examples of previous newsletters, they are also available on our website, hubermanlab.com. If you're not already following us on social media, we are Huberman Lab on both Twitter and Instagram. There, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the contents of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, it's Huberman Lab on Instagram and Huberman Lab on Twitter. And as mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, we are now partnered with Momentous supplements, because they make single-ingredient formulations that are of the absolute highest quality, and they ship international. If you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you will find many of the supplements that have been discussed on various episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, and you will find various protocols related to those supplements. So thank you once again for joining us today for our discussion about the science and science-related tools of motivation, goal seeking and pursuit, and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 265 ---
Video ID: m_OazsImOiI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m_OazsImOiI
Title: The Science & Treatment of Bipolar Disorder | Huberman Lab Podcast #82
Published: 2022-07-25 12:00:37 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the biology, symptoms, causes and types of bipolar disorder (sometimes called bipolar depression). I discuss neuroplasticity and how the brain normally regulates mood, energy, and perceptions; then, I contrast that with the biology of bipolar disorder, which is characterized by extremes of energy and mood, e.g., mania and depression. I outline the mechanisms through which bipolar disorder manifests in the brain, including deficits of interoception and reduced connections between the parietal and limbic systems. I also outline how treatment options (such as lithium) work in part through homeostatic plasticity.’ I discuss not only lithium but also the treatment of bipolar with ketamine, different talk therapies, electroconvulsive therapy, transcranial magnetic stimulation, and nutraceuticals, including Omega-3 and Inositol supplementation. This episode should interest anyone who has or knows someone with bipolar disorder and, more broadly, those interested in how the brain works to create a balance between thoughts, energy levels, focus, and mood. 

#HubermanLab #Bipolar #BipolarDisorder

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman
Blinkist: https://www.blinkist.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Full show notes & links to peer-reviewed articles: https://hubermanlab.com/the-science-and-treatment-of-bipolar-disorder

Timestamps
00:00:00 Bipolar Disorder 
00:02:23 Momentous Supplements 
00:03:42 Tool: Appetite Suppression & GLP-1, Parallel Pathways, Yerba Mate
00:10:23 InsideTracker, ROKA, Blinkist
00:14:24 Prevalence & Severity of Bipolar Disorder
00:16:30 Bipolar Disorder I, Diagnostic Criteria of Mania 
00:28:58 Bipolar Disorder II, Individual Variability 
00:33:07 Bipolar I vs. Bipolar II: Manic, Depressive & Symptom-Free States
00:38:20 Consequences of Bipolar Disorder, Heritability
00:46:53 Bipolar Disorder vs. Borderline Personality Disorder
00:51:51 Mania & Depression, Negative Impacts 
00:53:06 History of Lithium Treatment 
01:02:44 Lithium Treatment & Side-Effects
01:05:05 Effects of Lithium: BDNF, Anti-inflammatory & Neuroprotection
01:10:10 Neural Circuits of Bipolar Disorder, Interoception, Hyper- vs. Hypoactivity
01:17:11 Neural States & Mania, Parietal Lobe & Limbic System
01:22:58 Homeostatic Plasticity, Synaptic Scaling, Lithium & Ketamine
01:36:00 Talk Therapies: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Family-Focused Therapy, Interpersonal & Social Rhythm Therapy 
01:43:18 Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT), Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) 
01:48:01 Psylocibin, Cannabis 
01:51:50 Lifestyle Support, Supplements: Inositol & Omega-3 Fatty Acids 
02:03:31 Omega-3s, Membrane Fluidity & Neuroplasticity 
02:06:44 Mania, Creativity & Occupations 
02:15:33 Bipolar Disorder: Diagnosis, Neural Circuits & Treatment
02:17:45 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat rock music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are going to be discussing bipolar disorder, often called bipolar depression. Bipolar depression is a condition in which people undergo massive shifts in their energy, their perception, and their mood. However, it is very important to note that these shifts in mood, energy, and perception are all maladaptive. They can often cause tremendous damage to the person suffering from bipolar disorder and tremendous damage to the people in their lives. Today we are going to parse the biology that leads to these shifts in mood, energy, and perception. And we are going to talk about the various treatments that exist. Some of those treatments have been around for a very long time, and indeed one of those treatments, lithium, has an incredible backstory about its discovery and in understanding how lithium works and some of the ways in which it does not work well, it reveals a tremendous amount about how the brain works normally in all individuals. So that's a miraculous story that I look forward to sharing with you. As we go forward in this discussion about bipolar disorder, I want everyone to keep in mind that it is a very severe condition. In fact, people suffering from bipolar disorder are at 20 to 30 times greater risk of suicide. So today is a serious discussion and it's certainly one in which people who are suffering from manic bipolar disorder or who know people that are suffering from manic bipolar disorder can benefit from. However, for those of you that might know people or who themselves suffer from major depression, we will also be talking about important treatment developments for major depression. Major depression is a very common thing for many people. In fact, most people will suffer from depression of some sort at some point in their life, although not necessarily a major depressive episode, and yet major depression is very common. So you'll soon learn up to 20% of people will suffer from major depression. So today's discussion will encompass all of that. And it will also encompass basic brain mechanisms of neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience both for good and for worse. And you'll learn a lot about the basic biology of how the brain regulates mood, energy, and perception. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. We often talk about supplements on the Huberman Lab Podcast and while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing the quality and speed with which you get into sleep, or for enhancing focus or for hormone support. The reason we partnered with Momentous Supplements is several fold. First of all, their supplements are of the absolute highest quality. Second of all, they ship internationally which is important because many of our podcast listeners reside outside the US. Third, many of the supplements that Momentous makes and most all of the supplements that we partnered with them directly on are single ingredient formulations. This is important for a number of reasons. First of all, if you're going to create a supplement protocol that's customized for your needs, you want to be able to figure out which supplement ingredients are most essential and only use those and supplements that combine lots of ingredients simply won't allow you to do that. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partnered with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman, and there you'll see many of the supplements that we've talked repeatedly about on the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes. I should mention that the catalog of supplements that are available at livemomentous.com/Huberman is constantly being expanded So you can check back there, livemomentous.com/huberman to see what's currently available. And from time to time, you'll notice new supplements being added to the inventory. Before we dive into the discussion about manic bipolar disorder, I want to highlight some recent findings in an area totally separate from mental health that I think are really important for everyone to know about. This is a paper published in the journal Cell, which is a Cell Press Journal, an excellent journal. In fact, one of the three apex journals. So for those of you that are curious, papers published in the journal Nature, Science and Cell are considered the sort of Super Bowl, Stanley Cup, and NBA championships of publishing. And this paper entitled, an inter-organ neural circuit for appetite suppression illustrates a very important principle that I think everyone should know about, and that's the principle of so-called parallel pathways. Parallel pathways, as the name suggests, are pathways, they could be neural pathways or hormonal pathways or otherwise that operate independently of one another to accomplish a common goal. And what this paper really shows is that there's a set of peptides in the body and the peptide that I'm referring to today is called GLP-1, Glucagon-like peptide-1, and some related peptides. I've talked about these on the podcast before for two reasons. First of all, I'm a big proponent and consumer of yerba mate. Yerba mate is a tea that can promote the release of glucagon-like peptide-1. And there are also new prescription drugs that are now hitting the market. And for which there are really impressive clinical trials for diabetes and obesity that are essentially glucagon-like peptide-1 stimulator, so they stimulate the release of that, or they are in fact, a synthetic version of glucagon-like peptide-1. what is glucagon-like peptide-1? It is a peptide, which is a small little protein, that can dramatically suppress appetite. So that's why these drugs are being explored and are showing quite impressive results for things like treatment of type 2 diabetes and other forms of diabetes, as well as obesity. So they lead to weight loss. Now in terms of the yerba mate stimulation of glucagon-like peptide-1, that's going to be a much lower amount of glucagon-like peptide-1 that's released from drinking yerba mate as opposed to say, taking a drug that stimulates GLP-1 or taking a drug that is GLP-1. Nonetheless, should also point out that yerba mate comes in a bunch of different forms. There is some concern about certain smokey-flavored forms of yerba mate being carcinogenic, so that's why I avoid those forms of yerba mate. But for me, yerba mate is one of the preferred sources of caffeine. For me, I like the way it tastes. It does provide that sort of caffeine kick that I like to have early in the day for focus and for work and for exercise. And yet I actively avoid the smoked varieties of yerba mate because of the potential carcinogenic effects of the smoked varieties. Glucagon-like peptide-1, as I mentioned earlier, can suppress appetite. But what this paper shows is it does that by at least two mechanisms through parallel pathways. What this paper shows is that glucagon-like peptide-1 axon receptors in the body in a portion of the nervous system called the enteric nervous system, E-N-T-E-R-I-C, enteric nervous system. This is a component of your nervous system that you don't really have control over, it's autonomic or automatic. GLP-1 binds to what are called intestinofugal enteric neurons, you don't need to know the name, but those neurons do two things. First of all, they cause some gut distension, so they actually make you feel full. This is incredible, right? A peptide, not actual physical food, but a peptide that stimulates neurons that cause changes in the so-called mechanoreceptors of the gut, of the enteric nervous system and make people feel full. So it can lead to actually mild, or I suppose if levels of GLP-1 are very high, to major gut distension. I think that the levels of GLP-1 that would come from drinking yerba mate and hopefully from appropriate dosaging of the synthetic forms of GLP-1 or drugs that stimulate GLP-1 would cause mild, not major, gut distension, 'cause major gut distension would be uncomfortable. So GLP-1 is acting at the level of gut to increase gut distension, and by way of a pathway that goes from the gut up to the hypothalamus, this little cluster of neurons about the size of a marble that sits above the roof of your mouth, is also suppressing appetite through brain mechanisms. So this is really beautiful, right? You have a peptide, a small little protein that's released in the gut and that release within the gut causes gut distension, which makes you feel full. And by way of neural stimulation of the hypothalamus also activates neural pathways within the brain that trigger satiety, the feeling of having had enough food. So to me, GLP-1 is both impressive and important. Why? Because this recent category of drugs that's now hitting the market seems to adjust obesity or can help people with weight loss in order to help their health. And it's doing so by at least two mechanisms. One is within the brain, and the other is within the gut and communication through the so-called gut brain access. Because again, these enteric neurons are communicating to the brain, the hypothalamus, by way of this, what's called the sympatho-gastro-spinal-reticular-hypothalamic pathway, you absolutely do not need to know all of that. That's a mouthful, that's enough to make your mouth feel distended. But at the same time, things like yerba mate, and I'm sure there are other compounds out there as well, but certainly yerba mate can stimulate the release of GLP-1. So for those of you that are looking for some mild appetite suppression and want to accomplish that while also ingesting caffeine, yerba mate might be a good option for that. And just know that it's operating through two mechanisms, on the body through mild gut distension to make you feel full, and on the brain to increase satiety and make you feel less hungry. And then for everybody, not just those that are interested in appetite suppression, I think it's important to understand that these parallel pathways are fundamental to how we are organized. Another good example of this would be when we are excited by something positive or negative, so it could be stressful or we are positively aroused, there is a parallel activation of epinephrine, adrenaline, both from your adrenals and from an area in the brain called the locus coeruleus. So again and again, we see this in biology and in neuroscience that your brain and your body are acting in concert. They're acting together through mechanisms that either are independent, so separately in the brain and separately in the body, but directed towards a common goal, or through communication between brain and body, and almost always that communication is going to be bidirectional, body to brain and brain to body. So I think these results are really interesting and really important for sake of weight loss, for sake of appetite suppression, and just generally for the way that they illustrate this very important theme of the way that we are constructed at a biological level which is parallel pathways. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insight into, for instance, what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological age. And of course your biological age is the one that's important for your longevity and your understanding of your current health needs. One major problem with most blood tests and DNA tests out there however, is that you get information back about levels of metabolic factors, levels of hormones and lipids and so forth, but you don't know exactly what to do with that information. InsideTracker solves that problem through their personalized platform which can tell you, for instance, lifestyle factors like fitness or nutrition or supplementation that you can use to bring the numbers into the ranges that are ideal for your health needs. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with a number of very important challenges in order for you to see clearly. The designers of ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses understand this and for that reason, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses allow you, for instance, to move from a shady area to a bright area or from a bright area to a shady area and still see everything with crystal clarity. Originally, their glasses and sunglasses were designed for performance, that is for running and cycling, and as a consequence, the eyeglasses and sunglasses stay on your face even if you get sweaty and they're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I don't even realize that they're on my face. I wear ROKA eyeglasses for reading and for driving at night and I wear their sunglasses when I'm out during the day and it's really bright and I need to use sunglasses in order to be able to navigate in that bright sunlight. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist. Blinkist is an app that has thousands of nonfiction books condensed town to just 15 minutes each of key takeaways that you can read or listen to. I'm a big believer in reading physical books, I actually own a lot of hard cover books and paperback books and I like holding them my hand and flipping through the pages. I also like listening to audiobooks. But the reality is I don't have a ton of time to read books and I don't have a lot of time to listen to entire audiobooks. There are also a lot of books that I've really enjoyed in the past that I have read in their entirety but then I like to update myself on the information on every once in a while. Blinkist has terrific books available. For instance, I'm a big fan of Tim Ferris's 4-Hour Body, gleaned So much knowledge from that book. Also from Nassim Taleb's book, The Black Swan and the great Matt Walker's book, Why We Sleep, which is a book that I've read several times and I actually listen to the synopsis of on Blinkist over and over because there's so many key takeaways. With Blinkist you get unlimited access to read or listen to a massive library of condensed non-fiction books, essentially all of the books that you ever wanted to listen to, and now you have time because they're condensed down to just 15 minutes each. Right now, Blinkist has a special offer just for Huberman Lab Podcast listeners. If you go to blinkist.com/huberman, you can get a free seven-day trial and you can get 20% off a Blinkist premium membership. That's Blinkist spelled B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T, blinkist.com/huberman to get 25% off and a seven-day free trial. Let's talk about bipolar disorder. And today I'm going to refer to bipolar disorder interchangeably with bipolar depression, although as you will soon learn, not everyone with bipolar disorder necessarily goes through highs and lows. There is a subset of people who suffer from bipolar disorder who experience the manic phases, the highly elevated mood and energy, and then drop down to so-called baseline, so they don't necessarily go down into a depressive state. They often will return to a somewhat normal state. In fact, we will talk about the percentage of time that people with bipolar disorder tend to be symptom-free manic or depressed in the context of the different categories of bipolar disorder. But as we wade into this topic that is bipolar disorder, I just want to give you a little bit of the background statistics to anchor us in just how serious and prevalent bipolar disorder is. So bipolar disorder impacts about 1% of people, that might seem like a small percentage, but if you think about a room of a hundred people, that means that at least one of them is very likely to have bipolar disorder. And as I mentioned earlier in the introduction, bipolar disorder is very serious. It has a 20 to 30% greater incidence of suicide than the general population, which is, first of all, extremely tragic and extremely concerning. So anyone that thinks they might have bipolar disorder or who knows someone with bipolar disorder should be especially vigilant about this. And we'll talk about some of the, or signs and risk factors, age of onset, et cetera, as we move forward. So 1% of people have bipolar disorder. The typical age of onset is anywhere from 20 to 25 years old, although it can be much earlier. And the earlier the onset of a bipolar episode, which we will define in a few minutes, the earlier the onset of that episode, the higher likelihood that the bipolar disorder is going to be a stable feature of that person's psychology going forward. And yet, I also want to point out that there are some very good treatments for bipolar disorder that those people could still benefit from. There are basically two kinds of bipolar disorder referred to as bipolar 1 and bipolar 2. So let's just talk about bipolar 1 first. Bipolar 1 is characterized by a fairly extended period of mania. What is mania? Mania is a period of very elevated mood, energy, distractibility, impulsivity, and some other symptomology that we'll talk about going forward. But this manic episode is extreme. This is a condition in which the energy lift, the mood lift, and the sort of impulsivity and actions and words of the person suffering from manic bipolar disorder are very noticeable and very extreme. Now a key thing, however, is that it's not always noticeable to the person suffering from it that they are in this mode. Sometimes they recognize that, sometimes they don't, but it's always highly recognizable to other people that the person suffering from manic bipolar disorder is not like other people. So let's talk about bipolar 1 in a little bit more depth. One of the key clinical criteria or diagnostic criteria for bipolar 1 is that a person suffer from these manic episodes or display these manic episodes for seven days or more. That turns out to be very key. The stability of that manic episode for seven days or more turns out to be very important. And for those seven days, the person is in an elevated mood, expansive thought all day, every day for those seven days. Now there are a lot of reasons why somebody could be in a manic mode. It doesn't necessarily mean that somebody has bipolar disorder. In fact, someone could be in a manic mode for seven days or more and still not be diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Why? Well, there are other things that can create manic episodes, things like traumatic brain injury, things like seizure, things like various prescription drugs or illicit drugs, things like amphetamine and cocaine, that is not the same as bipolar disorder even though from a symptomology perspective, they might look even identical. So let's think about these symptoms and the diagnostic criteria that a psychiatrist would use in order to ask whether or not someone is manic because they have manic by bipolar disorder or whether or not that person is manic for some other reason, such as traumatic brain injury, illicit drugs, et cetera. So typically a person would be brought into a clinic or a person would bring themselves to a clinic or meet with a psychiatrist, it seems more likely that they would be directed toward a psychiatrist because oftentimes people who are in a manic episode just simply won't have the perspective or the foresight to bring themselves into the clinic. And the psychiatrist is going to start to evaluate for a couple of different things. But first of all, what they're going to try and figure out is whether or not the person has at least three of the following symptoms. The first symptom is distractibility. Is the person distractable? Are they going from one thing to the next. People who are in a manic episode will be talking about a pen and then they'll be talking about something they saw the other day and then something they want to purchase and then a place they're going to travel to, et cetera, but they are also very prone to any stimulus within the room. Meaning a bell could go off or there could be a sound out in the hallway and they'll orient to that. And then they'll orient to the clinician and then they'll orient to something in their pocket, so they're all over the place. You could think of this a little bit like ADHD or attention-deficit disorder, but it's very extreme. So highly distractable, highly impulsive, impulsivity relates to actions. So the person might be fidgeting with something and then they might try and leave the room or the person might, if they were out in the real world, somebody might notice that the person is going and purchasing multiples of something that would be unusual for someone to purchase. So for instance, I happen to know someone whose ex-spouse had bipolar disorder and their ex-spouse went out and bought 10 plus air fryers. I mean, I think unless you're a restaurant that's using a lot of air fryers, the idea that you would need more than one or two air fryers might just seem a little bit out of the norm. And so that impulsivity can be purchasing, it can be other things as well. It can be booking 12 international trips in one afternoon or going and buying three cars, et cetera. So impulsivity. the other is grandiosity. People who have manic bipolar disorder who are in a manic episode will often display words of or actions of grandiosity. And keep in mind, these are not lies in the sense that the person isn't lying in order to try and pull one over on anybody, these are actual beliefs that the person comes to have about their grandiose position in the world or grandiose opportunities or potential in the world. Typical forms of grandiosity and manic episodes would be that the person suddenly decides that they are going to win a Pulitzer Prize. They are the person selected to win a Pulitzer Prize. They're going to write a novel that afternoon, and they're going to win a Pulitzer Prize that year, which is more or less a delusion of grandeur. The idea that someone could do that in one afternoon, I suppose it is possible in the realm of all possibilities, but it's extremely unlikely. Other forms of grandiosity that often present themselves in people suffering from a manic episode will be that they're going to run for president or that they are the person that they believe is selected by the citizens of a given country or by the universe to be the president of that country or to be present of the universe. It sounds ridiculous, but those sorts of delusions of grandiosity are one condition that often presents itself, or one set of symptoms that presents itself. Flight of ideas are also typical of manic episodes. So this is a little bit like distractibility, but this would be people talking extensively about one thing and then switching and talking extensively about something else. It would be as if I was doing this podcast talking about manic bipolar disorder and then suddenly switching to OCD and then to deliberate cold exposure and then to the role of sugar and its impact on the brain, et cetera. So essentially a random selection of the different topics that exist in science, all of which I happen to be very interested in and curious about, but just as we have episodes of the podcast that are about one or two topics, and we focus on those in a fairly narrow trench of discussion, somebody who has a flight of ideas would be jumping between categories and topics in a kind of pseudo random way. So they might take off down a path of one thing and then switch to another without any transition or with transitions that that don't have any logical structure to them. The other aspect of manic bipolar disorder that often presents itself in the manic episodes are agitation. People feeling extremely physically agitated, so a lot of shaking and moving about. This can venture into the realm of paranoia, but a lot of agitation, a difficulty sitting down and being still, a difficulty in just looking, feeling and acting calm. And then another condition is no sleep. And when I say no sleep, I mean no sleep or very minimal sleep. As incredible as it sounds, people who are in a manic episode can often go seven days or more with zero sleep. And a key feature of this zero sleep is that they're not troubled by it. They're not thinking, oh, I'm suffering from insomnia and I really, really want to sleep. Sometimes that's the case, but more often than not, they are simply not sleeping. They're staying up 24 hours then another 24 hours, it just continues for an entire week. Again, inconceivable to those of us that don't suffer from manic episodes. I can only imagine how pulled apart most of us would feel under those conditions, and yet they are just going and going and going with no sleep, up all hours, shopping, talking, running, doing all sorts of different things in the categories of other symptoms that we talked about before. And it doesn't bother them that they're not sleeping. And then the last sort of category of symptoms that the psychiatrist is evaluating for and seeing if they present is rapid pressured speech. The rapid pressured speech is something that when you hear it, you recognize it. This is somebody that almost seems to be hitting you with speech like machine gun fire, it's coming at you, coming at you, coming at you and there's really no room for conversation. They're not offering any opportunity for a back and forth, or if there is a back and forth, they might ask you how you feel about something and then you started, well, I, [speaking gibberish] then they're going to hit you with another barrage or a paragraph of information or of just speech, that pseudo random. So we've got distractibility, impulsivity, grandiosity, flight of ideas, agitation, no sleep, and rapid pressured speech. For someone to be diagnosed as in a manic episode, they do not have to be engaging in or displaying all of those symptoms. They do however need to present at least three of those symptoms, and then in order to meet the condition of bipolar 1, they have to be presenting those three symptoms for at least seven days. It could be longer, but at least seven days. Now, this seems pretty straightforward, right? At one level, the way that I describe this and the way that it exists in the clinical literature, you could think, well, this should be pretty easy to diagnose. And yet there's a complication there or a challenge there because the psychiatrist, again, has to determine that these manic episodes are not due to something other than bipolar disorder. For instance, again, it could be TBI, traumatic brain injury, it could be seizures, or meds or other sorts of drugs. Corticosteroids, which are often prescribed for a number of immune conditions or for wound healing can also cause manic episodes. So they have to determine that everything that's happening meets the criteria I described before, three out of seven of these symptom categories for seven days or more and that it can't be better explained by something else going on in that person's life or immediate medical history. That's very important. Now, the other challenge, and this is something that's going to come up again and again today, not just in the description of the biology of bipolar disorder, but also the description of different treatments and treatment approaches, is that typically, when somebody is sitting in front of a psychiatrist, in particular for the first time those two people are interacting, the psychiatrist is just getting one snapshot of the person at that moment. So the person could be on day one of a manic episode, the person might be on day six of a manic episode, the person could be transitioning out of a manic episode, or the person could be suffering from a combination of manic episode where, because of the impulsivity of bipolar disorder, they went out and used illicit drugs. They also used cocaine. So the psychiatrist has a serious challenge. The psychiatrist has to determine based on a conversation, this isn't a blood test, this isn't a measurement that you can take on a scale or with a biomarker, they have to use language, a conversation with somebody who, by all accounts, is pretty impaired at conversation to determine whether or not they're suffering from a manic episode that is the consequence of bipolar disorder. You can imagine this in the real world, as somebody says, well, how long has it been since you slept? And the person starts to answer, oh, well, the other day I went down to the basement. I was going to get something out of the refrigerator and I thought I might take a nap. And then all of a sudden they're talking about something completely different. So they might not even have an answer. So the psychiatrist has to be a really good detective, a benevolent detective, but a detective nonetheless in determining whether or not these symptoms have existed for seven days or more, and whether or not they meet the, at least three, it could be more, but at least three of the criteria of symptom categories I talked about before. Now, assuming that they do, assuming that the patient meets those criteria, they are likely to be diagnosed with bipolar 1. Now bipolar 1 disorder means they're having these extended manic episodes, seven days or more, but it does not necessarily mean that they are dropping into a depressive episode as well. This is a common misconception about bipolar disorder because as it's often called, bipolar disorder is referred to as bipolar depression, and yet many people with bipolar disorder don't necessarily experience the deep depressive episodes. Many of them do, but many of them do not. So somebody can truly be diagnosed accurately with bipolar one, even though they're only experiencing manic episodes and then dropping down to baseline. Manic episode, then dropping down to baseline. That's very important to understand. Now, the second category of bipolar disorder is bipolar 2. So BP-II or bipolar disorder 2 is somewhat different than bipolar disorder 1. First of all, it's characterized most often by the presence of both manic episodes, mania, and depressive episodes, or what's referred to as hypomania. Now, anytime in biology or in medicine you hear hypo, it's the opposite of hyper. So we've got normal hyper and hypo. Hypomania is a somewhat suppressed level of mania. So this is not going to be as extreme as the mania that we typically think of. And yet the hypo can be due to the duration, not the intensity of mania. That's right. Hypomania can mean a lessened intensity of mania, but it can also be used to refer to a shorter duration of mania. And in fact, that's one of the key criteria for bipolar 2. Bipolar 2 is often diagnosed on the basis of the presence of manic episodes that are lasting four days or even less. So someone with BP-II might have four days of this increased energy, goal-directed activity, they're irritable, they're euphoric, they're not sleeping, et cetera, but it's only lasting for about four days. Or they could be having longer extended periods of mania, but they are hypomanic episodes. They're not quite as intense so the pressured speech isn't quite as pressured. The impulsivity isn't quite as severe, et cetera, et cetera. The other aspect of bipolar 2 is one that I had mentioned briefly a moment ago, which is that it's often associated with the drops into the depressive episode. So people are going from manic episodes for four days or less, then they're dropping into a depression, going back to normal, manic again. I do want to point out however that people who have bipolar 1 can indeed go from manic episodes to severe, what we call major depression, so they can oscillate like a sine wave, really high highs, really low lows. And very important to understand in terms of understanding both bipolar 1 and bipolar 2 is that it's not always a sine wave. This is really important and it's something that frankly I did not know until I started researching this episode and talking to some psychiatrists. I should mention, I've talked to several board certified psychiatrists in preparation for this episode, I'll give some references to them. And in fact, some of them are going to be coming on the podcast as guests in the future for more in-depth discussion about bipolar and other psychiatric disorders. But all the psychiatrists I spoke to confirmed what the other was saying, which was that the way that bipolar disorder can present can vary tremendously between individuals. One person might go from very high highs that last seven days or more, to very low lows. Bouts of depression, major depression that can last two weeks or more. Other people are rapid cycling by way of three days manic, three days normal, three days manic, and then dropping into three days depression. So you want to erase that picture in your mind that manic bipolar disorder is this sine wave, this cycling up and down between mania and depression. It can take a lot of different forms. And again, this is a serious challenge for the psychiatrist to diagnose people because of that fact that they're only getting a snapshot of the person unless they've known them for some time and are working with them for some time. But this is also especially important for those of you that either have bipolar depression or suspect that you might, or that know someone with bipolar depression or suspect somebody might have bipolar depression, AKA bipolar disorder. Because if you're noticing that somebody is very manic and then normal, well, that's a very different picture than somebody who's going from very manic to very deep bouts of depression. The very manic to deep bouts of depression is easier to recognize because of the extremes of those highs and lows. Now, this might seem somewhat obvious to all of you as I describe it, and yet it's very important as a, frankly, a citizen of the planet who knows other human beings to keep an eye out for these manic episodes, because again, whether or not it's four days or less, or whether or not it's seven days or more, these manic episodes really are the defining criteria of bipolar disorder, AKA bipolar depression. There are a couple other key features about bipolar 1 and bipolar 2 that can allow us to get better insight into whether or not somebody has bipolar 1 or bipolar 2, and that's the percentage of time that people with bipolar 1 versus bipolar 2 spend in a manic state, a depressed state, or a symptom-free state. And this is also important to discuss because it turns out that people with genuine diagnosed bipolar 1 or bipolar 2 are often symptom-free, which again can make it difficult for us as people that know them or for people that are treating people with bipolar disorder to identify whether or not somebody is in a manic episode or a depressive episode, or whether or not they are headed into a manic or depressive episode. So the numbers on this have been studied. This from a paper, actually two papers, first author, Judd, J-U-D-D et al. published some years ago, 20 years ago, but the data hold up really nicely over time. These were both published in Journal American Medical Association Psychiatry. So JAMA Psychiatry is a superb journal. And basically people who have bipolar 1 on average spend about 50%, it's actually 53% was the number that was eventually converged upon, but about 50% of their time symptom-free. That's interesting, right? Somebody who has genuine bipolar 1 disorder can spend as much as half of their life symptom-free, sleeping normally, speaking normally, et cetera. About 32% of the time depressed, And when we say depressed, we mean major depression. So severe challenges with waking up at two or three in the morning, and having trouble falling back asleep. That's one of the defining characteristics of depression, or sleeping far too much, having a hard time getting out of bed in the morning, suppressed appetite, suppressed libido, suppressed motivation, all the general symptoms of major depression which we'll talk about a little bit more later and in an upcoming episode about major depression in particular. And then about 15% of their time in this kind of manic state or mixed manic state, where they are showing long, again, seven days or more bouts of sleeplessness, irritability, pressured speech, grandiosity, et cetera. Contrast that with people who have bipolar 2 disorder who are spending about half of their time in a depressed state. So that's interesting, people with bipolar 2 disorder, while not always displaying depressed states or oscillations between mania or hypomania and depressed states, they tend to be in the depressed state more often. And again, this is major depression. This isn't just a little bit of a low, this is a serious depression of their nervous system, their mood, and as we say, their affect, their outlook on life, and that's one of the key distinguishing features of major depression is that people's outlook on life becomes very diminished in the sense that they don't see a future. You ask them about, how's work going? How're your relationships? And it's not just that they feel that that's going poorly, they really feel as if there's no opportunity for those things to improve. Those people with bipolar 2 tend to be symptom-free about 45% of the time. Again, these are averages, so about 45% of the time, that's a considerable amount of the time. And they tend to be in these hypomanic states only about 4 or 5% of the time. Again, the criteria for BP-II, bipolar 2 is these four days or less of mania or hypomania, but only 4% of the time or 5% of the time is a small enough sliver of the pie that is these people's existence that you could imagine why it would be easy for them or other people to overlook the fact that they have bipolar disorder and not major depression. Think about it. This is a person who, or I should say a collection of people who are spending about half of their time depressed, close to half, 45% of their time symptom-free, and then about 5% of their time in a hypomanic state. So either shorten bouts of high intensity mania or hypomania that is of reduced intensity. One of the reasons that I mentioned these percentages of time spent in a symptom-free, depressed manic or hypomanic state is because one of my major goals for today's episode is that it will increase awareness of whether or not you or somebody you know, could be a coworker, could be family member, et cetera, might be suffering from bipolar 1 or bipolar 2. I think it's fair to say that if somebody is suffering from bipolar 1, that is likely to be revealed or to reveal itself before too long, because of the fact that people have these extended periods of mania and mania is such an extreme state, not just for the person who's experiencing it, but the way that it presents is just so extreme and out of the ordinary. But bipolar 2, you can imagine could really duck under the radar of our awareness. And you could imagine that we might just think somebody is low or depressed, especially if that person tends to self-medicate with alcohol or other substances. We might think, oh, they're drinking more than often more than usual, excuse me, or they're spending more time alone and isolating. But then when they're in their hypomanic state, that might actually present as normal to us because they were in such a depressed state before. So it's very important that we dial up our awareness, that we have tune our antennae to the possibility that people out there who might appear depressed or that we haven't heard from in a while might actually be suffering from bipolar 2 disorder. Before we move into a in-depth discussion about the different kinds of treatments for bipolar disorder, I'd like to touch on just a few additional aspects of what bipolar disorder can do in terms of its negative consequences. And also talk about some of the inherited risk that is the genetic factors and the environmental factors that can contribute to bipolar disorder. In terms of the burden, the very real, emotional, and occupational and educational burden that can occur for somebody with bipolar disorder, that's actually been studied. There's a measure of this, it's called global burden which is defined as the years lost in engaging a normal life due to some disability. So that disability could be cancer or that disability, in this case, is bipolar disorder. And basically the way this sort of study is done is that through questionnaires, I should say quite in-depth questionnaires, there's a probing for whether or not somebody has lost two consecutive weeks or more of interest in normal activities. Now, for people who have depression, that's a kind of straightforward thing to address, right? You ask somebody, when was the last time you ate, or when was the last time that you went a few days without food or lost interest in relationships or work or sex or things of that sort and they answer and you can figure out the amount of time that you've essentially been withdrawn from normal levels of activity for them. With bipolar disorder, What it turns out is that the global burden of having bipolar 1 and even bipolar 2 is massive. In fact, having bipolar disorder sits as one of the highest risk factors for being in the top 10 of all categories of disabilities leading to global burden. Put in plain English, what that means is having bipolar 1 or bipolar 2 disorder is extremely debilitating. It really slows down one's life trajectory unless it's treated properly. Now, the other aspect of bipolar disorder is its heritability. And this gets into a little bit of some tricky science related to inheritability versus the genetic contribution of a given disease. So that might sound like the same thing, you think, okay, genes relate to heritability, heritability relates to genes, but of course, everything about the way that our nervous system works and functions and expresses itself, healthy or otherwise, is an interaction between our genes and our environment. And so typically the way these studies are done is you address what is the risk of somebody having a given condition in the general population? We talked about that before, bipolar disorder is a 1% of the world's population. Compare that to people who have only major depression. So this would be repeated bouts of two weeks or more of serious depression, not just low mood or something due to a life loss, but major depression, which is 10 to 17% of people have major depression. They suffer from major depressive disorder, compared to bipolar disorder which, again, is 1%. Now, you can address how much of the 1% of bipolar disorder that exists is due to genes versus environment in a somewhat exact way. This is never an exact science. And the way that this is typically done is to look at concordance, that is the likelihood that two identical twins will both have a given condition as opposed to two fraternal twins, which have more different genes than identical twins, of course. And then two siblings who have similar genes, of course, but less similar than identical or fraternal twins and so on and so forth. So what you basically do is you evaluate the probability that two people in the general population who are completely unrelated will have the same condition, versus two people in the general population who are very related, identical twins. And what you find is that in identical twins, if one identical twin has true major depression or major depressive disorder, there's a 20 to 45% chance that their identical twin will also have major depressive disorder. Now that tells you right there that it can't all be genes, that is not a gene for major depression per se, or if it is a gene or a collection of genes, that those genes are also subject to environmental influences, either prenatal, within the womb or after children are born. Now the large range there of 20 to 45% could be due to any number of things. It could be experimental, meaning the techniques that were used in experiments, it could be due to regional differences, one part of the world versus another. There are a lot of different factors. Right now, we probably shouldn't delve into all that. At some point, we'll probably do an episode all about the genetics of nervous system heritability and heritability of features and mental health, et cetera. But we can compare major depression and the heritability or the genetic concordance between identical twins in major depression and bipolar disorder and ask, if one twin of an identical twin pair has bipolar depression, what is the likelihood that the other twin will have it? And it turns out that number is much higher. It's 40 to 70% likelihood or probability that if one twin has bipolar disorder, that their identical twin will also have bipolar disorder. So again, the total incidence of bipolar disorder in the general population is much lower than it is for major depressions, 1% for bipolar versus 10 to 17% for major depression. But the genetic component is much higher, 40 to 70% for bipolar disorder versus 20 to 45% for major depression. I know I'm throwing a lot of numbers out there, but basically what this means is that researchers have been able to take those numbers and filter them through a number of different risk factors that are related to early development, ask questions like if two twins were raised separately or together, or in one part of the world versus another, or had a two parent household versus one parent household, evaluate a lot of different variables, what they were able to discover, and this has been shown again and again, is that the genetic contribution to bipolar disorder is very, very high. That is the heritability of bipolar disorder is 85%. So again, I want to be really clear what this means, the total occurrence in the general population, fairly low, still serious, 1%, but fairly low compared to other things like major depression. However, if someone has bipolar disorder, it's very likely that they inherited some gene or sets of genes, or more accurately, a susceptibility within their genes to environmental influences that can trigger bipolar disorder. There are a lot of different ways to discuss and to conceptualize heritability so I want to be very careful with the way that I'm wording this. What this means is that people with bipolar disorder very likely have a gene, or more typically it's going to be a set of genes that creates a susceptibility for bipolar disorder to present itself. Now, what environmental factors trigger or increase that susceptibility is not entirely clear. This always seems to center back onto the same sets of things like early life stress, trauma, et cetera, certainly those are going to exacerbate the likelihood that someone who has a genetic propensity for bipolar disorder will express that bipolar disorder and its full array of symptomology, but 85%, while very, very high, is not 100%. Again, 85%, while a very high number for heritability is not 100%. What that means is that there is no single gene or identified gene cluster for bipolar disorder. The reason I keep drilling into this over and over is that I think we can confidently say that if someone has bipolar disorder, that there was something in their genetic lineage that led to that, or that very likely led to that, and yet it's not like eye color or some other physical feature, which we can actually do the direct, so it's called Mendelian genetics, and figure out whether or not somebody directly inherited that gene from one parent or the other parent. So the takeaway here is that if you have certainly an identical twin, or a fraternal twin, or a sibling or a parent, or even a cousin or an uncle that has bipolar disorder, in particular bipolar 1, well, then you need to be on the lookout for bipolar disorder, perhaps in yourself and for the family members of that person. My goal within this episode up until now has been to provide a clear and detailed picture of bipolar disorder and its various forms. Before we start to talk about treatments for bipolar disorder and some of the neural circuit basis for bipolar disorder, I want to make sure that I distinguish bipolar disorder from borderline personality disorder. We will do an entire episode or maybe even several episodes about borderline personality disorder. Borderline personality disorder can indeed present itself in ways that resemble bipolar disorder and vice versa, but there's some key distinctions that need to be made because it turns out that bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder are quite distinct in terms of their defining criteria. The key distinction between somebody with borderline personality disorder and bipolar disorder is that in borderline personality disorder, there can be episodes that can resemble mania or hypomania. So periods of flights of ideas, or where people are spending money excessively or sexually promiscuous in ways that seem manic or could even be a little bit manic or a lot manic, and yet more often than not, there is an environmental trigger for those manic episodes. That is distinctly different from bipolar disorder where the person will have manic episodes without any need for a trigger. There doesn't need to be a call from someone saying, hey, let's go on a vacation together, or there's something coming up this Friday that's really exciting, or let's enter a relationship together of one form or another. The person with bipolar disorder will have episodes of mania or episodes of major depression without any need for an external stimulus or environmental trigger. But the person with borderline personality disorder, almost always, again, there's never an always in biology and psychiatry, but almost always is going to exhibit flights of mania or depressive episodes or other types of mood shifts that are dramatic and maladaptive in response to things that are coming in through the external environment or relationships of some kind. In fact, one of the defining characteristics of borderline personality disorder is this thing that's referred to as splitting. A good example of splitting in a person with borderline personality disorder is that they will feel that they absolutely adore you and want to spend all their time with you and just think the world of you. You can do no wrong. And in fact, they genuinely can feel that way and can genuinely think that way about you. And then for whatever reason, it could be a perception of something that you did or something that you said or suspicion that you're thinking something about them, they can suddenly shift or split their emotions in what's called move you from a good object or a can do no wrong object to a bad object. They'll suddenly decide that you are cheating on them or that you are being mean to them or that you're insulting them or that something that you're doing is in violation to their self worth, their wellbeing, et cetera and that can send them down a pathway of being very angry, very depressed, et cetera. As I describe the contour of a person with borderline personality disorder as somebody who splits very suddenly in response to some environmental trigger, real or perceived, there's the risk, of course, that it makes the person with borderline personality disorder sound like a bad person, that they're very volatile. And while they can be volatile, I want to be very careful to point out that the person with borderline personality disorder is also suffering in this context. So while those sorts of relationships with people with borderline personality disorder, whether or not they're romantic relationships or familial or coworkers, et cetera, can be very challenged, can be very high friction because of the good object, bad object shifts, et cetera, it's bidirectional, meaning the person with borderline personality disorder, as you can imagine, is also going through a lot of suffering. At one moment, they feel as if someone is wonderful and can do no wrong to them and they want to be so strongly affiliated with them, and then in the next moment, they feel as if that person is attacking them through their actions or even through their non actions. So again, we will return to borderline personality disorder in a separate episode, it's a serious disorder, both for the person that has it and for people around them. Fortunately, there are some emerging treatments that are showing promise and it's a fairly common disorder, but it's important that we distinguish borderline personality disorder from bipolar disorder, mostly on the basis of this need for a trigger. Again, in bipolar disorder, there is no need for a trigger to create a manic episode or a major depressive episode, they just happen or they can just happen. Whereas in borderline personality disorder, almost always there's an external trigger or a perception that something happened in the environment or that somebody is behaving a certain way that dramatically shifts the person with borderline personality disorder from one mode to the next. As we move into our discussion about the treatments for and neural circuits underlying bipolar disorder, I want to just nail down one more key point. This is a very brief point but it's perhaps the most important point, which is the highs and lows, or we should say the highs, these manic episodes, and sometimes lows, 'cause again, not everybody with bipolar disorder 1 or 2 suffers from depressive episodes, sometimes yes, sometimes no, in particular in bipolar 2, yes, but people with bipolar 1 can have extreme manic episodes and then just return to normal as you recall. Well, those extreme lows and or extreme highs of people with bipolar disorder impact their lives in very negative ways. This is essential and it's something that we're going to return to a little bit later when we talk about the relationship between bipolar disorder and creativity, because it turns out that there's a quite strong association there, one that would almost lead you to believe that being bipolar can be beneficial in certain contexts, and yet, on whole, having bipolar disorder is extremely detrimental and challenging to the person suffering from it. And it's something that we want to keep in mind as we think about treatments and the underlying biology. Now I'd like to talk about some of the treatments for bipolar disorder. And in the discussion of those treatments, there's an absolutely incredible history of the discovery of one particular treatment that still shows great success in many patients, although some people can't take it for reasons that we'll talk about. And in the description of the discovery of this treatment for bipolar disorder, it also reveals to us that sometimes treatments come to the profession of medicine and through science in ways that precede the discovery of the underlying biology. That's right, every once in a while, someone will discover a treatment for a disease without any understanding about the underlying biological basis of that disease. And in fact, that is the case for bipolar disorder and the treatment that we are referring to is lithium. Lithium, as some of you know, is on the periodic table of elements. It is indeed a naturally occurring substance. It actually arrived on earth by way of star dust. Yes, we are talking about star dust on this podcast, but if you'd like to learn more about the origins of lithium and how lithium arrived here on earth for its discovery and applications in psychiatry, there's a beautiful talk that exists on YouTube and we'll provide a link to this in the show note captions that describes the history of lithium in terms of its interplanetary travels and arrival on earth. This is a talk delivered by a physicist who is expert in quantum mechanics and is expert in lithium. And it's a just wonderful talk that I can refer you to, less on the biology in that talk, but certainly a lot about lithium as an element. So for those of you nerds like me, that love to know how things came to be here on the planet in one form or another, I'll encourage you to take a brief listen to that talk. We are going to discuss lithium in the context of its applications for treatment of bipolar disorder. And the discovery of lithium as a treatment for bipolar disorder is truly a miraculous story that I think everyone should know. The key player in this story is a physician by the last name Cade, he was an Australian physician. And Cade has a very interesting story in his own right. Cade was an Australian psychiatrist or Australian psychiatrist who also was a soldier. And during World War II, after the fall of Singapore to Japan, he became a prisoner of war and he was a prisoner of war from 1942 until 1945. So he had some time for observation and during his imprisonment, he observed some of his fellow inmates is going through pretty wild vacillations in mood and energy, essentially going from manic episodes to depressed episodes, or from manic to normal episodes. And for one reason or another, we don't know why because I couldn't find any report as to why he hypothesized this, but he hypothesized that there was some buildup of some chemical in these people's brains that then they would urinate out. And that urinating out of whatever chemical was in there would allow them to be more relaxed and not manic. In other words, Cade hypothesized that there's a buildup of a chemical in certain people's brains that makes them manic and they urinate that chemical out. So eventually he got out of this prison, as we mentioned in 1945, and he started doing experiments in addition to seeing patients in his clinic. And what he did is he started to take urine from people who exhibited mania and urine from people who were not manic, and he took that urine and he would inject it into guinea pigs as an experimental model. And his general observation was that there was something in the urine that was indeed making the guinea pigs more manic if they were injected with urine from a manic patient. The exact measures that he was taking in these guinea pigs wasn't exactly clear. This is at a time or an era in science when you could just sort of report things a little bit more subjectively, although there were still numbers and statistics, it was a little bit more of like case studies and descriptions, but it turns out that even though that all seems a little bit loose, it led to some incredible and still important discoveries for psychiatric health. So what he figured out was that the urine from manic patients seemed to be more toxic for these guinea pigs. And he also knew that there are two toxic substances in urine, urea and uric acid. So he was able to separate the urea and uric acid from people with mania and patients that did not have mania. And he figured out that the urea was the same in both these mentally ill, manic patients and the non manic patients. So it did not seem that urea was the compound that was creating these manic episodes or related to manic episodes or held the toxicity so instead he focused on the uric acid. Now in order to put the uric acid into solution so that he could inject it into these guinea pigs, he had to try a number of different compounds in order to dilute it. It just so happens that, and you chemists will be familiar with this, but there's certain things that just don't go into solution easily. You put the powder in a vial, you add some water or a saline or another solution, you mix it up and the powder stays suspended in there, it doesn't actually ever become a clear liquid that you can inject. So in order to try injecting different strengths of uric acid, he ended up using lithium to assist in the dilution, and lithium worked. So what he basically was doing, again for you chemists, is he was taking uric acid, he was adding lithium, and making a solution of lithium urate. this is a lot of details, but this is important because what he eventually found is that when he diluted the uric acid with lithium and created lithium urate, lithium urate could actually calm down these guinea pigs that were injected with the toxic urea. He also found that lithium urate had a generally calming effect on these guinea pigs. So now we're really off in crazy territory, we're talking about urine from patients that's separating out urea and uric acid, we're adding lithium to the uric acid, we're injecting this into guinea pigs, this is getting pretty wild and pretty weird, but this is medicine, and from time to time, this is medicine and science. Cade was a good scientist in addition to being a good physician, and by good scientists, I mean that he did control experiments. Here he was injecting lithium urate into animals and seeing an effect, but he knew that that solution of lithium urate contained not just the uric acid, but it also contained lithium. And so he quite appropriately asked, maybe the lithium alone is having this calming effect on these guinea pigs. And indeed, that was the case. When he did the proper control experiment and injected only lithium solution into these guinea pigs, they calmed down. From there, he in sort of 1940 style medicine, this would not happen now, he very quickly moved from that animal model into human patients and started injecting human patients with lithium or providing lithium orally to those patients. And lo and behold, found an absolutely profound and positive effect of lithium in reducing symptoms of mania. And as all good physician scientists do, he wrote up his results. And he wrote it up in a paper entitled, Lithium Salts in the Treatment of Psychotic Excitement. Okay, back then they didn't call it mania, they called it psychotic excitement. This is a paper that was published September 3rd, 1949 in the Medical Journal of Australia. We will provide a link to this study, is now a classic study in the field of psychiatry. It's a really wonderful paper to read. And actually I encourage people, even if you're not a scientist or a clinician to just take a quick look at the second page in this paper that we've made available to you where he describes each of the various case studies or the individuals that he looked at. I'm not going to read these in detail now, 'cause it would take a lot of unnecessary time, but things like case seven, MC, aged 40-years-old, suffering from manic recurrent mania. In this episode, he'd been excited, restless, and violent for over two months and was interfering so often that had to be confined to a single room during the day. So this is very debilitating, what we now know to be bipolar depression. He commenced taking lithium citrate, 20 grains, that's a measure of the amount of lithium, three times a day. In four days, he was distinctly quieter and by February 13th, 1949, appeared practically normal. He continued well and on February 20th, 1949, the dose of citrate was reduced to 10 grains, et cetera, et cetera. He left the hospital. There are numerous descriptions of this sort within this paper, including some descriptions of patients that did not see such success, and including some descriptions of patients that suffered from some negative side effects. So that's important to point out as well, but it's an absolutely wonderful paper and it's an absolutely wonderful voyage into the history of psychiatry right down to the discussion where in just three short paragraphs, Cade really lays out the case for why lithium is such a important discovery in the treatment of what, at that time, they were calling psychotic excitement and what we now know to be manic bipolar depression. Lithium, I should mention, has a number of important features, but it also a number of important side effects that need to be considered. First of all, it does have a certain toxicity and so levels of lithium in the blood need to be monitored extremely carefully. So it's not the sort of thing that people can just take at a given dose and every patient responds the same, there's a lot of oversight and a lot of blood tests that have to be done, especially in the first three months of lithium treatment. I should mention that lithium treatment is still used to some great degree of success in many, not all people suffering from bipolar depression, or bipolar disorder rather, but there are a number of important things that happened between 1949 and present day that prevented lithium from reaching patients that really needed it. And that all can be summarized in two or three short sentences. Basically, by virtue of the fact that lithium is a naturally occurring element, it could not be patented. And as a consequence of that, there wasn't a lot of potential profit for drug companies to produce lithium. In fact, still to this day, it's very low cost, and still to this day, no one really owns the patent for lithium in its purest form. So that made it unattractive. It turns out that the FDA in the United States didn't allow lithium to be used as a treatment for manic bipolar disorder until 1970. So we're talking about a full 21 years from the publication of this paper by Cade in the Medical Journal of Australia showing quite beautifully the great potential in use of lithium for quelling the symptoms of bipolar disorder until the first patients in the United States were starting to access lithium regularly. And nowadays, of course, lithium is available, but still not able to be patented 'cause it's element number three on the periodic table, it's naturally occurring. It's not literally falling down from the stars as stardust and going into pill form, but rather it can be synthesized in laboratories, but it is available. It does show not only great potential in many patients but great application in many patients despite its side effects. So lithium really stands as this kind of golden example of a treatment that works, at least in many individuals, prior to an understanding of the biological basis of the disease for which that treatment is needed. Now with that said, scientists and clinicians have been quite rigorous in trying to understand why and how lithium works in order to understand the why and how of bipolar disorder. This is the way that proper medicine and science is done. Even if there's an excellent treatment for something, it's important to understand why that treatment works because, first of all, not everyone responds to that treatment. Second of all, scientists and physicians understand that just because we have one treatment that works, if it has any side effects at all, there is the possibility for better treatments. So it's not just about trying to bypass a drug that doesn't make much money for drug companies, I know a lot of people think in those terms, they think, oh, well, there's this continued search for better treatments for bipolar disorder even though lithium works because lithium doesn't allow drug companies to make much money. That's not really the case. The fact of the matter is is that the toxicity, some of the other issues that are created with lithium, the fact that people need the ongoing blood testing, et cetera, really stimulates the need, really an urgent need for new and better treatments for bipolar disorder. And only by understanding how lithium works at the cellular level, at the neural circuit level, et cetera, do we really stand to find those new discoveries. If you were to do a literature search on the actions and mechanisms of lithium in terms of how it can calm people down and reduce their manic episodes, you would find an enormous array of papers, literally thousands of scientific studies in animals and in humans, which, for instance will tell you that lithium treatment will increase so-called BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor. BDNF is often talked about in the context of neuroplasticity, the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. And indeed it does seem that ingesting lithium increases BDNF. BDNF is what we call permissive for neuroplasticity. It doesn't create specific changes in the brain, meaning it's not going to make your memory better or your coordination better, or your emotional state better per se, what BDNF does is it permits the neurons, the nerve cells and their connections in the brain to be more likely to change if the proper environmental conditions are met. That is BDNF creates a kind of buoyancy to neuroplasticity. It opens the gates to neuroplasticity. So lithium does increase BDNF, we'll talk about why that's important in the context of the neural circuits involved with bipolar disorder in a few minutes. It also seems to be a potent anti-inflammatory. Now, inflammation is one of those words that's thrown around extensively nowadays, especially on social media and especially as it relates to any health condition, it's like inflammation, inflammation, inflammation, always seems to be discussed in the context of inflammation being bad. But I do want to point out that inflammation is a natural adaptive response to physical injury to a cell or organ or tissue of any kind. Inflammation is the basis by which adaptations occur to exercise. So if, for instance, you were to weight train and use a heavier than normal weight kind, do a set to failure or create some little micro tears in the muscle that are healthy in the sense that they would create adaptations and make that muscle stronger, maybe even grow that muscle, there's an inflammatory response associated with that that is critical to the positive adaptation. So inflammation isn't always bad, although excessive, or as we say, runaway inflammation is bad. Lithium seems to be able to suppress inflammation and, importantly, it can suppress inflammation in neural tissues and within the brain in particular. That is important. And we return to that and why it's important in a little bit. The other thing about lithium is that lithium is neuroprotective, that is it can prevent neurons from dying under certain conditions. Why would neurons die? Well, there are a lot of reasons why neurons can die. There can be a physical insult to the neurons. You can get hit really hard in the head, a bullet, God forbid, can enter the skull and kill neurons, there are a lot of reasons why neurons can die. Neuroprotection is a situation in which a neuron is given some sort of chemical or physical resiliency that allows it to suffer an insult and yet bounce back. So it's very similar to the way that we think about psychological resiliency, neuroprotection is an ability for neurons to be better able to handle stress of different kinds, in particular, excitotoxicity. There's a phenomenon in bipolar disorder and a lot of other psychiatric conditions in which hyperactivity of certain brain areas actually starts to kill off neurons. Hyperactivity doesn't always do this, but it turns out that if certain brain circuits are too active for too long, some of the chemicals associated with neuroactivity, things like calcium and neurotransmitters like glutamate can actually kill the very neurons that are active. So it seems that lithium can prevent some of that neurotoxicity. Now, this turns out to be particularly important for this discussion about bipolar disorder and the neural circuit basis of bipolar disorder because if we are just take a step back and ask, what's different in the brains of people with bipolar disorder? There are some very interesting answers that start to emerge. There are basically two main neural circuits that are present in normal individuals, I say normal, I say that respectfully to the people with bipolar disorder by referring to people who do not suffer from manic episodes or from manic depression. There are circuits that are present in people with bipolar disorder and in people that do not suffer from bipolar disorder, both of those circuits do the same thing in both sets of individuals, and yet in people with bipolar disorder, there seems to be an atrophy or a removal of certain neural connections over time that leads to a situation in which people with bipolar disorder become very poor at registering their own internal state, in particular, their emotional states and their somatic states. What we're referring to here is something called interoception. I've talked about this a little bit on the Huberman Lab Podcast before, but there are two modes of perception. Perception, of course, is a attention to something that's happening in our environment or to us on or within our body. Exteroception is literally an attention to things that are happening beyond the confines of our skin. So seeing that person's face over there, or seeing that color of leaf over there, or hearing a sound over to my left, that is exteroception, perception of things beyond the confines of one's skin. Then there's interoception which is perception of things that are happening internally like, how full does my gut feel? How fast is my heart beating? Some people can measure that quite accurately just by thinking about it, other people can't. How happy am I, how sad am I, how energetic am I, how lethargic am I, et cetera, et cetera. So we are always existing in a balance between exteroception and interoception, but as it turns out, people with bipolar disorder over time, and especially into the second and third decade of having bipolar disorder seem to have progressively diminished levels of interoception. And that very likely is important in their inability to register, for instance, that, wow, they are talking at an excessive rate or they haven't slept in 5 or even 10 days, or they haven't eaten in a long period of time. This atrophy of neural circuits for interoception is starting to emerge as one of the defining neural circuit characteristics or underpinnings of bipolar. Now I bridge to this conversation about neural circuits from the statement that lithium can protect against some of the neurotoxic effects of neural circuits being very active. Now this can get a little bit complicated, but I promise I'm going to make it clear for any of you that are watching and or listening. The reality is that people with bipolar depression very likely have a hyperactivity, that is an increased level of activity in certain circuits within the brain early in the expression of their disease. And that typically, as I mentioned earlier, sets in around the early 20s, although sometimes that can be even earlier, in the teens and so forth. But that hyperactivity, we think, leads to a toxicity and excitotoxicity of certain elements of the neural circuits that are responsible for interoception. In other words, the overuse of certain circuits can lead to a diminishing, an atrophy, or even a death of certain elements within those circuits and it appears that lithium, through its anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects and through its ability to increase BDNF, very likely protects us against some of that atrophy of those circuits for interoception. So this isn't a case in which people with bipolar have a neural circuit or lack a neural circuit and people without bipolar are the opposite. This is a case in which everyone more or less starts out the same, but it seems that there's a hyperactivity of certain neural circuits in people with bipolar disorder that over time actually causes those circuits to diminish. Now, this is very important because some of the more recent longitudinal studies doing brain imaging on people with bipolar disorder and those without, and doing that over time in patients starting as early as their teens, but into their 20s and 30s reveals just that, that there can be hyperactivity of circuits early on, but then hypo, reduced activity of those very same circuits at a time 5 or 10 years later. Again, this speaks to the complicated nature of bipolar disorder and the complicated nature of psychiatry and linking specific psychiatric disorders to neural circuits in general. Because if you have a situation in which in one disease, let's just, hypothesize here for a second that for instance, in certain forms of schizophrenia, there's elevated dopamine and where we to just reduce the amount of dopamine, that they would receive relief from those schizophrenic symptoms, well, that's all pretty straightforward on the face of it, but in this situation with bipolar disorder, what we're talking about is hyperactivity, too much activity leading to hypoactivity through death of those very circuits. And so now you can especially appreciate why when the patient shows up to the psychiatrist or when the psychiatrist shows up to the patient in the total course of their disease is going to be very important. And then layer on top of that the complexity of the fact that the very defining characteristic of bipolar disorder is that there are oscillations in mood. So now we need to think about treatments, not just for the manic episodes, but also treatments for the depressive episodes. And that's, in fact, what psychiatrists do. Turns out that they apply different treatments or combinations of treatments for patients that are in manic episodes versus depressive episodes and they have to infer all that from discussions, again, just exchange of words depending on when that person walked into their office, where they are in terms of manic episodes, no symptomology or depressive symptomology, and whether or not they've had that symptomology for an extended period of time. And then just to make the situation even more complicated, the very circuits that atrophy that start to wane and disappear in people with bipolar disorder are the circuits for interoception, for understanding of what's going on in one's own body. So you can imagine if you sit down and ask somebody, well, how long have, has it been since you've slept, that person may genuinely not know. Or if you ask the very depressed person, how depressed are you? That person may not be able to articulate that. So fortunately there are solutions to this and the solution is that more often than not, the accurate understanding of whether or not someone has bipolar depression or not, and what stage of the illness they might be in or not is going to depend on the reports of people around them and not the patient themselves, hence the importance of having a rather detailed and admittedly a rather intense discussion about the symptomology of bipolar disorder, so that you can have an understanding of the people around you and have an eye and an ear to whether or not those people might be suffering from bipolar, and if so, at what stage of the disease they might happen to be at. Now I'd like to talk a little bit more about what is known about the neural circuits that lead to the manic states, as well as the depressive states, but mainly the manic states of bipolar disorder. We already discussed the fact that interception, registering of one's own internal emotions and bodily states is diminished in people with bipolar disorder. But we haven't really talked about the neural circuits that are responsible for that lack of recognition. For that reason, I'd like to point out a paper. This is a fairly recent paper, just came out this year, but it's an excellent one, Looking at the changes over time in neural circuitry in people with high genetic risk for bipolar disorder, and in particular in young people. And studies of this sort are rare, but are exceedingly important because of the fact that they track individuals over time. The title of this paper is, Longitudinal Changes in Structural Connectivity in Young People at High Genetic Risk for Bipolar Disorder. We will provide a link to this study in the show note captions. There are a lot of data in this paper, in particular, neuroimaging data, and it's quite extensive in terms of analyzing the so-called connectomics. You've probably heard of genomics, which is the analysis of genes and their display in different individuals or different animals, et cetera. You have proteomics, which is the display of, or the existence of different proteins. So omics is a big thing now in science, you kind of throw omics behind anything and it becomes its own Wikipedia page, which means it becomes its own thing, so to speak, I say that only partially in jest. Nonetheless, connectomics is the analysis of connections between different neurons and neural circuit elements. And what this paper really showed by analyzing the connectomics of neural circuits in the brains of many different people with different categories of, and onset of, and severity of bipolar disorder, as well as controls in different age groups, et cetera, is that people who are of particularly high risk for having bipolar disorder or that have full blown bipolar disorder, have deficits and actually reductions in the amount of connectivity between what are called the parietal brain regions and the limbic system. Now, the limbic system I've talked about before in this podcast, if you're not familiar with it, I'll explain what it is in a moment, it's simply a collection of brain structures, not one brain structure, but a collection of brain structures that generally are responsible for shifting the overall state that we're in from states of more relaxed and calm to states of more alert and focused. The limbic system is intimately related to the so-called autonomic nervous system, which regulates our sleep wake cycles and a number of other things like our digestion, et cetera, our level of hunger and on and on. So the limbic system is really kind of like a volume control or as nerd scientists like to say, a kind of gain control on the overall level or amplitude of alertness or calmness. In fact, if we're very, very calm, we are asleep or even more calm, we can be in a coma. If we are very alert, we can be wide awake and ready to work and run, et cetera. Or if we are very, very, very alert by way of limbic autonomic interactions, well, then we can be in anxiety. We can be in full blown panic attack, or we can be in mania. We can have so much energy that we feel like we don't need to sleep. And in fact, disruptions in the circuitry really seems to be what's going on in people who have bipolar disorder. Now, if disruptions in the circuitry are present in the limbic system, that doesn't necessarily mean that the limbic system is at fault because the way that neural circuits work is that different brain areas are talking to one another through electrical-chemical signaling, and they're regulating one another. And what this paper really tells us is that there are elements within the parietal lobe, which is a kind of a section of the brain that sits off to the side, it's not really off to the side, but in neuroanatomical nomenclature, the parietal lobe is connected in two ways, bidirectionally. So parietal lobe is connecting to limbic system and limbic system is connecting to parietal lobe. And in people with bipolar disorder, it seems that the parietal lobe is able to exert less top down control, that is less suppression of certain elements of the limbic system, which, at least right now, is leading researchers to hypothesize that the limbic system is sort of revving at higher levels. It's kind of like RPM in your cars or kind of redlining at times and for durations that are inappropriate or at least abnormal. So we have two major sets of neural circuit deficits or changes in people with bipolar. Their lack of internal awareness is reduced, and that turns out to be, by way of neural structures, like the insula which is a brain region that is connected in a very direct way to our somatosensory cortex, so the part of our cortex that registers how we feel, literally, sense of touch and internal state. So those circuits, excuse me, for those for those of you listening I just bumped the microphone, excuse me. Those circuits are disrupted in people with bipolar and the top down control, that kind of accelerator and break on our overall levels of energy are also disrupted. Now that's all fine and good because, well, it's true, at least according to what the data at this point in time tell us, there may be new discoveries to come, but that all seems to be the case, but it doesn't tell us how to modulate or change that circuitry. It also doesn't tell us how something like lithium can actually benefit a large number of patients or how a good number of the other treatments for bipolar disorder, which we'll talk about going forward can benefit patients with bipolar. So it appears that lithium is exerting its positive effects on bipolar depression treatment, at least in part by preventing the loss of certain neural circuits, namely the neural circuits for interoception and the top down control over the limbic system. Now it turns out to be examining lithium's effects at an even more reductionist level, we can gain really important insight into what's going on in bipolar depression and some of the other treatments for bipolar depression, including behavioral treatments, things like transcranial magnetic stimulation, and even some of the more natural or so-called nutraceutical treatments including things like high dose omega-3 supplementation, which we're going to talk about extensively. Now, in order to understand what we're going to talk about next, it's important that everybody understand a key concept of neuroplasticity. And this is a key concept regardless of whether or not one is talking about bipolar depression. In fact, it's something I think everybody, every citizen of earth should know about, and that's called homeostatic plasticity. Homeostatic plasticity is a particular form of neuroplasticity in which if a neural circuit is overactive for a period of time, there are changes that occur at the cellular level that lead to a balance or a homeostatic regulation of that circuit so that it's no longer overactive. Conversely, if a neural circuit is underactive for a period of time, certain changes happen within the cells of that circuit to ramp up their activity or make them more likely to be active. And whether or not a neural circuit and the neurons within it become more active or less active in the context of homeostatic plasticity largely depends on one mechanism, and it's a beautiful mechanism that I'll make very clear to you right now, even if you don't have a background in biology. Neurons communicate with one another by releasing so-called neurotransmitters, which are just chemicals. Those neurotransmitters are vomited out, they're not actually vomited, but they're spit out into the so-called synaptic cleft, often called the synapse. The synapse is just a little gap between neurons. And when they are released into the synapse, they don't just stay there, they actually park or bind to receptors on what's called the postsynaptic neuron. And depending on how many receptors they bind to and how many receptors are available, et cetera, they can have a greater or lesser effect on the postsynaptic neuron. This scenario of neurotransmitters being released into synapses then binding to receptors on postsynaptic neurons and influencing the electrical excitability of those postsynaptic neurons sits central to not just the treatment of bipolar disorder, but to all treatments of all psychiatric conditions and indeed to things like neuropathic pain as well. For example, the so-called SSRIs, Prozac, Zoloft and others, et cetera, stands for selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor. What does that mean? Well, serotonin is a neurotransmitter. It's actually a neuromodulator that's released into the synapse, and then the SSRI, the selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor allows more of that serotonin to sit within the synapse for longer, it's a re-uptake inhibitor, it prevents re-uptake by the presynaptic neuron. and that serotonin therefore can park in or dock in the receptors, as it's called, of the postsynaptic neuron in greater numbers, and have a greater impact on that postsynaptic neuron. So the drugs that are used to treat depression or other things of that sort, things like SSRIs, work by changing the availability of neurotransmitter in the synapse. Other things like MAO inhibitors, Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, work a different way. They inhibit the enzyme. Anytime you hear ase in biology, it's very likely an enzyme which breaks things down. so MAO inhibitors prevent the breakdown, not the re-uptake, but the breakdown of neurotransmitter and therefore allow more neurotransmitter to be available in the synapse and influence the postsynaptic cell. Homeostatic plasticity is a form of neuroplasticity in which overall circuits can become much more excitable or much less excitable by the addition of more receptors in the postsynaptic neuron or by the removal of more receptors from the postsynaptic neuron. And the way this happens is just beautiful. It was first discovered in the visual system and the person primarily responsible for the discovery of homeostatic plasticity, although there are several, is a woman by the name of Gina Turrigiano, she's a professor at Brandeis University. And what the Turrigiano Laboratory showed was that for instance, if we are in the dark for a long period of time, literally, and we're not seeing much for a long period of time, there's an increase in the number of receptors in the postsynaptic neurons so that a smaller amount of light and excitability within the visual system can lead to greater amounts of activity in the visual system. Conversely, if there's an overactivity or an increase in that activity in the visual system for some period of time, then a number of receptors in the postsynaptic neuron are removed from that postsynaptic neuron surface, making any neurotransmitter that's available only able to bind the receptors that are left and have less of an influence on those cells. In other words, keeping a circuit in so-called homeostatic balance in a particular range of excitability. Now, while that's a mouthful and an earful and a concept-full, I don't know if a concept-full is a word, but in any case, that's a lot to think about, but all you need to know is that if a neural circuit is very active for a period of time, in normal individuals, there will be a reduction in the amount of activity by way of removing receptors that bind neurotransmitter. Whereas, if a neural circuit is very quiet, it's not activated for a period of time, maybe your leg is in a cast for instance, and you're not activating your quadricep and calves very much, well when that cast comes off, sure, the muscle might be atrophied but the nerves that connect to that muscle are actually in a position to influence that muscle even more once you start using that muscle or those muscles, because whatever neurotransmitter is released now has the opportunity to bind to more receptors, in that case in muscle, or in the case of brain circuits, in postsynaptic neurons. So homeostatic plasticity is this beautiful, balancing mechanism that makes sure that neural circuits are never too active nor too quiet for too long. And in a beautiful display of how treatments can lead to a better understanding of biology, which can lead to the discovery of even better treatments, lithium and another compound, which we'll talk about, ketamine seem to exert their actions largely through effects on homeostatic neuroplasticity. There's a wonderful paper that describes all the nitty-gritty of this. Certainly most people listening, I'm guessing, are not going to be interested in all this detail, but for those of you that you are and you want to delve deep into this, this paper was published in Neuron Cell Press journal, excellent journal, it's titled, Targeting Homeostatic Plasticity for the Treatment of Mood Disorders. And there's one particular figure in this paper that I'll just describe to you in which measurements were made from neurons and the number of receptors in those neurons, it's done somewhat indirectly through a method that's detailed and neuroscientists are familiar with. Basically what it measures is how excited a given neuron is, electrically excited a given neuron is to a given amount of neurotransmitter. So that the amount of neurotransmitter that's vomited onto a neuron is essentially kept constant, and then the response of the postsynaptic neuron is measured. So it can be of one level or higher or lower depending on homeostatic plasticity. And what this paper shows and what's been shown over and over again, is that when neurons are exposed to lithium for a period of time, there is a reduction in the excitability of the postsynaptic neuron, that is neurons within the brain become less excitable over time if lithium is present, whereas ketamine, which is now a common FDA-approved, at least in the US, it's approved for the treatment of major depression, ketamine does the opposite. Ketamine seems to increase the number of receptors in the postsynaptic neuron and lead to greater levels of excitability and electrical activity within neural circuits to a given fixed amount of neurotransmitter. So this is super interesting because what it means is that lithium is causing circuits to be less active, ketamine is causing circuits to be more active. And we know from excellent clinical data now that ketamine seems to be a very effective treatment for major depression, and for the major depressive episodes of people that suffer from bipolar depression, that includes these major depressive episodes of two weeks or longer of suppressed mood, appetite, sleep issues, et cetera. Now, the key thing about ketamine that's often not discussed is that while its effects are very potent, they are transient. So one major drawback to ketamine therapy for depression is that it has to be done repeatedly, and how repeatedly, or how often, rather, depends, of course, on a discussion between the psychiatrist and the patient. This is not something to cowboy on your own. I know that, and many of you are probably familiar with the fact that ketamine also is abused recreationally. It is a so-called NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, so it blocks the very receptor that's responsible for neuroplasticity for changes in neural circuits. It also changes excitability in neurons as I just described. So ketamine is a very potent chemical that has been shown over and over again and is now FDA approved for the treatment of major depression, but its effects seem to be transient. Lithium, as I described earlier, seems to reduce the manic episodes or the intensity of manic episodes in symptomology, in people with bipolar disorder, it's doing that through neuroprotection. So protecting neural circuits from dying away that initially are overactive and that overactivity causing excitotoxicity, blocks that excitotoxicity, we believe. And it seems to do that in part by diminishing the amount of activity in those circuits. So this is a beautiful mechanistic story, and it's the sort of story that you'd love to have for a great number of psychiatric illnesses. And fortunately we have for bipolar disorder. Overactivity of a given circuit eventually leads to neurotoxicity, excuse me, lithium is preventing that neurotoxicity by reducing the number of receptors in certain elements within those circuits, so called homeostatic scaling, it's downregulating the number of receptors leading to less excitability and preventing, we think, excitotoxicity. And in that sense, you can see exactly why it's important to get lithium treatment in there early for people with bipolar disorder. Ketamine as a treatment for major depression seems to be effective but transient. And you can also see why it would be important, not just to reduce the manic episodes for people with bipolar disorder, but to also treat the depressive episodes. So this is a key feature of the treatment for bipolar depression and for bipolar disorder. there needs to be treatment both of the mania and of the depressive episodes if they're present. And fortunately, there are excellent drugs to do that. And I should mention that ketamine and lithium are just two of the drugs within the kit that psychiatrists have access to. There are many things, olanzapines and a number of different, including Clozapine. Clozapine is an antipsychotic which is commonly prescribed to as a sedative in some cases that allows people in manic episodes to sleep. It's classically described as so called dopamine receptor 4 antagonist, although it does other things as well. Clozapine has a number of side effect features related to white blood cell and things of that sort that require careful monitoring. So there are an enormous number now, literally dozens and dozens of different drugs, each designed to target either the manic phase, the depressive phase, or some what we call acute sort of early phases versus ongoing treatments. This is a vast galaxy of drug treatments that really should be navigated, I should say, absolutely should be navigated by a board certified psychiatrist. And of course in close discussion with both the person suffering from bipolar disorder, but also ideally the family members of the person suffering from bipolar disorder. But I think, at least up until now, we've focused on the two major pathways for treatment, lithium and ketamine. And we've talked about why lithium and ketamine work, that they're working on opposite ends of this homeostatic scaling. We talked a bit about the circuits that are involved in generating what we think are the manic symptomology and the lack of interception. Why people can just persist in staying awake, awake, awake, not eating, et cetera. Now you have in mind how all that is put together. And I think you have in mind, some of the well-demonstrated treatments for the different component parts of bipolar disorder, which now I'm hoping you're also well versed in based on our early, early discussion of what constitutes bipolar 1 and bipolar 2. Now I would like to also talk about some of the not so typical therapeutics for bipolar disorder and also point to the things that have been tried and failed for successful treatment of bipolar disorder, because some of those things are often talked about and suggested, especially in online communities, and while it's not clear that any of them are particularly hazardous on their own, although some of them do carry some hazards, I do think it's important because of the critical time sensitive nature of bipolar disorder and the urgency of getting treatments early to try and prevent some of the longer lasting neural circuit changes that if people can avoid some of the less effective or demonstrated to be ineffective treatments, that they stand to combat bipolar disorder much more successfully. First of all, a key point about drug therapies versus non-drug therapies or talk therapies, without question, drug therapies are going to be most effective when done also with talk therapies. And we'll talk about which talk therapies have been demonstrated to be most effective. There is some argument about what I'm about to say next, but in general, most psychiatrists will tell you, or certainly the ones I've spoken to have told me, that talk therapy on its own is rarely, if ever effective for bipolar depression and bipolar disorder, whether or not it's BP-I or BP-II. That's just the reality of it. Contrast that with our discussion about obsessive-compulsive disorder, which we talked about a few episodes ago, if you haven't seen that episode, We have an in-depth episode all about OCD and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. There it seems that drug therapies and talk therapies can be done independently or in combination. As expected, combined drug and talk therapies are more effective there than either one alone, but there are pretty impressive effects of talk therapy alone provided that they're initiated at the right time, and it's the right form of talk therapy. That's OCD, but in terms of bipolar disorder, it really seems that the drug therapies are necessary, at least in most all cases. That said, talk therapies are terrific augment or support for those drug therapies and sometimes can allow people to take lower doses of those drug therapies, which turns out to be important because of the side effect profiles of a lot of drug therapies and sometimes the cost as well. I guess we can think of cost just as another side effect really. There are both established and more novel forms of talk therapy being used, again, in concert with drug treatments for bipolar disorder. Cognitive behavioral therapy is the one that seems to be best, at least by way of the statistics and papers that exist. It's also the one that's been explored the most. So one of the reasons why it's often considered the most popular or effective is 'cause it's also been around longer and it's been explored the most. Cognitive behavioral therapy in general is a progressive exposure of the patient in a very controlled way, in a clinical setting, to some of the triggers or the conditions that would exacerbate bipolar disorder. Now, earlier I said borderline personality disorder has all these triggers and triggered elements from the external environment, whereas bipolar disorder does not. And that's still true, but it is the case that somebody with bipolar can have worse symptoms if life conditions get worse or more stressful. So cognitive behavioral therapy, I mean the discussion about and sometimes the direct exposure to anxiety provoking elements of life can be very helpful for adjusting the responses to those otherwise triggering events and sometimes making the drug treatments more effective even at lower doses. There are also forms of therapy including family-focused therapy, which is especially important in terms of bipolar disorder because family members, provided that they are not themselves in a manic episode due to the close heritability of bipolar disorder, but family members can often be excellent windows into whether or not somebody is doing well or poorly, or is veering toward or is emerging from a manic or depressive episode because they understand that person, they have a lot of data, it could be purely subjective data, but they have a lot of exposure to how long or well somebody's been sleeping or eating, et cetera. So family-focused therapy involves other members of the person suffering from bipolar disorder's family, as well as conversations about family members in a way that helps patients with bipolar disorder navigate, not just through manic episodes and depressive episodes, but start to learn to predict what are the conditions psychological, physical, and otherwise that can trigger bipolar episodes. And then there's a category of therapy called interpersonal and social rhythm therapy. This is deserving of its own entire episode really. Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, it's sort of an expansion on family-focused therapy, although it's distinct in certain ways as well, and really focuses on how people are relating to others in their life, and in the workplace, and in the school environment, and also within the family, et cetera. And I should say that a overall theme that's emerging in psychiatry and psychology is to start wherever possible to incorporate more of the social aspects and the interpersonal aspects. In other words, not just talking to and examining a patient as one biological system, one nervous system, one set of chemicals, and one life, but rather a set of chemicals, neural circuits, and a life that's embedded in the chemicals and neural circuits and lives of other people. Just by way of example, you can imagine that if somebody is in a very healthy relationship or a very abusive relationship, that that's going to strongly impact the outcomes of manic episodes. You can imagine that if the financial situation is one in which people can recover from manic episodes, I didn't mention this earlier, but I should have, forgive me, that oftentimes people who are in a manic episode will go out and spend immense amounts of money that they simply cannot afford to lose. And then the depressive episodes that, in many cases, follow are made far worse by the financial anxiety and the financial stress that results from those manic episodes of spending, et cetera. And then of course, this carries over to sexual promiscuity where people might be dealing with unwanted pregnancy or STIs, or very fractured interpersonal dynamics with existing or new relationships. I mean, you can imagine how these manic episodes, as well as the depressive episodes can really wick out into an enormous amount of destruction, which brings us back to the initial criteria of BP-1 and BP-2 is that these manic episodes are not a good thing. These depressive episodes are not a good thing. They create this sense of euphoria in the person experiencing mania, or they create this sense that anything is possible. But at the end of the day, and actually every day, these episodes are quite maladaptive. They really destroy people's lives. And it's not just the life of the person that's suffering from bipolar disorder. And so hence cognitive behavioral therapy, family-focused therapy and interpersonal and social rhythm therapies are the primary three talk therapies that are most often combined with drug therapies in order to try and really reduce the harm. It's really all about harm reduction from manic episodes and depressive episodes. One very exciting and emerging treatment that does show great promise, and in some cases, great outcomes, for bipolar disorder is, believe it or not electric shock therapy. Electric shock therapy may sound barbaric, and in fact, it tends to look barbaric, although this is done in the controlled setting of a hospital. If any of you have seen One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, the final scene or near final scene in that movie was Jack Nicholson with the sort of bite protector in his mouth and getting electric shock therapy, and it's as the name suggests, it's a kind of inducing a global seizure, either low level or grand mal type seizure in the patient's brain and nervous system. You might ask, well, why would one want to do that? Well, it turns out that this is a well-established, and in many cases, very effective treatment for major depression. Electric shock therapy is generally used for treatment-resistant depression. So these are people that have no positive response or ongoing positive response to drug therapies or other therapies. Electric shock therapy is thought to work primarily by stimulating the massive kind of indiscriminate release of things like serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, a huge variety of neuromodulators, as well as things like BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor which then allows neuroplasticity to take place. Again, BDNF being permissive for neuroplasticity. The problem with ECT is that it's really only useful for treatment-resistant depression, it doesn't actually target the manic aspects of bipolar depression and bipolar disorder, but nonetheless, is used when drug treatments don't work. Some of the negatives of electric shock therapy or electric convulsive therapy, ECT, is the proper acronym and way it's described is that it's quite invasive, right? This is something that you need to go to the hospital for and oftentimes there's some inpatient care required after the electric convulsive therapy. It's a fairly high cost, especially for those that don't have insurance. And of course it requires anesthesia. For most people, that's not going to be a problem, but for many people that could be a problem. And there's often some associated memory loss. And so the memory loss, the invasive nature of ECT and the cost oftentimes rule out ECT for most patients, and that's why it's sort of a late stage or kind of last resort type thing for treatment-resistant depression. Nowadays ketamine type therapy is done repeatedly or other treatments, for instance, transcranial magnetic stimulation which is basically non-invasive, it's a coil that's placed on the outside of the skull, excuse me. And we can more accurately refer to it as repetitive or rTMS, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Transcranial magnetic stimulation is a tool that allows researchers and clinicians to reduce the amount of activity in specific neural circuits. So they can actually target the magnetic field to particular neural circuits to reduce activity in those neural circuits. Again, it's minimally invasive. It has been shown to be effective in both increasing neuroplasticity in positive ways, as well as reducing depressive episodes and in a few instances in reducing the amplitude or the intensity of manic episodes in people with bipolar disorder. The problem is it's still a very early technique. There aren't a lot of clinics and labs doing it. I'm starting to see more advertisements, literally commercial clinics that are advertising rTMS or TMS. I encourage you to approach those clinics with caution. I'm of the mind that if those clinics are not either closely or maybe even distantly associated with a research institution that's really up on the latest of rTMS, you'd be wise to at least do your research, and explore, talk to other patients who've done these treatments, but certainly in university hospitals and in clinical settings and research settings, rTMS is being used as a way to, for instance, reduce the activity of certain limbic circuitries so that people are just overall less excitable and manic or to activate because it can also be used for activation now of certain neural circuits. Activate, for instance, the parietal inputs, the top down control over the limbic system. This is all happening right now. So we have ECT, repetitive TMS or rTMS, and then as I mentioned earlier, ketamine therapies, most of those are targeted toward the depressive aspects of manic depression. So for people with bipolar disorder that doesn't include depression, those are going to be less effective, but overall, it's going to be the talk therapies of the sort that we discussed earlier, or a moment ago. Plus drug treatments, almost always lithium will be explored, plus some treatments for the depressive episodes in particular if those depressive episodes are present. Nowadays, there's a lot of excitement about psilocybin which is a psychedelic. In the US, psilocybin is still illegal. It is not legal, meaning you can get in a lot of trouble for possessing it, certainly for selling it, et cetera. But psilocybin is being explored as a clinical therapy in certain laboratory settings in particular, at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. It's being explored in human patients for the treatment of major depression, for OCD I believe as well, but certainly for major depression and for eating disorders. And it seems from the initial wave of publications from that work done by the incredible Matthew Johnson or Dr. Matthew Johnson, who was a guest on this podcast before, he's also been on the Tim Ferris Podcast, he's been on the Lex Fridman Podcast. Dr. Matthew Johnson came on this podcast, he's talked about some of the work with psilocybin for the treatment of depression. Very impressive results there. And as you can imagine, very impressive results for the major depressive episodes for bipolar. However, at least to my knowledge, again, to my knowledge, there have not been any controlled clinical trials exploring psilocybin for the mania associated with bipolar disorder. If someone out there is aware of those clinical trials, please let me know. I'll do an update in a future podcast, but right now, no knowledge from me about psilocybin clinical trials for the manic component of bipolar disorder. A number of people are probably also going to wonder about whether or not cannabis or medical marijuana is useful for bipolar disorder. To address this, I looked to some previous lectures and some clinicians at Stanford Psychiatry. This question was asked of them, and as it turns out, cannabis does not seem to be effective for the treatment of the manic phases of bipolar disorder or for the treatment of the major depressive component. The only treatment perhaps, or I should say the only situation perhaps in which it might be useful, and this is what was relayed to me, is that it may help with sleep in certain people that are having trouble with insomnia, though nowadays, it's far more common for people in manic episodes to be prescribed things like Trazodone or other benzos, benzodiazepines in order to try and get sleep within the manic episodes. And benzodiazepines and Trazodone, et cetera, work largely through the so-called GABA system. This is a neurotransmitter that causes reductions in excitability of neurons, hence why it's being used to try and calm people down and allow them to sleep during their manic episodes. So not a lot, or essentially no data, supporting the use of cannabis for the treatment of bipolar disorder, per se, nor data supporting the use of psilocybin for the treatment of bipolar disorder per se. But I realize, as I say that, that there are going to be a number of people that may have had positive or negative experiences with cannabis or psilocybin as they relate to bipolar disorder. So please, if you're willing or comfortable, put that, if you're comfortable, into the comment section on YouTube. And of course, if you are aware of any studies on cannabis or psilocybin showing positive outcomes for the treatment bipolar disorder, please provide links or PubMed ideas to those, I'd love to peruse those studies. There are two naturopathic, or I should say, nutrition, supplement-based approaches to bipolar disorder. They get talked about a lot, and one of them shows some interesting promise, or effectiveness even, in a limited context. Before marching into this description of these two compounds, in fact before even mentioning these two compounds, I do want to emphasize what's been said and written about over and over again and what was relayed to me from expert psychiatrists. It is not wise to rely purely on talk therapy or on natural approaches to the treatment of bipolar disorder given the intensity of the disorder and the high propensity for suicide risk in people with bipolar disorder, it is a chemical and neural circuit disruption, and it needs to be dealt with head on through the appropriate chemistry and prescription drug approaches from a board-certified psychiatrist. I don't say this to protect me, I say this truly to protect those who either suffer from or think they may suffer from bipolar disorder or if you know someone who you think might suffer from a bipolar disorder. Now, all that is not to say that there aren't useful lifestyle interventions that can support people with bipolar disorder. So I just briefly want to mention those. And again, I'm lifting the statements I'm about to make from some excellent online lectures from psychiatrists at Stanford and elsewhere, which essentially say that, of course, of course, of course, getting better sleep, getting adequate exercise, getting proper nutrition, having quality, healthy, social interactions, even getting regular sunlight in the day and avoiding bright light at night, all of those things are going to braid together to support the nervous system and the psyche of somebody with bipolar disorder, but they braid together to support the psyche and the neurochemistry and the neural circuits of anybody and everybody. So they have generally a modulatory effect that is they're indirectly shifting the likelihood that somebody might have an episode, or the intensity of an episode, in particular, the depressive episodes. You can imagine how someone who's heading into a depressive episode, maybe they're on a lower amount of medication or they haven't yet medicated for the depressive episode of bipolar. And now they're making sure or their family is making sure that they're getting exercise, sunshine, eating correctly, social engagement, et cetera. Of course it makes perfect sense why they would have perhaps a shallower drop into depression or maybe an offset of depressive episode. That said, most all, if not all people with bipolar disorder are likely to need some sort of drug therapy intervention in order to help them. So lifestyle factors are always important in all individuals, those suffering from psychiatric conditions or not. But in some conditions of the mind and body, those lifestyle interventions can have a greater effect in offsetting symptoms, whereas in bipolar disorder, I think it's naive, and in fact, wrong to say that lifestyle interventions alone are going to prevent, especially the extreme forms of mania and depression. Again, bipolar disorder being so serious and carrying such high suicide risk, we just have to point this out again and again. Now with that said, there are two substances generally found as supplements, although there are other sources of them as well, including within nutritional sources that have been shown, at least in some studies, to be pretty effective in adjusting the symptoms of bipolar disorder, and those two things are inositol and omega-3 fatty acids. Now inositol is a compound that is taken for a variety of reasons. It's something we've talked about on the podcast before. I personally take inositol not because I have bipolar disorder, in fact I am quite lucky that I don't have bipolar disorder, but I take inositol, a 900 milligrams of myo-inositol every third night or so in order to improve my sleep. It's something that I've added to my sleep stack. It's something that I found greatly enhances the depth and quality of my sleep. And if I wake up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom, et cetera, it's greatly enhanced my ability to fall back asleep when I want to go back to sleep. It also seems to have a fairly potent anti-anxiety effect during the day. And as I discussed in our episode about obsessive-compulsive disorder, inositol has been used at high dosages, again, I should say myo-inositol has been used at high dosages, at levels of even 10, 18 grams, those are massive dosages by the way, to deal with certain symptoms of OCD to limited success. And I should mention that high dosages of 10 or 18 grams of inositol can cause a lot of gastric discomfort, et cetera. If you want to learn more about inositol and its various uses, I encourage you to go to examine.com where there's the so-called Human Effect Matrix, and that Human Effects Matrix will describe the many places in which myo-inositol and other forms of inositol have been show shown to be effective in, for instance, reducing anxiety, enhancing sleep and on and on. Myo-inositol is important because myo-inositol, and we can just say inositol, is related to so-called second messenger pathways. I don't want to get too deep into second messenger pathways, but when certain substances bind, like neurotransmitters to a receptor on a cell surface, oftentimes those receptors themselves will open and allow the passage of ions and other things into a cell. Oftentimes they will engage what are called second messenger systems that is they will trigger mechanisms within the cell to then go do other things. This is probably something we should get into in real detail in a future episode for those of you that really want to nerd out on cell-cell signaling, which is a favorite topic of mine. In any case, inositol is related to a number of so-called second messenger systems, this handoff, or this kind of stimulating of changes within a cell that can inspire changes in what's called membrane fluidity, can actually make the membranes of cells, the outside fence around a cell, which is made up of fatty stuff, it can change the fluidity, meaning how readily things can float around in the membrane. You know, we think of cells as very rigid, like there's a cell, there's a neuron, or there's a immune cell, but actually those cells have a fatty outside, in particular neurons have a fatty outside. It's a thin fatty outside, it's called the cell membrane, and things are floating around in that cell membrane, but it's kind of like jello that hasn't quite fixed. And so things like receptors moving into the synapse or moving out the synapse for homeostatic plasticity, things like the ability for certain genes to be turned on in a cell or not turned on, can depend a lot on things that are happening in that cell membrane and how readily things move around in the cell membrane. One way to think about this whole picture of membrane fluidity is that just imagine that everyone of your cells has this layer, it's kind of a gelatinous-like layer and there are lots of little rafts floating around in there, but those rafts are able to move more quickly from one place to another, or get more stuck at one place or another, depending on how set that jello is. Inositol and lithium, and as we'll talk about next, omega-3 fatty acids seem to change the fluidity of those membranes, in other words, they allow things to move in and out of those membranes more readily or not. And this is no surprise given that those membranes are made out of fatty stuff. In particular, the membranes of neurons are what called a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, bi means two, lipid, fat. And omega-3 fatty acids of the sort that are found in certain fish, and that fatty fish in particular, and that are found in fish oil and cod liver oil, et cetera. Omega-3 fatty acids, when we ingest them are used for a lot of different things, but they can be readily incorporated into pathways or directly incorporated into cell membranes, changing the way those cell membranes work and if those cell membranes are the cell membranes of neurons, changing the way that neurons work. So the ability for fish oil, and in particular, the omega-3 fatty acids, which come in varieties like EPA and DHA, we'll talk about that in a moment, have been explored at relatively high dosages for their ability to offset some of the effects of mania and to offset the effects of depressive episodes in bipolar disorder. And actually, the data there are pretty impressive, although, although they are varied, meaning you will find several studies, and I'll mention a few, that found no effect of omega-3 supplementation through fish oil, usually it's capsuled fish oil, although fish oil can also be taken, excuse me, in liquid form. Oftentimes taking in liquid form is the more cost efficient way to do it. Taking in capsule form is the more palatable way to do it, because fish oil for a lot of people doesn't taste good. But nonetheless, there are several studies that have shown that supplementing with fish oil or omega-3 fatty acids at levels of, for instance, four grams per day for a period of time, this is a study that we will link in the show notes, This is Murphy at al. 2012. This is a fatty acid supplementation of 70% EPA to DHA actually worsen symptoms of mania over a period of about 16 weeks, which on the face of it makes it seem like, okay, omega-3 fatty acid supplementation, very likely to not be good for bipolar disorder. And yet that was the manic phase. When one looks at some of the other studies of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation, there is, for instance, a study published in 1999, this is a much higher dosage supplementation with omega-3 fatty acid, this is a 9.6 grams of fish oil per day for four months. And then actually greatly reduced symptoms of bipolar depression compared to the control group which received olive oil, olive oil is a different form of fat, monounsaturated fat but doesn't contain as much of the omega-3 fatty acids and so forth. So 9.6 grams of fish oil per day over four months is a lot of fish oil to be ingesting on a given day. This was a double blind study. This was only carried out, I should mention, in 30 subjects, but it was males and females. And the age range was pretty broad, anywhere from 18 all the way up to 64 years of age, which is important given the sort of longitudinal or changes over time, that one sees in bipolar disorder. Here's the major takeaway, supplementing with high dose omega-3s does seem to be beneficial for a good number of people with bipolar disorder. However, again, I want to highlight, however, it should not be viewed as the only treatment approach for bipolar disorder. This goes back to what I was saying before about the essential need, in most every case, for high potency prescription drug treatments prescribed by board certified psychiatrists for bipolar disorder. However, omega-3 supplementation does seem to improve or reduce the depressive symptoms in the major depressive episodes of bipolar. And there are a couple studies, and we'll link to these in the show notes as well, that show that it may even improve some of the manic episodes as well, meaning it reduces some of the manic symptoms. Now I say all this from a place of great caution, because I know, especially for listeners of this podcast, there's a lot of interest in the behavioral tools, the supplement-based tools, the nutrition tools that can support bipolar disorder, but I don't think I can overemphasize enough that especially for bipolar disorder and the great risk of suicide and suffering and inappropriate spending, or I should say maladaptive spending and impulsivity that's associated with bipolar disorder, that it's hard to imagine a scenario in which just talk therapy and fish oil and lifestyle interventions are going to completely suppress or treat bipolar disorder. People with bipolar disorder really need to consider the full picture of treatments, the drug treatments, the talk therapy treatments, and lifestyle treatments, and nutraceutical, or we can say supplement-based treatments such as omega-3 supplementation as a full and necessary picture for dealing with their illness. I'd be remiss, however, if I didn't emphasize that the omega-3 fatty acid supplementation is very interesting, not just in terms of the subjective effects, people saying they feel less depressed or able to sleep better, or maybe even some reduction in manic symptoms, there's actually been some really good brain imaging to try and understand how omega-3 fatty acid treatments are actually changing the brains and neural circuits of people with bipolar. And I will put a reference to this. This is a paper that was published in the American Journal Psychiatry. It's entitled, Omega-3 Fatty Acid Treatment and T2 Whole Brain Relaxation Times in Bipolar Disorder. I don't have the opportunity to go into a lot of detail right now about what T2 whole brain relaxation times are, but basically when people go into a MRI or f, functional MRI scanner, excuse me, magnetic resonance imaging scanner, what they're getting essentially is pulses of magnetic fields and the way that brain structures and neural activity can be evaluated has a lot to do with the sort of spinning, or not sort of, it has to do with the spinning and the relaxation times of different elements, literally the protons and electrons within the neurons, so it gets really detailed there, and the relaxation time is essentially looking at how quickly some of that spinning returns to rest. And in particular, the fact that the relaxation times are different for aqueous, that is liquid, versus lipid, fatty versus other components of brain tissue. And basically what this study shows is that the membranes of neurons within the brains of these people with bipolar disorder, showed more fluidity, more ability of things to move in and around the membranes, which we know is an important component of neuroplasticity in bipolar subjects that were treated with omega-3 fatty acids as compared to bipolar subjects that did not receive omega-3 fatty acids. And fortunately this study also include a healthy comparison group where they could essentially find that people with bipolar disorder who supplemented with omega-3 had changes at the cellular level and the neural circuit level that brought their brains and neural circuits closer to that of the healthy comparison subjects. So while I don't want to point to omega-3 fatty acid supplementation as the be-all end-all of treatment for bipolar disorder, certainly it is not, it does have a strong mechanistic basis for its possible support of neural circuitry, of neuroplasticity, and in particular, the ability to make changes in cell membranes that are very reminiscent of some of the neural circuit changes and changes in membrane fluidity that are seen with lithium treatment and other known prescription drug treatments that have been established now for decades to be very effective for bipolar disorder. So what that says is that omega-3 supplementation, while not the only intervention that one should consider is something to consider and talk about with your doctor and it's operating in powerful ways. It's not just that it's changing, for instance, your gut microbiome, which is powerful, but is indirect to the brain, it does seem to be having direct effects on neurons and neural circuits. Before we begin to conclude our discussion about bipolar disorder, I want to talk a little bit about this word, disorder, and this is a theme that doesn't just relate to bipolar disorder, but other psychiatric disorders as well. And when we think of a disorder, we think of something that is really detrimental to us. Something that really impairs our ability to function in work, in school, in relationships, and really starts to pull down our health status in a variety of ways. And certainly bipolar disorder meets those criteria. However, there is this idea that things like bipolar disorder, even things like schizophrenia in some cases are responsible for some of the creative aspects or the creative works that have been observed and carried out by human beings for many centuries. And believe it or not, there are good data to support the fact that certain aspects of mania are associated with creativity. Now, we are long overdue for an episode about creativity, its neural circuit basis, its chemical basis here on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and certainly we will have that conversation. But in the meantime, I'd like to just briefly touch upon this idea that certain occupations are associated with a higher incidence of bipolar depression. And in fact, it's been explored at a research level. There are data pointed to the fact that certain individuals of certain occupations tend to be more creative and that creativity is associated with, again, associated, this isn't causal, it's associated, correlated with higher levels or incidents of bipolar depression and maybe even other forms of depression. So this is a study looking at mood disorders in eminent individuals. So these are people that are not just good at what they do, but are exceptional at what they do, and explored the percentage of people in given professions with either depression or mania. And this was actually a data set gleaned from more than a thousand 20th Century Westerners based on their biographies that were reviewed by other people. So it's a bit of an indirect measurement. This isn't psychiatrist data, this is data, or I should say these are data that were compiled from self reports or from reads of self reports. And they explored a number of different professions. So for instance, they looked at people in the military or people who were professional athletes or natural scientists or social scientists, people who occupied positions in public office, or were musical performers, artists, nonfiction writers, poetry, et cetera. There are a lot of professions here. I will post this or I'll post a link to it in the show note captions for you to peruse, but I'll just give you a sense of the extremes on this graph because they're very interesting. Turns out that if you were to look at the profession or I should say among the professions they looked at in this study, 'cause they didn't look at all professions, those in the military and those who are professional athletes or had jobs in the social or natural sciences, of those, there was a lower percentage of those that had depression or mania. In some cases like those who were professional athletes didn't seem to have, there was no incidence of mania, at least in this dataset, whereas at the opposite extreme of the graph, those that were poets, so these are eminent individuals, people that were exceptional poets, exceptional fiction writers, exceptional artists or non-fiction writers, well there, especially for the poets, you find that as many as 90% of these very successful poets had either depression or mania. As high as 90%, that's incredible. Contrast that with military where it's as few as 10% or professional athletes where it's as few as 20%, and for the professional athletes, as I mentioned before, none of them had mania. So does this mean that being a poet will make you manic or depressed? Well, first of all, let's look at the poetry category. It turns out that 75% of these eminent poets, these highly accomplished poets had major depression, whereas only about 20% of those poets had manic episodes. So again, it's not that being a poet is going to give you mania, certainly we're not saying that, it's not that being a poet is going to give you depression, but it turns out that people with depression and people with depression and mania seem to gravitate towards poetry or at least are very successful at poetry. Again, associative, correlative, no causal relationship here. But it is really striking to see how the creative occupations, poetry, fiction, art, non-fiction writing, even though non-fiction writing is about non-fiction, it's still creative, music composition, theater, much higher incidents of things like mania. In fact, for the people in theater, the actors, even though the overall occurrence of depression and mania is lower than that in poets, the fraction of those individuals that have mania is exceedingly high. It's about 30% of those that they looked at who are actors, have manic episodes or have full blown mania. So I'm referring to these data because first of all, I find them incredibly interesting, right up until now we've been talking about bipolar disorder and other mood disorders for their maladaptive effects. And again, they're extremely maladaptive, much, much higher instance of suicide, et cetera, but we'd be wrong to say that certain aspects of manic episodes don't lend themselves well to creativity or that certain aspects of major depression don't lend themselves well to creativity or to the performing arts or to poetry. That said, in no way, shape or form, do I believe that being depressed is a good thing or that being manic is a good thing. Again, we return to the basic foundational criteria for bipolar disorder, major depression which is that the pressured speech, the not sleeping, the incredible increases in energy and the flights of ideas are generally not going to lead, or I think it's fair to say, are not going to lead to good places. In fact, often lead to bad places. But we would also be wrong if we didn't consider the fact that there is a somewhat inextricable relationship between mania and creativity. And it could be that hypomania or brief periods of mania, maybe even an hour a day or 30 minutes a day of composing or writing poetry, maybe even some of the lows that we feel, some of the sadness, some of the grief, some of the nostalgia that we feel provided that it's not pathologic, that it's not persistent for the four or seven days that are diagnostic of bipolar 2 and bipolar 1 disorder respectively, well, then we can start to view emotional states as something that can actually lend themselves to positive outcomes and maybe even to creativity and to improved occupations. So it's important that we have a nuanced view of what sadness versus depression versus major depression are, it's important that we distinguish between being erratic, being very energized, and full blown bipolar disorder. And I raise this for another reason as well. Nowadays, it's very common to hear people saying, ah, you know, that person is OCD. Well, on the episode about OCD that I did a few weeks back, that you can find if you like at hubermanlab.com, in that episode, I pointed out that OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder is very maladaptive. I think it's number seven, as I recall on the list of debilitating diseases, all diseases in terms of lost time at work, suffering relationships, et cetera. So it's a really serious condition. And yet we often hear, oh, that person is obsessive. And as I pointed out, there is obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. And then there is obsessive-compulsive tendencies, which actually benefit people, but that is distinct from obsessive-compulsive disorder as a clinically diagnosed thing. Similarly, we hear that, oh, somebody's being bipolar. You know, they're all over the place. They're bipolar. Well, that's a very subjective label that people give one another in passing, more and more often I'm hearing this, and yet bipolar disorder, whether or not it's BP-1 or BP-2 are extremely maladaptive and extremely associated with high suicide risk. So while I'm not here to police people, I'm not certainly not the word police or the nomenclature police, I do think that whether or not you refer to people as OCD or as bipolar, et cetera, that's up to you, it's not my place to say, but I do think it's important that all of us understand that these psychiatric conditions carry with them tremendous maladaptive weight. So today we've really done a deep dive into bipolar disorder and to both the manic and the depressive components that are present or can be present in bipolar disorder and the different forms of bipolar disorder and some of the major treatments for bipolar disorder, in particular lithium and its underlying mechanisms and some of the neural circuit and chemical basis and neuroplasticity basis of the treatments for bipolar disorder, in particular homeostatic scaling or homeostatic plasticity. All of that, of course, is relevant to bipolar disorder and I hope will be useful in your understanding and maybe even in your pursuit of treatments for bipolar depression, bipolar disorder for you or other people. I also hope that it will be useful in your understanding of how brain circuits work in normal conditions or in conditions where there is no disease state or maladaptive conditions. Homeostatic plasticity is present in all of us. Membrane fluidity due to how easily things move around in the surface, the fatty layers on the outside of neurons and the movement of receptors in and out of neurons that is present in all of us. The influence of omega-3 fatty acids is central to that discussion. As is the discussion about various drug treatments because even if you're not somebody who's taking a drug treatment or who is pursuing a drug treatment for bipolar disorder or another psychiatric condition, your serotonin levels, your dopamine levels, your acetylcholine levels, all of these play into what we call your mental and physical health. In fact, if any of you are interested in the various categories of neuromodulators and tools to adjust those neuromodulators under more standard non-disease conditions, we did an episode on neurochemicals and how to control them. You can find that at hubermanlab.com along with all other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. I should mention everything is timestamped So you can navigate to the specific topics and tools of interest to you. And meanwhile, I just want to thank all of you for joining me on this voyage through the biology and the treatments for bipolar disorder. I do hope you found it beneficial both for yourself and for others. I just want to remind people that bipolar disorder is an extremely serious condition. If you suspect that you have bipolar disorder or you know somebody who does, please make sure that you or they talk to a qualified health professional. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel, that's a terrific, zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, or if you have questions about material already covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put that in the comment section on YouTube, we do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. During today's episode, and certainly on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. Once again, while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep and focus and hormone support and other aspects of mental and physical health and performance. As I mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab Podcast is happy to announce that we partnered with Momentous Supplements. If you'd like to see our supplements and the ones that we designed in concert with Momentous, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. Please also check out Huberman Lab on social media. We are hubermanlab on both Twitter and Instagram. In both places, I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We also have a newsletter, it's called the Neural Network Newsletter. It's completely zero cost and it contains summaries of podcasts and some actionable protocols from each podcast. You can sign up for it by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on Neural Network Newsletter. You can also see some examples of previous newsletters there. I should mention that by signing up, you do provide your email, but we do not share your email with anybody. And again, it is completely zero cost. So once again, thank you for joining me today for our discussion about the biology and treatment of bipolar disorder. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat rock music]

========================================

--- Video 266 ---
Video ID: UChhXiFPRgg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UChhXiFPRgg
Title: Dr. Charles Zuker: The Biology of Taste Perception & Sugar Craving | Huberman Lab Podcast #81
Published: 2022-07-18 12:00:19 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Charles Zuker, PhD, Professor of Biochemistry, Molecular Biophysics and Neuroscience at Columbia University and an Investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Dr. Zuker is the world’s leading expert in the biology of taste, thirst and craving. His laboratory explores the mechanisms of taste perception, focusing on how our conscious and unconscious processing of specific foods and nutrients guide our actions and behaviors. We discuss the neural circuits of taste,  the “gut-brain axis,” the basis of food cravings and the key difference between wanting (craving) and liking (perceiving) sugar. We also explore how taste perception relates to specific food satiety, thirst, to our emotions, and expectation. We also consider how sugar containing and highly-processed foods can hijack the natural balance of the taste and digestive systems. Dr. Zuker provides a true masterclass in the biology of taste and perception that ought to be of interest to anyone curious about how the brain works, our motivated behaviors and the neural, chemical perceptual aspects of the mind.

#HubermanLab #Sugar #Taste 

Thank you to our sponsors
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Dr. Charles Zuker
Columbia Zuckerman Institute: https://zuckermaninstitute.columbia.edu/charles-s-zuker-phd 
Lab website: https://www.zukerlab.com 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) profile: https://www.hhmi.org/scientists/charles-s-zuker 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Charles Zuker & Taste Perception 
00:03:05 Momentous Supplements 
00:04:35 Thesis, ROKA, Helix Sleep
00:08:35 Sensory Detection vs. Sensory Perception 
00:11:48 Individual Variations within Perception, Color
00:16:20 Perceptions & Behaviors 
00:20:19 The 5 Taste Modalities 
00:26:18 Aversive Taste, Bitter Taste 
00:28:00 Survival-Based & Evolutionary Reasons for Taste Modalities, Taste vs. Flavor
00:30:14 Additional Taste Modalities: Fat & Metallic Perception 
00:34:02 Tongue “Taste Map,” Taste Buds & Taste Receptors  
00:39:34 Burning Your Tongue & Perception
00:42:54 The “Meaning” of Taste Stimuli, Sweet vs. Bitter, Valence 
00:51:55 Positive vs. Negative Neuronal Activation & Behavior 
00:56:16 Acquired Tastes, Conditioned Taste Aversion  
01:01:44 Olfaction (Smell) vs. Taste, Changing Tastes over One’s Lifetime
01:09:14 Integration of Odor & Taste, Influence on Behavior & Emotion 
01:17:26 Sensitization to Taste, Internal State Modulation, Salt
01:24:05 Taste & Saliva: The Absence of Taste
01:28:10 Sugar & Reward Pleasure Centers; Gut-Brain Axis, Anticipatory Response
01:36:23 Vagus Nerve
01:43:09 Insatiable Sugar Appetite, Liking vs. Wanting, Gut-Brain Axis 
01:52:03 Tool: Sugar vs. Artificial Sweeteners, Curbing Appetite 
01:54:06 Cravings & Gut-Brain Axis  
01:57:30 Nutrition, Gut-Brain Axis & Changes in Behavior 
02:01:53 Fast vs. Slow Signaling & Reinforcement, Highly Processed Foods  
02:10:38 Favorite Foods: Enjoyment, Sensation & Context
02:15:58 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
[light rock music] - Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Charles Zuker. Dr. Zuker is a professor of biochemistry and molecular biophysics and of neuroscience at Columbia University School of Medicine. Dr. Zuker is one of the world's leading experts in perception. That is how the nervous system converts physical stimuli in the world into events within the nervous system that we come to understand as our sense of smell, our sense of taste, our sense of vision, our sense of touch, and our sense of hearing. Dr. Zuker's lab is responsible for a tremendous amount of pioneering and groundbreaking work in the area of perception, for a long time his laboratory worked on vision, defining the very receptors that allow for the conversion of light into signals that the rest of the eye and the brain can understand. In recent years, his laboratory is focused mainly on the perception of taste. And indeed his laboratory is responsible for discovering many of the taste receptors leading to our perception of things like sweetness, sourness, bitterness, saltiness, and umami. That is savoriness in food. Dr. Zuker's laboratory is also responsible for doing groundbreaking work on the sense of thirst. That is how the nervous system determines whether or not we should ingest more fluid or reject fluids that are offered to us. A key feature of the work from Dr. Zuker's laboratory is that it bridges the brain and body. As you'll soon learn from today's discussion. His laboratory has discovered a unique set of sugar sensing neurons that exist not just within the brain, but a separate set of neurons. That sense sweetness and sugar within the body. And that much of the communication between the brain and body leading to our seeking of sugar is below our conscious detection. Dr. Zuker has received a large number of prestigious awards and appointments as a consequence of his discoveries in neuroscience. He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Medicine, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He is also an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. For those of you that are not familiar with the so-called HHMI, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigators are selected on an extremely competitive basis. And indeed they have to come back every five years and prove themselves worthy of being reappointed as Howard Hughes investigators, Dr. Zuker has been a Howard Hughes investigator since 1989. What all that means for you as a viewer and or listener of today's podcast, is that you are about to learn about the nervous system and its ability to create perceptions in particular, the perception of taste and sugar sensing from the world's expert on perception and taste. I'm certain that by the end of today's podcast, you're not just going to come away with a deeper understanding of our perceptions and our perception of taste in particular. But indeed you will come away with an understanding of how we create internal representations of the entire world around us and in doing so, how we come to understand our life experience. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. We often talk about supplements on the Huberman Lab Podcast and while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. For things like enhancing the quality and speed with which you get into sleep or for enhancing focus or for hormone support. The reason we partnered with Momentous Supplements is several fold. First of all, their supplements are of the absolute highest quality. Second of all, they ship internationally, which is important because many of our podcast listeners reside outside the US. Third, many of the supplements that Momentous makes and most all of the supplements that we partnered with them directly on are single ingredient formulations. This is important for a number of reasons. First of all, if you're going to create a supplement protocol that's customized for your needs, you want to be able to figure out which supplement ingredients are most essential and only use those and supplements that combine lots of ingredients simply won't allow you to do that. So in trying to put together a supplement protocol for yourself, that's the most biologically effective and cost effective single ingredient formulations are going to be the most useful. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman, and there you'll see many of the supplements that we've talked repeatedly about on the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes. I should mention that the catalog of supplements that are available at livemomentous.com/Huberman is constantly being expanded. So you can check back there, livemomentous.com/huberman to see what's currently available. And from time to time, you'll notice new supplements being added to the inventory. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics and for frequent listeners of this podcast, you may remember that I'm not a big fan of the word nootropics because the word nootropics means smart drugs or smart compound. And the reason I don't like that phrase is that the brain has many different circuits that it uses in order to perform things like focus or task switching or creativity. So the idea that there's a single thing that we would call a smart drug is simply not in concert with the biology. Well, Thesis understands this, and as a consequence has developed custom nootropic formulations that are tailored to your unique needs. So for instance, Thesis will allow you to try different blends over the course of a month and determine which blends of specific ingredients work best for you to focus or for you to gain motivation and energy for workouts or for cognitive work of some sort. I've been using Thesis custom nootropics for well over six months now. And they completely transform the way that I do cognitive work and indeed the way that I do physical fitness, if you want to try your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman. There you'll just do a brief three minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind and with the biology of the visual system in mind, I spent my lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with a number of very important challenges in order to be able to see the world around you clearly, things like adjusting for background illumination so that when you go from a sunny area to a shady area, you can see what's in front of you still with crystal clarity. ROKA takes all of that into account when designing their eyeglasses and sunglasses, their eyeglasses and sunglasses also have some unique qualities for instance, because they were initially designed for performance with things like running and cycling. If you get sweaty, they won't fall off your face. Also they're extremely lightweight. In fact, most of the time, I don't even remember that I'm wearing them. I wear ROKA eyeglasses at night. So I wear readers and I wear sunglasses often during the day, if it's very bright or if I'm driving, if you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, you can go to ROKA that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are uniquely tailored to your sleep needs. I've talked repeatedly about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. So getting adequate deep sleep is absolutely essential. Now, one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the surface that you're sleeping on is the right one for you. Helix understands this, and they've created a sleep quiz. That is you go to their website and you fill out a brief quiz that asks questions like you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach. Do you tend to run hotter cold during the night? Maybe you don't know the answers. In which case you simply say you don't know, by taking that quiz, they will match you to a mattress that is ideal for your sleep needs. I took that quiz and I matched to the so-called Dusk, D-U-S-K mattress. And I've been sleeping on that mattress for some time now, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress to one, that's uniquely tailored to your sleep needs, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. And you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. They have a 10 year warranty and you get to try out that mattress for a hundred nights, risk free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it, but I do believe that you will love it because you'll be sleeping far better than you have before. Again, if you're interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman to get up to $200 off and two free pillows. And now for my discussion with Dr. Charles Zuker, Charles, thank you so much for joining me today. - My pleasure. - I want to ask you about many things related to taste and gustatory perception, but maybe to start off and because you've worked on a number of different topics in neuroscience, not just taste, how do you think about perception, or rather, I should say, how should the world and people think about perception, how it's different from sensation and what leads to our experience of life in terms of vision, hearing, taste, et cetera? - So the brain is an extra ordinary organ that weights maybe 2% of your body mass. Yet it consumes anywhere between 25 to 30% of all of your energy and oxygen. And it gets transformed into a mind and this mind changes the human condition. It make, it changes, it transforms fear into courage, conformity into creativity, sadness into happiness. How the hell does that happen? Now, the challenge that the brain faces is that the world is made of real things. You know, this here is a glass, and this is a cord and this is a microphone, but the brain is only made of neurons that only understand electrical signals. So how do you transform that reality into nothing that electrical signals that now need to represent the world? And that process is what we can operationally define as perception, in the senses, let's say olfactory, other taste, vision we can very straightforwardly separate detection from perception, detection is what happens when you take a sugar molecule, you put it in your tongue and then a set of specific cells now sense that sugar molecule that's detection, you haven't perceived anything yet. That is just your cells in your tongue, interacting with this chemical. But now that cell gets activated and sends a signal to the brain and now detection gets transformed into perception. And he's trying to understand how that happens. That's been the maniacal drive, of my entire career in neuroscience. How does the brain ultimately transform detection into perception so that it can guide actions and behaviors? Does that make sense? - Absolutely. And is a very clear and beautiful description, a sort of high level question related to that. And then I think we can get into some of the intermediate steps. I think many people would like to know whether or not my perception of the color of your shirt is the same as your perception of the color of your shirt. - Excellent question. Am I okay to interrupt you as I'm guessing what you're going? - Interruption is welcome on this podcast. The audience will always penalize me for interrupting you, and will never penalize you for interrupting me. - Good, I like the one way penalize. Now, given what I told you before that the brain is trying to represent the world based in nothing but the transformation of these signals into electrical languages that now neurons had to encode and decode. It follows that your brain is different than my brain. And therefore it follows that the way that you are perceiving the world must be different than mine, even when receiving the same sensory cues. And I'll tell you about an experiment is a simple experiment yet brilliant. That demonstrates why we perceive the world, how we perceive the world different. So in the world of vision, as you know, well now we have three classes of photo receptor neurons that sense three basic colors, red, blue, and green. Blue, green, and red if we go from short to long wavelength and these three are sufficient to accommodate the full visible spectra, I'm going to take three light projectors, and I'm going to project with one into a wide screen, a red light, and the other one green light, I'm going to overlap the two beams. And on the screen, there's be yellow. This is the superposition when you have two beams of red and green, and then I'm going to take a third projector and I'm going to put a filter that projects right next to that mixed beam, a spectral pure yellow. And I'm going to ask you to come to the red and green projectors and play with intensity knobs so that you can match that yellow that you're projecting to the spectrally pure next to it. Is this making sense? - Perfect sense. - And I'm going to write down the numbers in those two volume intensity knobs and then I'm going to ask the next person to do the same. And then I'm going to ask every person around this area of Battery Park in New York to do the same, and guess what, we're going to end up with thousands of different number combinations. - Amazing. - So for all of us, is yellow enough that we can use a common language, but for every one of us, that yellow is going to be ever so slightly differently. And so I think that simple psychological experiment beautifully illustrates how we truly perceive the world differently. - I love that example. And yet, in that example, we know the basic elements from which color is created. If we migrate into a slightly different sense, let me pick a hard one, like- - Sound. - Sound, olfaction. - Very hard then to do an experiment that will allow us to get that degree of granularity and beautiful causality, where we can show that A produces and leads to B. If I give you the smell of a rose, you can describe it to me. If I smell the same rose, I can describe it also, but I have no way whether the two of us are experiencing the same, but it's close enough that we can both pretty much say that it has the following enough features or other determinants, but no question that your experience is different than mine. - The fact that it's good enough for us to both survive that your perception of yellow and my perception of yellow at least up until now is good enough for us both to survive. - You got it. - Raises a thought about a statement made by a colleague of ours, Marcus Meister at Caltech. It's never been on this podcast, but in a review that I read by Marcus, at one point, he said that the basic function of perception is to divide our behavioral responses into the outcomes downstream of three basic emotional responses. Yum. I like it. Yuck. I hate it. Or meh, whatever. What do you think about, I'm not looking to establish a debate between you and Marcus, without Marcus here. - I understand that. - But what I like about that is that it seems like we know the brain is a very economical organ in some sense, despite its high metabolic demands and this variation in perception from one individual to the next, at once, seems like a problem because we're all literally seeing different things. And yet we function, we function well enough for most of us to avoid death and cliffs and eating poisons and so forth and to enjoy some aspects of life one hopes. So is there a general statement that we can about the brain, not just as a organ to generate perception, not just as an organ to keep us alive, but also an organ that is trying to batch our behaviors into general categories of outcome? - I think so, but, and again, I think the world of Marcus too, and I think he's right that broadly speaking, you could categorize a lot of behaviors falling into those two categories and that's 100% likely to be the case for animals in the wild where the choices are not necessarily binary, but they're very unique and distinct. Do I want to eat this? Do I want to kill that? Do I want to go there? Or do I want to go here? We humans deviated from that world long ago. And learned to experience life where we do things that we should not be doing. - Some of us more than others. - Exactly. You know, in my own world of taste, the likelihood that an animal in the wild will enjoy eating something bitter it's inconceivable, yet we love tonic water. We enjoy, we like living on the edge. We love enjoying experiences that makes us human. And that goes beyond that simple set of categories, which is yummy, yukky, ah, who cares. And so I think it's not a bad palette, but I think it's overly reductionist for certainly what we humans do. - I agree. And since we're here in New York, I can say that the many options, the extensive variety of food, flora and fauna in New York explains a lot of the more nuanced behaviors that we observe. Let's talk about taste because although you've done extensive work in the field of vision, and it's a topic that I love you could spend all day on taste is fascinating. First of all, I'd like to know why you migrated from studying vision to studying taste. And perhaps in that description, you could highlight to us why we should think about and how we should think about this sense of taste. - My goal has been to understand, as I highlighted before how the brain does its magic, you know what part you might wonder, ideally, I like to help contribute to understand all of it. You know how do you encode and decode emotions? How do you encode and decode memories and actions? How do you make decisions? How do you transform detection into perception? And the list goes on and on. But one of the key things in science, as you know, is ensuring that you always ask the right question so that you have a possibility of answering it. Because if the question cannot be tractable or reduced to an experimental path that helps you resolve it, then we end up doing some really fun science, but not necessarily answering the important problem that we want to study. Make sense? - From a first person perspective, yes. The hardest question, the most important question is what are you going to try and answer. - You got it. And so for example I will have to understand the neural basis of empathy. - [Andrew] There's a big market for that. - 100%, but I wouldn't even know. I mean, at the molecular level, that's what we do. How do the circuits in your brain create that sense? I have no clue how to do it. I can come up with ways to think about it, but I like to understand what in your brain makes someone a great philanthropist. What is the neural basis of love? I wouldn't even know where to begin. So if I want to begin to study these questions about brain function, that can cover so many aspects of the brain, I need to choose a problem that affords me that window. But in a way that I can ask questions that get me answers and among the senses that have the capacity of transforming detection into perception of being stored as memories or creating emotions, of giving you different actions and perceptions as a function of the internal state. You know, when you're hungry, things taste very differently that when you're sated, how, why? When you taste something, you now remember this amazing meal you had with your first date, how does that happen? So if I want to begin to explore all of these things that the brain does, I felt I have to choose a sensory system that affords some degree of simplicity in the way that the input output relationships are put together. And in a way that still can be used to ask every one of these problems that the brain has to ultimately compute, encode and decode. And what's remarkable about the taste system at the time that I began working on this is that nothing was known about the molecular basis of taste. You know, we knew that we could taste what has been usually defined as the five basic taste qualities, sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami, umami is a Japanese word that means yummy, delicious. And that's nearly every animal species, the taste of amino acids. And in humans, it's mostly associated with the taste of MSG, monosodium glutamate, one amino acid in particular. - What are just by way of example, some foods that are rich in the umami evoking stimulation? - Seaweed, tomatoes, cheese, eh, and it's a great, great flavor enhancer. It enriches our sensory experience. And so the beautiful thing of the system is that the lines of input are limited to five. You know, sweet, sour, bitter, salt and umami, and each of them has a predetermined meaning, you are born liking sugar and disliking bitter. You have no choice. These are hard wire systems, but of course you can learn to dislike sugar and to like bitters, but in the while, let's take humans out of the question, these are a hundred percent predetermined. You are born with that specific valance value for each taste of sweet, umami and low salt are attractive taste qualities. They evoke appetitive responses, I want to consume them. And bitter and sour are innately, predetermined to be aversive. - Could I interrupt you just briefly and ask a question about that exact point for something to be appetitive to and some other taste to be aversive and for those to be hardwired, can we assume that the sensation of very bitter or of activation of bitter receptors in the mouth activates a neural circuit that causes closing of the mouth, retraction of the tongue and retraction of the body and that the taste of something sweet might actually induce more licking? - 100%, you got it, the activation of the receptors in the tongue that recognize sweet versus the ones that recognize bitter activate an entire behavioral program. And that program that we can refer as appetitiveness or aversion it's composed of many different subroutines, in the case of bitter is very easy to actually look at, see them happening in animals. Because the first thing you do is you stop licking. Then you put unhappy face, then you squint your eyes and then you start gagging. And that entire thing happens by the activation of a bitter molecule in a bitter sensing cell in your tongue. - It's incredible. - It's again, the magic of the brain, how it it's able to encode and decode these extraordinary actions and behaviors in response of nothing but a simple, very unique sensory stimuli. Now, let me say that this pallet of five basic tastes accommodates all the dietary needs of the organism. Sweet to ensure that we get the right amount of energy, umami, to ensure that we get proteins and that essential nutrient, salt, the three appetitive ones to ensure that we maintain our electrolyte balance, bitter to prevent the ingestion of toxic nauseous chemicals, nearly all bitter tasting things out in the wild are bad for you, and sour, most likely to prevent ingestion of spoil acid, fermented foods. And that's it. That is the pallet that we deal with. Now, of course, there's a difference between basic taste and flavor, flavor is the whole experience. Flavor is the combination of multiple tastes coming together together with smell, with texture, with temperature, with the look of it that gives you what you and I would call the full sensory experience. But, but we scientists need to reduce the problem into its basic elements. So we can begin to break it apart before we put it back together. So when we think about the sense of taste, and we try to figure out how these lines of information go from your tongue to your brain and how they signal and how they could integrate it and how they trigger all these different behaviors. We look at them as individual qualities, so we give the animals sweet, or we give them a bitter. We give them sour, we avoid mixes because the first stage of discovery is to have that clarity as to what you're trying to extract so that you can hopefully meaningfully make a difference by being able to figure out how easy that A goes to B to C and to D, does this make sense? - Yeah, almost like the primary colors to create the full array of the color spectrum. - Exactly. - Before I ask you about the first and second and third stages of taste and flavor perception, is there any idea that there may be more than five? - There is, for example, what about fat? - I love the taste. - Oh, I love fat too. And I love the texture of fat, especially if it's slightly burnt, like in South America, when I visited Buenos Aries, I found that at the end of a meal, they would take a steak, the trimming off the edge of the steak, burn it slightly, and then serve it back to me. And I thought that's disgusting. And then I tasted it and it's delightful. - It is. - There's nothing quite like it. - This goes back to this notion before that we like to live on the edge. And we like to do things that we should not be doing, Andrew, but on the other hand, look at those muscles. - I don't suggest anyone eat pure fat. The listeners of this podcast will immediately, I'm sure there'll be a YouTube video soon that I like eating pure fat. I'm not on a ketogenic diet, et cetera, but fat is tasty as evidenced by the obesity problem that exists in this country. - We'll talk about that. You know, in a little bit about the gut brain axis, I think it'll be important to cover it because it's the other side of the taste system. And so missing taste, one is fat, although like you clearly highlighted a lot of fat taste in quotation marks is really the feeling of fat rolling on your tongue. And so there is a compelling argument that a lot of what we call fat taste, it's really mechanosensory, it's somatosensory cells, cells that are not responding to taste, but they're responding to mechanical stimulation of fat molecules rolling on the tongue that gives you that perception of fat. - I love the idea that there is a perception of fat, regardless of whether or not there's a dedicated receptor for fat, mostly because it's evoking sensations and imagery of the taste of slightly burnt fat. - For example. And another one you could argue is metallic taste. You know, I know exactly what it tastes like. You know, if you ask me to explain it, I will have a hard time, what are the palettes of that color that can allow me to define it? It wouldn't be easy, but I know precisely what it tastes like, take take a penny, put it in your mouth and you know what it tastes like. - Or blood. - Or blood. That's another very good example. And is there really a receptor for metallic taste or it's nothing but this magical combination of the activation of the existing lines, think of it as lines of information, just separate lines, like the keys of a piano. Sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, you play the key and you activate a one chord. And that one chord in the case of a piano leads to a note, you know a tune and in the case of taste leads to an action and a behavior, but you play many of them together. And something emerges that it's different than any one of the pieces. And it's possible that metallic, for example, represents the combination of the activity just in the right ratio makes of these other lines. - Makes sense. And it actually provides a perfect, your example of the piano provides a perfect segue for what I'd like to touch on next, which is if you would describe the sequence of neural events leading to a perceptual event of taste. And I'm certain that somewhere in there you'll embed an answer to the question of whether or not we indeed have different taste receptors distributed in different locations on our tongue. Or elsewhere in the mouth. - Yes. So let's start by the banking that old tale and myth. - Who came up with that? - There are many views, but the most prevalent is that there was an original drawing describing the sensitivity of the tongue to different tastes. So imagine I can take a Q-Tip, this is a thought experiment, and I'm going to dip that Q-Tip in salt and in quinine as something bitter and glucose as something sweet. And I'm going to take that Q-tip, ask you to stick your tongue out and start moving around your tongue and ask you, what do you feel? And then I'm going to change the concentration of the amount of salt or the amount of bitter and ask, can I get some sort of a map of sensitivity to the different tastes? And the argument that has emerged is that there is a good likelihood that the data was simply mistranslated as it was being drawn. And of course, that led to an entire industry. This is the way you maximize your wine experience, because now we're going to form the vessel that you're going to drink from so that it acts maximally on the receptors which happen. Now, there is no tongue map. All right, we have taste buds distributed in various parts of the tongue. So there is a map on the distribution of taste bud, but each taste bud has around a hundred taste receptor cells. And those taste receptor cells can be of five types, sweet, sour, bitter, salty, or umami. And for the most part, all taste buds have the representation of all five taste qualities. Now there's no question that there is a slight bias for some taste, like bitter, is particularly rich at the very back of your tongue. And there is a teleological basis for that, actually a biological basis for that. That's the last line of defense before you swallow something bad. And so let's make sure that the very back of your tongue has plenty of these bad news receptors so that if they get activated, you can trigger a gagging reflex and get rid of this that otherwise may kill you. - Makes good sense. - But the notion that all sweet is in the front and salt is on the side. It's not real. Go ahead. - Oh, I was just going to ask, first of all, thank you for dispelling that myth. And we will propagate that information as far and wide as we can. 'Cause I think that's the number one myth related to taste. The other one is, are there taste receptors anywhere else in the mouth, for instance, on the lips? - The palette, the palette, not the lips. So it's in the pharynx at the very back of the oral cavity, the tongue and the palette and the palette is very rich in sweet receptors. - I'll have to pay attention to this the next time I eat something sweet. - When you pull it up, yeah. Now the important thing is that after the receptors for these five, the detectors, the molecules that send sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, these are receptors, proteins found on the surface of taste receptor cells that interact with these chemicals. And once they interact, then they trigger the cascade of events, biochemical events, inside cell that now sends an electrical signal that says there is sweet here, or there is salt here. Now having these receptors and my laboratory identify the receptors for all five basic taste classes, sweet, bitter, salt, umami, and most recently sour. Now completing the palette. You can now use these receptors to really map where are they found in the tongue in a very rigorous way. This is no longer about using a Q-Tip and trying to figure out what you're feeling, but rather what you have in your tongue. This is not a guess. This is now a physical map that says the sweet receptors are found here. The bitter are found here. And when you do that, you find that in fact, every taste bud throughout your oral cavity has receptors for all of the basic taste classes. - Amazing. And as it turns out, and I'm sure you'll tell us important in terms of thinking about how the brain computes, encodes and decodes this thing we call taste. I'm going to inject a quick question that I'm sure is on many people's minds before we get back into the biological circuit, which is many people, including myself, are familiar with the experience of drinking a sip of tea or coffee that is too hot, and burning my tongue is the way I would describe it. - Horrible. - Horrible. And then disrupting my sense of taste for some period of time afterward. When I experienced that phenomenon, that unfortunate phenomenon have I destroyed taste receptors that regenerate, or have I somehow used temperature to distort the function of the circuit so that I no longer taste the way I did before? - Excellent question. And the answer is both. It turns out that your taste receptors only live for around two weeks, and this, by the way, makes sense because here you have an organ, the tongue, that is continuously exposed to everything you could range from the nicest, to the most horrible possible things. - Use your imagination. - And so you need to make sure that these cells are always coming back in a way that can reexperience the world in the right way and there are other organs that have the same underlying logic. Your gut, your intestines are the same way. Amazing. Again, they're receiving everything that you ingest. God forbid what's there, from the spiciest to the most horrible tastings or the most delicious. And again, those intestinal cells whose role is to ultimately take all these nutrients and bring them into the body. Also renew in a very, very fast cycle, olfactory neurons in your nose is the example. So then A, yes, you're burning a lot of your cells and is over for those. The good news is that they're going to come back, but we know that when you burn yourself with tea, they come back within 20 minutes, 30 minutes, an hour, and these cells are not renewing in that timeframe. They're not listening to your needs. They have their own internal clock. And so you are really affecting, you're damaging them in a way that they can recover. And then they come back and you also damage your somatosensory cells. These are the results that feel things, not taste things. And then you wait half an hour or so, and then my goodness, thank God, it's back to normal. - And most of the time, I don't even notice the transition realizing, as you tell me, and I'll later, I'll ask you about the relationship between odor and taste. But as a next step, along this circuit, let's assume I ingest some, let's keep it simple. A sweet taste. - Let's make it even simpler. But at the same time, perhaps more informative, let's compare and contrast sweet and bitter as we follow their lines from the tongue to the brain. So the first thing is that the two evoke diametrically opposed behaviors. If we have to come up with two sensory experience that represent polar opposites, it will be sweet and video. There are not two colors that represent polar opposites because you could say black and white, they are polar opposites, one detects only one thing. The other one detects everything, but they don't evoke different behaviors. - Even political parties have some overlap. - Sweet and bitter are the two opposite ends of the sensory spectrum, now, a taste can be defined by two features. Again, I'm a reductionist, so I'm reducing it in a way that I think it's easier to follow the signal. And the two features are its quality and its valance and valance with a little V that's what we say in Spanish, with a V, means the value of that experience, right? Or in this case of that stimuli and you take sweet, sweet has a quality, an identity, and that's what you and I will refer to as the taste of sweet. We know exactly what it tastes like, But sweet also has a positive valance, which makes it incredibly attractive and appetitive, but it's attractive and appetitive, as I'll tell you in a second independent of its identity and quality. In fact, we have been able to engineer animals where we completely remove the valance from the stimuli. So these animals can taste sweet, can recognize it as sweet, but it's no longer attractive. It's just one more chemical stimuli. And that's because the identity and the valence are encoded in two separate parts of the brain. In the case of bitter, again, it has on the one hand its identity, its quality, and you know exactly what bitter tastes like. - I can taste it now, even as you describe it. - But it also has a valence and that's a negative valance because it evokes aversive behaviors. Are we on? - Absolutely. And it comes to mind. I remember telling some kids recently that we're going to go get ice cream and it was interesting. They looked up and they started smacking their like, they'll actually. - The anticipatory response. Absolutely. When we talk about the gut brain maybe we'll get there. So then the signals, if we follow now, these two lines, they're really like two separate keys at the two ends of this keyboard. And you press one key and you activate this cord. So you activate the sweet cells throughout your oral cavity. And they all converge into a group of sweet neurons in the next station, which is still outside the brain, it's one of the taste ganglia. These are the neurons that innervate your tongue and the oral cavity. - Where do they sit approximately? - Around there. - Right here around there. The lymph nodes, more or less? - You got it. And there are two main ganglia that innervate the vast majority of all taste buds in the oral cavity. And then from there that sweet signal goes onto the brain stem. The brain stem is the entry of the body into the brain. And there are different areas of the brain stem. And there are different groups of neurons in the brain stem. And there's this unique area in a unique, a topographically defined location in the rostral side of the brain that receives all of the taste input. - A very dense area of the brain. - A very rich area of the brain. Exactly. And from there, the sweet signal goes to this other area higher up on the brain stem. And then it goes through a number of stations where that sweet signal goes from sweet neuron to sweet neuron, to sweet neuron, to eventually get to your cortex. And once it gets to your taste cortex, that's where meaning is imposed into that signal. It's then, and only then this is what the data suggests that now you can identify this as a sweet stimuli. - [Andrew] And how quickly does that all happen? - You know, the time scale of the nervous system it's fast. - So within less than a second. - [Charles] Yeah, absolutely. - I rarely mistake bitter for sweet. Maybe with respect to people and my own poor judgment, but not with respect to taste. - And in fact, we can demonstrate this because we can stick electrodes at each of these stations, conceptually, and we can stimulate the tongue, and then we can record the signals pretty much time log the stimulus delivery. You deliver the stimuli and within a fraction of a second, you see now the response in this following stations, now it gets to the cortex, and now in there you impose meaning to that taste. There is an area of your brain that represents the taste of sweet in taste cortex and a different area that represents the taste of bitter. In a sense, there is a topographic map of these taste qualities inside your brain. Now we're going to do a thought experiment. Now, if this group of neurons in your cortex really represents the sense of sweet and this added different group of neurons in your brain represents the taste, the perception of bitter, then we should be able to do two things. First, I should be able to go into your brain, somehow silence those neurons, find a way to prevent them from being activated. And I can give you all the sweet you want, and you'll never know that you're tasting sweet. And conversely, I should be able to go into your brain, come up with a way to activate those neurons while I'm giving you absolutely nothing. And you're going to think that you are getting that full percept and that's precisely what we have done. And that's precisely what you get. This of course is in the brain of mice. - But presumably in humans it would work similarly. - Absolutely the same, zero doubt. I have no questions. So this attests to two important things, the first to the predetermined nature of the sense of taste, because it means I can go to these parts of your brain in the absence of any stimuli. And have you throw the full behavioral experience. In fact, when we activate in your cortex, these bitter neurons, the animal can start gagging, but it's drinking only water, but the animal thinks that's getting a bitter stimuli. [audience applauds] This is amazing. - And so, and the second, just to finish the line so that it doesn't sound like it teaches two things and then I only give you one lesson. It is that it substantiates this capacity of the brain to segregate, to separate in this nodes of action, the representation of these two diametrically opposed percepts. Which is sweet, for example, versus bitter. - The reason I say amazing, and that is also amazing is the following, you told us earlier, and you're absolutely correct, of course, that the end of the day, whether or not it's one group of neurons over here, and another group of neurons over there, which is the way it turns out to be, electrical activity is the generic, common language of both sets of neurons. So that raises the question for me, of whether or not those separate sets of neurons are connected to areas of the brain that create this sense of valence or whether or not they're simply created connected, excuse me, to sets of neurons that evoke distinct behaviors of moving towards and inhaling more and licking or aversive are we essentially interpreting our behavior and our micro responses or are micro responses and our behaviors the consequence of the percept? - Excellent, excellent question. So first answer is they go into an area of the brain where valence is imposed, and that area is known as the amygdala and the sweet neurons go to a different area than the bitter neurons. Now I want to do a thought experiment because I think your audience might appreciate this. Let's say I activate this group of neurons and the animal increases licking and I'm activating the sweet neurons. And so that's expected because now it's tasting this water as if it was sugar. Now this Moses transforming water into wine in this case we're going to, and today's Passover, so this is an appropriate example, we're transforming it into sweet. But how do I know that activating them is evoking a positive feeling inside, a goodness, a satisfaction, or I love it versus I'm just increasing licking, which is the other option, because all we're seeing is that the animal is leaking more. And we're trying to infer that that means that he's feeling something really good versus you know what, that piano line is going back straight into the tongue. And all it's doing is forcing it to move faster. Well, we can actually separate this by doing experiments that allows to fundamentally distinguish them and imagine the following experiment, I'm going to take the animal and I'm going to put them inside a box that has two sides. And the two sides have features that make him different. One has yellow little toys. The other one has green toys. One has little black stripes. The other one has blue stripes. So the animal can tell the two halves, I take the mouse, put them inside this arena, this play arena. And it will explore and potter around both sides with equal frequency. And now what I'm going to do is I'm going to activate these neurons, these sweet neurons, every time the animal is on the side with the yellow stripes. And if that is creating a positive internal state, what would the animal now want to do? It will want to stay on the side with the yellow stripes. There's no licking here. The animal is not extending its tongue every time I'm activating this neurons. This is known as a place preference test. And it's generally used, it's just one form of many different tests to demonstrate that the activation of a group of neurons in the brain is imposing, for example, a positive versus a negative valance. Whereas if I do the same thing by activating the bitter neurons, the animal will actively want now to stay away from the side where these neurons are being activated. - And that's precisely what you see. - [Charles] And that's precisely what we see. - Many people, including myself, are familiar with the experience of going to a restaurant, eating a variety of foods. And then fortunately doesn't happen that often, but then feeling very sick. I learned coming up in neuroscience that this is one strong example of one trial learning, that from that point on, it's not the restaurant or the waitress or waiter, or the date, but it's my notion of it had to have been the shrimp that leads me to then want to avoid shrimp in every context, maybe even shrimp powder. - You got it. - For a very long time. I can imagine all the evolutionarily adaptive reasons why this such a phenomenon would exist. Do we have any concept of where in this pathway it exists? - We do, we know actually a significant amount at a general level. In fact, more than shrimp, oysters are even a more dramatic example, one bad oyster is all you need to be driven that way for the next six months. - I think because the texture alone is something that one learns to overcome. I actually really enjoy oysters. I despise mussels, despise shrimp, not the animal, but the taste and yet oysters, for some reason, I've yet to have a bad experience. - It's like, uni, by the way texture is hard to get over, but once you get over, it's delicious. - That's what they tell me. We were both in San Diego at one point, and I'll give a plug to Sushi Ota, is kind of the famous place, and they have amazing uni and I've tried it twice. And I'm oh for two. It somehow the texture outweighs any kind of the deliciousness that people report. - It's a very acquired taste. It's like beer, I grew up in Chile, that's where the accent comes from in case anyone wonder. And by the time I came here to graduate school, I was 19, too old to overcome my heavy Chilian accent. So here I am, 40 years, 50 years late, not quite 40 plus- - We appreciate it. - And I still sound like I just came off the boat. So in Chile, you don't drink beer when you're young, you drink wine. Chili's a huge wine producer. So when I came to the US, all of my classmates were drinking beer because they had finished college where they were all you're drinking and graduate school, you're working 18 hours a day every day, the way they relax, let's go and have some beers. - And beer is cheaper. - And beer is cheap, and we were being clearly underpaid may I add. I couldn't do it. It's an acquired taste. It was too late by then. And here I am 60 plus. And if you take all the beer I've drank in my entire life, I would say they add to less than an eight ounce glass of water. - Impressive. Well, your health is probably better for it. - I'm not sure. - Your physical health anyway. - So it goes back to acquired taste. This is the connection to uni and to oysters. Now, going back to the one trial learning this is the great thing about our brains, certain things we need to repeat a hundred times to learn them, hello operator. Can I have the phone number for sushi Ota, please? And then she'll give it to you over the phone, at least in the old days. And then you need to repeat it to yourself over and over and over, over the next minute. So you can dial sushi Ota, and five minutes later, it's gone. That's what we call working memory. Then there is the short term memory. We park our car. And if we're lucky, by the end of the day, we remember where it is. And then there is the long term memory. We remember the birthdays of every one of our children for the rest of our lives. Well, there are events that a single event is so traumatic that it activates the circuits in a way that it's a one trial learning. And the taste system is literally at the top of that food chain. And there is a phenomenon known as conditioned taste aversion. You can pair an attractive stimuli with a really bad one, and you can make an animal begin to vehemently dislike for example, sugar. And that's because you've conditioned the animals to now be averse to these otherwise nice taste because it's been associated with malaise. And when you do that, now you could begin to ask why has change in the signal as it travels from the tongue to the brain in a normal animal versus an animal where you have now transformed sweet from being attractive to being immersive. And this is the way now you begin to explore how the brain changes, the nature, the quality, the meaning of a stimuli as a function of its state. - I have a number of questions related to that, all of which relate to this idea of context, because you mentioned before that flavor is distinct from taste because flavor involves smell, texture, temperature, and some other features, uni, sea urchin being a good example of, I can sense the texture. It actually it's, nah, I won't describe what it reminds me of, for various reasons. The ability to place context into, to insert context into a perception, or rather to insert a perception into context is so powerful. And there's an element of kind of mystery about it. But if we start to think about some of the more nuance that we like to live at the edge, as you say, how many different tastes on the taste dial to go back to your analogy earlier, the color dial, do you think that there could be for something as fixed as bitter, so for instance, I don't think I like bitter taste, but I like some fermented foods that seem to have a little bit of sour and have a little bit of that briny flavor. How much plasticity do you think there is there and in particular across the lifespan, because I think one of the most salient examples of this is that kids don't seem to like certain vegetables, but they all are hardwired to like sweet tastes. And yet you could also imagine that one of the reasons why they may eventually grow to incorporate vegetables is because of some knowledge that vegetables might be- - Good for you. - Better for them. So is there a change in the receptors, the distribution, the number, the sensitivity, et cetera, that can explain the transition from wanting to avoid vegetables, to being willing to eat vegetables simply in childhood to early development. Yes, so I going to take the question slightly differently, but I think it would illustrate the point. And I want to just use the difference between the olfactory system and the taste system to make the point, taste system five basic pallets, sweet, sour, bitter, salt, umami, each of them has a predetermined identity. We know exactly what and valence. These are attractive. These are aversive. In the olfactory system, it's claimed that we can smell millions of different odors, yet for the most part, none of them have an innate predetermined meaning, in olfactory system, meaning is imposed by learning and experience. - Even the smell of smoke? - So I'm going to give you, I'm going to make it differently. They are a handful of the millions of odors that were claimed that, that you could immediately tell me these are adversive and these are attractive. - Vomit. - So vomit, it's not correct because I can assure you that they're cultures and societies where things which are far less appealing than vomit do not evoke a adverse reaction. - Really? - Really, sulfur would be maybe a universal. I'm not talking pheromones. pheromones are in a different category that trigger innate responses, but nearly every other is afforded meaning by learning and experience. And that's why you like broccoli. And I despise broccoli because I remember my mother forcing me to eat broccoli. [audience applauds] I'm so sorry. - Same sensory experience. This accommodates two important things. In the case of taste, you have neurons at every station that are for sweet, for sour, for bitter, for salty, and umami, it's only five classes. So it's not going to take a lot of your brain. If we can, in fact, smell a million others, and everyone else of others had to have predetermined, meaning there's not going to be enough brain just to accommodate that one sense. And so evolution in its infinite wisdom, evolved a system where you put together a pathway and a cortex, olfactory cortex, where you have the capacity to associate every other in a specific context that now gives it the meaning. Now let's go back to the original question then. So other than clearly plastic, mega plastic, because it's fundamental basis and neural organization, but taste, we just told you that predetermined, hardwired, but predetermined, hardwired doesn't mean that it's not modulated by learning or experience. It only means that you are born liking sweet and disliking bitter. And we have many examples of plasticity, beer being one example. So why do we learn to love beer and coffee. It's because it has an associated gain to the system and that gain to the system, that positive valance that emerges out of that negative signal is sufficient to create that positive association. And in the case of beer, of course, it's alcohol. The feeling good that we get after is more than sufficient to say, I want to have more of this. And in the case of coffee, of course, is caffeine activating a whole group of neurotransmitter systems that give you that high associated with coffee. So yes, this taste system is changeable. It's malleable, and it's subject subjected to learning and experience. But I like the olfactory system is restricted in what you could do with it because its goal is to allow you to get nutrients and survive. The goal of the olfactory system is very different. It's being used, not in our case, but in every animal species to identify friend versus foe, to identify mate, to identify ecological niches they want to be in. So it plays a very broad role that then requires that it be set up organized and function in a very different type of context. Taste is about, can we get the nutrients we need to survive? And can we ensure that we are attracted to the ones we need? And we adverse to the ones that are going to kill us, I'm being overly simplistic and reductionist. But I think it illustrates the huge difference between these two chemo sensory systems. - I don't think you're being overly simplicity. I think it illustrates the key intractable nature of this system and the way you've approached it. And I think it's important for people to hear that, because everybody, as we are as mystified with empathy and love, et cetera. So in a fairness to that, I'm going to ask a sort of a high level question or abstract question. This was based on a conversation I had with a former girlfriend where we were talking about chemistry between individuals. Very complicated topic on the one hand. But on the other hand, quite simple in that certain people, for whatever reason, evoke a tremendous sense of arousal, for lack of a better word, between two people, one would hope, at least for some period of time. - I didn't know this was that kind of a podcast. - No, well, the reason I, but this has to do with taste because she said something, I think in part to maybe irritate me a bit, but we were commenting not about our own experience of each other, but of someone that she was now very excited about we're on good terms. And she said, "What do you think it is, this thing of chemistry?" So maybe she was trying to- - Warn you of what's coming. - Warn me what's coming. And she said, "I have a feeling something about it is in smell and something about it is actually in taste, literally the taste of somebody's breath." That's the way she described it. And I thought that it was a very interesting example for a number of reasons, but in particular, because it gets to the merging of odor and taste. But also to the idea that of course the context of a new relationship, I'm assuming that, and in fact, they're both attractive people, et cetera. There's a whole context there, but I've had the experience of the odor of somebody's breath being aversive. Not because I could identify it as aversive. - Because you just didn't like it. - But because I just didn't like it. - But that's because you associated with added odors that trigger that negative aversive reaction, by the way. - Absolutely. There are certain perfumes to me that are aversive. - [Charles] You got it. - And there are other sense, I can recall a sense of skin, of foods, et cetera, that are immensely appetitive. So I've experienced both sides of this equation myself. And she was describing this and to me more than tasting wine, which is the typical example where people inhale it and then they drink it, to me, this seems like something that more people might be able to relate to, that certain things and people smell delicious. Even mothers describing the smell of their baby's head. - A mother, or us. - [Andrew] Of course, men too, yeah. - I mean our own babies when in their necks, that's the magical place. - Their neck. - The back of their neck. - There you go. - Oh my goodness. I have a grandchild now. So I know exactly what, Rio, that's his name, smells like. - Okay. So more beautiful examples. It's always more fun to think about the beautiful positively appetitive examples. The smell of the back of your grandson's neck. I mean, you could get more specific than that, but not a lot more specific exactly. So what is going on in terms of the combination of odor and taste given that these two systems are so different? - Yes, and they come together, ultimately there is a place in the brain where they come together to integrate the two into what we would call that sensory experience. And I'll tell you an experiment that you could do that demonstrates this. I think it's good for the, for your audience here to get a sense of how we approach these problems so that we can get in a meaningful scientific answers. So we know where the olfactory cortex is in the brain. We know where the taste cortex is in the brain. They're in two different places. We can go to each of these two, cortexes, put color traces, we put green in one, we put red in the other and we see where the colors go to. That's a reflection of where those neurons are projecting into their next targets. Once they get the signal, where do they send the signal to? And then we reason that if odor and taste come together somewhere in the brain, we should find an area that now it's getting red and green color. And we found such an area. And next we anticipated, we hypothesized that maybe this is the area in the brain of the mouse, corresponding area in the brain of humans, that integrates odor and taste. It's known as, the term normally used is multisensory integration. And if this is true, we could do the following experiment. We can train a mouse to lick sweet. And if they guess correctly, that that is supposed to be sweet. They should go now to the right port, to the right side, to get a water reward. If they go to the lift, when it was sweet, then they're incorrect and they get no reward and they actually get a time out. Now the mice are thirsty, so they're very motivated to perform. And if you repeat this task a hundred times, a hundred trials, incredibly enough, this animal learned to recognize the sweet and execute the right action. And by their action, we now are being told what that animal is tasting. We can make it more interesting and we can give him sweet and bitter and say, if it's sweet go to the right and if it's bitter go to the left. And after you train him this mice with 90% accuracy, it'll tell you, when you randomize now the stimuli, what was sweet and what was bitter? We can now do the same experiment, but now mix taste with odor and say, if you got odor alone, go to the right or push this lever in mice. If you get taste alone, go to this other part or push this other lever. And if you get the two together, do this something else. And if you train the mice, the mice are able now to report back to you when it's sensing taste alone, odor alone, or the mix. Makes sense? - Makes sense. - Now we can go to the brain of this mice and go to this area that we now uncover, discover as being the side of multisensory integration between taste and odor, and silence it, prevent it from being activated experimentally. And if that area really represented the integration of these two, the animals should still be able to recognize the taste alone. They still should be able to recognize the other alone, but should be incapable now to recognize the mix, and exactly as predicted. That's exactly what you get. All right? - The brain is basically a series of engineered circuits, complex. - You got it. And our task is to figure out how can we extract this amazing architecture of these circuits in a way that we can begin to uncover the mysteries of the brain. - And why certain people's breath tastes so good and other people's not so good. - Exactly. So I never answered that, but I told you how we can figure out where in the brain it's happening. - As we've been having this discussion, I thought a few times about similarities to the visual system or differences to the visual system, the visual system, there are a couple of phenomenon that I wonder if they also exist in the taste system, and the visual system we know for instance, that if you look at something long enough and activate the given receptors long enough, that object will actually disappear. We offset this with little micro eye movements, et cetera, but the principle is a fundamental one. This habituation or desensitization, everyone seems to call it something different, but you get the idea of course, in the taste system, I'm certainly familiar with eating something very, very sweet for the first time in a long time. And it feel tastes very sweet, but a few more licks, a few more bites, and now it tastes not as sweet, with olfaction, I'm familiar with the odor in a room I don't like, or I like, and then it disappearing. So similar phenomena, where does that occur? And can you imagine a sort of a system by which people could leverage that? Because I do think that most people are interested in eating, not more sugar, but less sugar. - I think we have better ways to approach that. And we can transition from taste into these other circuits that makes sugar so extraordinarily impossible not to consume. - Impossible, exactly. - So where does the desensitizing happen. That's the term that we use, and it's, I think happening at multiple stations, it's happening at the receptor level. I.e. the salt in your tongue that are sensing the sugar, as you activate this receptor and it's triggering activity after activity after activity, eventually you exhaust the receptor again, I'm using terms which are extraordinarily loose. - But for sake of this discussion. - For the sake of this discussion the receptor gets to a point where he undergoes a set of changes, chemical changes, where it now signals far less efficiently, or it even gets removed from the surface of the cell. And now what will happen is that the same amount of sugar will trigger far less of a response. And that is a huge side of this modulation. And then the next, I believe is the integrated again, loss of signaling that happens by continuous activation of the circuit at each of these different neural stations. You know, there is from the tongue to the ganglia, from the ganglia to the first station in the brain stem, a second station in the brain stem, to the thalamus, then to the cortex. So there are multiple steps that this signal is traveling. Now, you might say why, if this is a label line, why do you need to have so many stations? And that's because the taste system is so important to ensure that you get what you need to survive, that it has to be subjected to modulation by the internal state. And each of these nodes provides a new site to give it plasticity and modulation, not necessarily to change the way that something tastes, but to ensure that you consume more or less or differently of what you need. I'm going to give you one example of how the internal state changes the way the taste system works. Salt is very appetitive at low concentrations. And that's because we need it. It's our electro lite balance requires salt. Every one of our neurons uses salt as the most important of the ions with potassium to ensure that you can transfer these electrical signals within and between neurons, but at high concentrations, let's say ocean water, it's incredibly aversive. And we all know this because we are going to the ocean. And then when you get it in your mouth, it's not that great. However, if I salt deprive you, and we can do this in experimental models quite readily, now this incredibly high concentration of salt, one molar sodium chloride becomes amazingly appetitive and attractive. What's going on in here. Your tongue is telling you, this is horrible, but your brain is telling you, I don't care. You need it. And this is what we call the modulation of the taste system by the internal state. - And presumably if one is hungry enough, even uni will taste good. Just hit you hit it right on the money. No, no, this is exactly correct. Or if you're thirsty and hungry, you suppress hunger so that you don't waste water molecules in digesting food. Why? Because if you're thirsty and you have no water, you will die within a week or so, but you can on a hunger strike as long as you have water for months, because you're going to eat up all your energy reserves. Water is a different story. So you could see, or that there are multiple layers at which the taste system that guides our drive and our motivation to consume the nutrients we need has to be modulated in response to the internal state. And of course, internal state itself has to be modulated by the external world. And so that I think is a reason why, what could otherwise, would've been an incredibly simple system from the tongue to the cortex in one just wire. It's not, because you have to ensure that each step you give the system that level of flexibility or what we call in neuroscience, plasticity. - I think we're headed into the gut. But I have a question that has just been on my mind for a bit now, because I was drinking this water and it has essentially no taste. Is there any kind of signal for the absence of taste despite having something in the mouth and here is why I ask, what I'm thinking about is saliva. And while it's true that if I eat a lot of very highly palatable foods that does change how I experience more bland foods, I must confess when I eat a lot of these highly processed foods I don't particularly like them. I tend to crave healthier foods, but that's probably for contextual reasons about nutrients, et cetera. But I could imagine an experiment where- - You see a taste of no taste. - Right, is there a taste of no taste, because in the visual system there is. You close the eyes and you start getting increases in activity in the visual system, as opposed to decreases, which often surprises people. But there are reasons for that because everything is about signal to noise, signal to background. - It's a good question. I can tell you that most of our work is trying to focus on how the taste system works, not how it doesn't work well, but you know. - Yeah, I know you're being playful. And I knew when inviting you here today, I was setting myself up for, actually on a different- - We're trying to learn things. - Yeah, I know. - However- - All right, listen, I was weaned in this system of a, and I'll say it here for the second. Actually I recorded a podcast recently with a very prominent podcast with Lex Friedman Podcast. And I made reference to the so-called New York neuroscience mafia. I won't say whether or not we are sitting in the presence of the New York neuroscience mafia member, but in any event, I know the sorts of ribbing that they provide for those listening, this is the kind of hazing that happens. Benevolent hazing in academia. I'm the target. - Of course, it's- - It's a sign of love. - Exactly. - He's going to tell me that. - And it's always about the science in the end, right. But it's an interesting question. Look, I am, I don't know the answer and I don't even know how I would explore it in a way that it will rigorously teach me, eh, but. - Let me tell you why I'm asking. And then I'll offer an experiment that I'd love to see someone here in the lab do. I'm thinking about saliva. - No, no, no, but that we know, that we can figure it out. - Obviously. But the question is whether or not the saliva in a fed state is distinct from the saliva in an unfed state, such that it modulates the sensitivity, the response. - It's not the sensitivity, the experiment has been done. - [Andrew] It has been done. And so the answer is no. - It's not. And the way you could do the experiment is because we use artificial saliva. - There's such a thing? I know there's artificial tears, but. - No, no, we, I don't mean that you go to Walgreens that you get, I mean, we, in my laboratory, we know the composition of saliva and so you can make such a thing, and you can take taste cells in culture or in a tongue where you wash it out, and then you can apply artificial saliva. And what happens is that the system is being engineered to desensitize, to become agnostic for saliva to become invisible. And there is no difference on the state of the animal. - Great, well, this is the reason to do experiments. - [Charles] Yeah, absolutely. - So it doesn't defeat any grand hypothesis. It's just a pure curiosity. - You know that curiosity kills the cat? - I do, but saves the career of a scientists every single time. - That's what drives us, absolutely. - Every single time. - It's the story of our lives. - Exactly. So if it's not saliva and apparently it is not, what about internal state and what aspects of this, the internal milieu are relevant because there's autonomic, there's a sleep and awake, there's stress. One of the questions that I got from hundreds of people when I solicited questions in advance of this episode was why do I crave sugar when I'm stressed, for instance, and that could be contextual, but what are the basic elements- - Because it makes us feel good by the way, we'll get to that. That's his answer. - Soothing. - It activates, what I'm going to generically refer to as reward pleasure centers in a way that it dramatically, changes our internal state. This is in why do we eat a gallon ice cream when we're very depressed? In fact, this is a good segue to go into this an entire different world of the body telling your brain what you need in important things like sugar and fat, but anyways, go ahead, you were going to ask something. - Well, no, I would like to discuss the most basic elements of internal state in particular, the ones that are below our conscious detection. And this is a, of course is a segue into this incredible landscape, which is the gut brain axis, which I think 15 years ago was almost a, maybe it was posters at a meeting. And then now I believe you and others, there are companies, there have companies, there are active research programs, and beautiful work. Maybe you could describe some of that work that you and others have been involved in. And a lot of the listeners of this podcast will have heard of the gut brain axis. And there are a lot of misconceptions about the gut brain axis. Many people think that this means that we think with our stomach because of the quote unquote, gut feeling aspect, but I'd love for you to talk about the aspects of gut brain signaling that drive or change our perceptions and behaviors that are completely beneath our awareness. - Yes. Excellent. So let me begin maybe by stating that, the brain needs to monitor the state of every one of our organs, it has to do it. This is the only way that the brain can ensure that every one of those organs are working together in a way that we have healthy physiology. Now, this monitoring of the brain has been known for a long time, but I think what hadn't been fully appreciated that this is a two-way highway where the brain is not only monitoring, but is now modulating back what the body needs to do. And that includes all the way from monitoring the frequency of heartbeats and the way that inspiration and aspirations in the breeding cycle operate to what happens when you ingest sugar and fat. Now, let me give you an example again, of how the brain can take what we would refer to contextual associations and transform it into incredible changes in physiology and metabolism. Remember Pavlov? So Pavlov in his classical experiments in conditioning, associative conditioning, he would take a bell, he would ring the bell every time he was going to feed the dog. And eventually the dog learned to associate the ringing of the bell with food coming. Now, the first incredible finding he made is the fact that the dog now in the presence of the bell alone will start to salivate. And we will call that neurologically speaking an anticipatory response. Okay, I could understand it. I get it. You know, neurons in the brain that form that association now represent food is coming. And they're sending a signal to motor neurons to go into your salivary glands to squeeze them. So you release saliva because you know food is coming, but what's even more remarkable is that those animals are also releasing insulin in response to a bell. Okay. This illustrates one part of this two-way highway, the highway going down, somehow the brain created these associations and there are neurons in your brain now that no food is coming and send a signal somehow all the way down to your pancreas that now it says release insulin because sugar is coming down. This goes back to the magic of the brain. It's a never ending source of both joy and intrigue. How the hell do they do this? I mean, the neurons. - I share your delight and fascination. There's not a day or a lecture or some talks are better than others or talk where I don't sit back and just think, it's absolutely amazing. - How. - It's amazing. - Now over the past, I don't know, dozen years it and with great force over the last five years now, the main highway that is communicating the state of the body with the brain, it has been uncovered as being what we now refer to as the gut brain axis. And the highway is a specific bundle of nerves which emerged from the Vagal ganglia, the nodus ganglia. And so it's the vagus nerve that is innervating the majority of the organs in your body. It's monitoring their function, sending a signal to the brain. And now the brain going back down and saying, this is going alright, do this, or this is not going too well, do that. - And I should point out as you well know, every organ, spleen, pancreas, lung. - They all must be monitored. In fact I now, I have no doubt that the diseases that we have normally associated with metabolism, physiology, and even immunity are likely to emerge as diseases, conditions, states of the brain. I don't think obesity is a disease of metabolism. I believe obesity is a disease of brain circuits. - [Andrew] I do as well. - And so this view that we have, been working on for the longest time, because, the molecules that we're dealing with are in the body, not in the head, led us to to view, of course this issues and problems has been one of metabolism, physiology, and so forth. They remain to be the carriers of the ultimate signal, but the brain ultimately appears to be the conductor of this orchestra of physiology and metabolism. All right, now let's go to the gut brain and sugar, maybe. - Please, please. No, I mean, the vagus nerve has in popular culture has been kind of converted into this single meaning of calming pathways, mostly because I actually have to tip my hat to the yogic community was among the first to talk about vagus on and on and on, there are calming pathways, so-called parasympathetic pathways within the vagus. But I think that the more we learn about the vagus, the more it seems like an entire set of neural connections, as opposed to one nerve. I just wanted to just mention that because I think a lot of people have heard about the vagus turns out experimentally in the laboratory, many neuroscientists will stimulate the vagus to create states of alertness and arousal when animals, or even people believe it or not are close to dying or going into coma stimulation of the vagus is one of the ways to wake up the brain counter to the idea that it's just this I way of calming oneself down. - And also of course, I mean, one has to be cautious they're in that. So the vagus nerve is made out of many thousands of fibers, individual fibers that make this gigantic bundle. And it's likely as we're speaking, that each of these fibers carries a slightly different meaning, not necessarily one by one, maybe five is 10, five is 20, do all right, but they carry meaning that's associated with their specific task. This group of fibers is telling the brain about the state of your heart. This group of fiber is telling the brain about the state of your gut. This is telling your brain about its nutritional state, this, your pancreas, this your lungs. And they are again, to make the same simple example, the keys of this piano. Yes, you're right. There is a lot of data, showing that activating the entire vagal bundle has very meaningful effects in a wide range of conditions. In fact, it's being used to treat untractable depression. - A little stimulator. - Epileptics seizures. But again, there are thousands of fibers carrying different functions. So to some degree this is like turning the lights on the stadium, because you need to illuminate where you lost your keys under your seat. Yet 10,000 bulbs of a thousand Watts each have just come on. Only one of this is pointing to where, and so I'm lucky enough that one of them happened to point to my side. So here you activate the bundle thousands of fibers. I'm lucky enough that some of those happen to do something, to make a meaningful difference in depression, or to make a meaningful difference in epileptics. But it should not be misconstrued as arguing that this broad activation has any type of selectivity or specificity, we're just lucky enough that among all the things that are being done, some of those happen to change the biology of these processes. Now, the reason this is relevant because the magic of this gut brain axis is the fact that you have these thousands of fibers really doing different functions and our goal. And along with many other great scientists, including Steve Lieder Lee, that started a lot of this molecular dissection on this vagal gut brain communication line at Harvard, is trying to uncover what each of those lines doing, what are each of those keys of this piano playing? - What's the latest there? Just as a brief update. I know Steven Lieder Lee, I think I was there when he got his Howard Hughes and I did not. So that was fun. Always great to get beat by excellent people. - First of all, I'm happy you didn't, because that way you can focus on this amazing podcast. - Well, thank you. That's very gracious of you. It's always feels better if not good to get beat out by excellent people. Steven is second to none. And he is defining, as you said, the molecular constituents of different elements of these many, many fibers, is there an update there, are they finding multiple parallel pathways? - They are, they are, some that control heartbeat. Some that control the respiratory cycle. Some that might be involved in a gastric movement. You know, this notion that you're full and you feel full in part because your gut gets distended your stomach, for example. And then there are little sensors that are reading that and telling the brain you're full. - So the textbooks will soon change on the basis of the Lieder Lee and other work. - In essence, I think we are learning enough about these lines, that could really help put together this holistic view of how the brain it's truly changing body physiology, metabolism, and immunity, the part that hasn't been yet developed, and that it needs a fair amount of work, but it's an exciting thrilling, journey of discovery is how the signal comes back to now change that biology. You know, the example I gave you before with Pavlov's dog. I figure out how the association created this link between the bell, but then how does the brain tell the pancreas to release in the right amount of insulin? So, let me tell you about the gut brain axis and our insatiable appetite for sugar and fat. Insatiable for sugar, unquenchable for fat. And this is a story about the fundamental difference between liking and wanting. Liking sugar is the function of the taste system. And it's not really liking sugar, it's liking sweet, wanting sugar, our never ending appetite for sugar is the story of the gut brain axis, liking versus wanting. And this work is work of my own laboratory. You know, that began long ago when we discovered the sweet receptors and you can now engineer mice that lack these receptors. So in essence, these animals will be unable to taste sweet, a life without sweetness. How horrible. And if you give a normal mouse, a bottle containing sweet, and we're going to put either sugar or an artificial sweetener, they bottle sweet. They have slightly different tastes, but that's simply because artificial sweeteners have some off tastes. But as far as the sweet receptor is concerned, they both activate the same receptor, trigger the same signal. And if you give an animal, an option of a bottle containing sugar or a sweetener versus water, this animal will drink 10 to one from the bottle containing sweet. That's the taste system, animal goes samples, each one, licks a couple of licks and then says, that's the one I want because it's appetitive. And because I love it. - So it prefers sugar to artificial sweetener? - No, no, no, no, no, no. In this experiment, this experiment, I'm going to put only sweet in one bottle and it could be either sugar or artificial sweetener. It doesn't matter which one. We're going to do the next experiment where we separate those two, for now is sweet versus water. And sweet means sweet, not sugar. Sweet means anything that tastes sweet. And sugar is one example and Splenda is another example. - Aspartame, monk fruit, Stevia, doesn't matter. - I mean, there's some that only humans can taste. Mice cannot taste because their receptors between humans and mice are different, but we have put the human receptor into mice. We engineer mice and we completely humanize this mouse's taste world. But for the purpose of this conversation, we're only comparing sweet versus water, an option. My goodness, they will lick to know and from the sweet side 10 to one, at least versus the water, makes sense? All right, now we're going to take the mice and we're going to genetically engineer it to remove the sweet receptors. So this mice no longer have in their oral cavity, any sensors that can detect sweetness, be that sugar molecule be an artificial sweetener, be anything else that tastes sweet. And if you give this mice an option between sweet versus water, sugar versus water, artificial sweetener versus water, it will drink equally well from both because he cannot tell them apart because it doesn't have the receptors for sweet. So that sweet bottle tastes just like water. Makes sense? - Makes sense. - Very good. Now we're going to do the experiment with sugar from now on let's focus on sugar. So I'm going to give a mouse out sugar versus water. Normal mouse will drink from the sugar, sugar, sugar, sugar, very little from the water, knock out the sweet receptors, eliminate them. Mouse can no longer tell them apart. And they will drink from both. But if I keep the mouse in that case for the next 48 hours, something extraordinary happens when I come 48 hours later. And I see what the mouse is licking or drinking from, that mouse is drinking almost exclusively from the sugar bottle. How could this be? It cannot not taste it. It doesn't have sweet receptors during those 48 hours the mouse learn that there is something in that bottle that makes me feel good. And that is the bottle I want to consume. Now does the mouse identify that bottle? It does so by using other sensory features, the smell of the bottle, the texture of the solution inside, sugar, the high concentrations is kind of goopy, the side in which the bottle is in the cage. It doesn't matter what, but the mouse realize there is something there that makes me feel good. And that's what I want. And that is the fundamental basis of our unquenchable desire and our craving for sugar and is mediated by the gut brain axis. The first clue is that it takes a long time to develop, immediately suggesting a post-ingestive effect. So we reason if this is true and it's the gut brain axis that's driving sugar preference. Then there should be a group of neurons in the brain that are responding to post-ingestive sugar, and low and behold, we identify a group of neurons in the brain that does this and these neurons receive their input directly from the gut brain axis. - From other neurons. - You got it. And so what's happening is that sugar is recognized normally by the tongue, activates an appetitive response. Now you ingest it and now it activates a selective group of cells in your intestines that now send a signal to the brain via the vagal ganglia that says, I got what I need. The tongue doesn't know that you got what you need. It only knows that you tasted it. This knows that it got to the point that it's going to be used, which is the gut. And now it sends the signal to now reinforce the consumption of this thing, because this is the one that I needed. Sugar, source of energy. - And are these neurons in the gut? - So these are not neurons in the gut. So these are gut cells that recognize the sugar molecule. - [Andrew] I see. - Send the signal and that signal is received by the vagal neuron directly. - Got it. - And it sends a signal through the gut brain axis to the cell bodies of these neurons in the vagal ganglia, and from there to the brain stem to now trigger the preference for sugar. - Two questions. One, you mentioned that these cells that detect sugar within the gut are actually within the intestine. You didn't say stomach. Which surprised me. I always think gut as stomach, but of course- - They're intestines, because that's where all the absorption happens. - [Andrew] Got it. - So you want the signal, you see, you want the brain to know that you had successful ingestion and breakdown of whatever you consume into the building blocks of life, and glucose, amino acids, fat. And so you want to make sure that once they are in the form that intestines can now absorb them, is where you get the signal back saying this what I want. Now let me just take it one step further. And this now sugar molecules activates this unique gut brain circuit that now drives the development of our preference for sugar. Now, a key element of this circuit is that the sensors in the gut that recognize the sugar do not recognize artificial sweeteners at all. - Because their nutrient value is uncoupled from the taste? - Generically speaking one can make that, but it's because it's a very different type of receptor. Turns out that it's not the tongue receptors being used in the gut. It's a completely different molecule that only recognizes the glucose molecule, not artificial sweeteners. This has a profound impact on the effect of ultimately artificial sweeteners in curbing our appetite, our craving, our insatiable desire for sugar, since they don't activate the gut brain axis, they'll never satisfy the craving for sugar like sugar does. And the reason I believe that artificial sweeteners have failed in the market to curb our appetite. Our need, our desire for sugar is because they beautifully work on the tongue. They liking to recognize sweet versus non-sweet, but they fail to activate the key sensors in the gut that now inform the brain you got sugar, no need to crave anymore. - So the issue of wanting, can we relate that to a particular set of neurochemicals upstream, so the pathway is, so glucose is activating the cells in the gut that through the vagus that's communicated through the presumably the nodus ganglia and up into the brain stem. - Very good, and from there, where does it go? - Yeah, where does it go, and what is the substrate of wanting? Of course I think molecules like dopamine craving, there's a book even called the molecule of more, et cetera. Dopamine is a very diabolical molecule, as you know, because it evokes both a sense of pleasure-ish, but also a sense of desiring more, of craving. So if I understand you correctly, artificial sweeteners are, and I agree are failing as a means to satisfy sugar craving at the level of nutrient sensing. And yet if we trigger this true sugar evoked wanting pathway too much, and we've all experienced this, then we eat sugar and we find ourselves wanting more and more sugar. Now that could also be insulin dysregulation, but can we uncouple those? - I mean, look, if we have a mega problem with over consumption of sugar and fat, we're facing a unique time in our evolution where diseases of malnutrition are due to over-nutrition. I mean, how nuts is that? Historically, diseases of malnutrition have always been linked to undernutrition. And so we need to come up with strategies that can meaningfully change the activation of these circuits that control our wanting certainly in the populations at risk, and this gut brain circuit that ultimately it's the lines of communication that are informing the brain, the presence of intestinal sugar, in this example, it's a very important target in the way we think about, is there a way that we can meaningfully modulate these circuits? So I make your brain think that you got satisfied with sugar, even though I'm not giving you sugar. - So that immediately raises the question are the receptors for glucose in these gut cells susceptible to other things that are healthier for us. - That's very good. Excellent idea. And I think an important goal will be to come up with a strategy and identify those very means that allow us to modulate the circuits in a way that certainly for all of those, where this is a big issue, it can really have a, you know, dramatic impact in improving human health. - I could be wrong about this. And I'm happy to be wrong. I'm often wrong. And told I'm wrong, that we have cells within our gut that don't just sense sugar, glucose to be specific, but also cells within our gut that sense amino acids and fatty acids. I could imagine a scenario where one could train themselves to feel immense amounts of satiety from the consumption of foods that are rich in essential fatty acids, amino acids, perhaps less caloric or less insulin dysregulating than sugar. I'll use myself as an example. I've always enjoyed sweets, but in the last few years, for some reason I've started to lose my appetite for them probably because I just don't eat them anymore. At first that took some restriction. Now I just don't even think about it. - And you're not reinforcing the circuits. And so you're in essence are removing yourself from, but you tend to be the exception. You know, we have a huge, a incredible large number of people that are being continuously exposed to highly processed foods. - And hidden, so called hidden sugars. - They don't even have to be hidden. You know, it's right there. - Hiding in plain sight. I agree so much is made of hidden sugars that we often overlook that there are also the overt sugars. - I mean, we can have a long discussion on the importance of coming up with strategies that could meaningfully change public health when it comes to nutrition. But I want to just go back to the notion of this brain centers that are ultimately the ones that are being activated by these essential nutrients. So sugar, fat, amino acids are building blocks of our diets. And this is across all animal species. So it's not unreasonable then to assume that dedicated brain circuits would've evolved to ensure their recognition, their ingestion and the reinforcement that that is what I need. And indeed animals evolve these two systems. One is the taste system that allows you to recognize them and trigger this predetermined, hardwired, immediate responses. Oh my goodness. This tastes so good. It's so sweet. I personally have a sweet tooth, and you know, oh my God, this is so delicious. It's fatty or umami, recognizing the amino acids. So that's the liking pathway, but in the wisdom of evolution, that's good, but doesn't quite do it. You want to make sure that these things get to the place where they're needed and they're not needed in your tongue. They're needed in your intestines where they're going to be absorbed as the nutrients that will support life. And the brain wants to know this, and it wants to know it in a way that it can now form the association between that I just tasted is what got where it needs to be. And it makes me feel good. And so now next time that I have to choose, what should I eat? That association now guides me to, that's the one I want. I want that fruit, not that fruit. I want those leaves, not those leaves, because these are the ones that activate the right circuits that ensure that the right nutrients got to the right place and told the brain, this is what I want and need. Are we on? - We're on. One thing that intrigues me and puzzles me, is that this effect took a couple of days, at least in mice. And the sensation, ah, sorry, the perception of taste is immediate. and yet this is a slow system. And so in a beautiful way, but in a kind of mysterious way, the brain is able to couple the taste of a sweet drink with the experience of nutrient extraction in the gut, under a context where the mouse and the human is presumably ingesting other things, smelling other mice, smelling other people. That's incredible. - But you have to think of it not as humans, remember we inherited the circuits of our ancestors and they through evolutionary from their ancestors. And we haven't had that many years to have fundamentally changed in many of these hardwired circuits. So forget as humans, let's look at animals in the wild. Which is easier now to comprehend the logic. You know, why should this take a long time of continued reinforcement given that I can taste it in a second? You want to make sure that this source of sugar, for example, in the wild is the best. Is the richest. It's the one where I get the most energy for the least amount of extraction, the least amount of work. I want to identify rich sources of sugar. And if the system simply responds immediately to the first sugar that gets to your gut, you're going to form the association with those sources of food, which are not the ones that you should be eating from. - Don't fall in love with the first person you encounter. - Oh my goodness, exactly. And so evolutionarily by having the taste system, giving you the immediate recognition, but then by forcing this gut brain axis to reinforce it only when sustained repeated exposure has informed the brain. This is the one you don't want to form the association before. And so when we remove it from the context of we just go to the supermarket, we're not hunting there in the wild where I need to form. And so what's is that highly processed foods are hijacking, co-opting these circuits in a way that it would've never happened in nature. And then we not only find these things appetitive and palatable, but in addition, we are continuously reinforcing, the wanting in a way that, oh my God, this is so great. What do I feel like eating? Let me have more of this. - You've just forever changed the way that I think about supermarkets and restaurants. There are understanding this fast signaling and this slower signaling and the utility of having both makes me realize that supermarkets and restaurants are about the most unnatural thing for our system ever, almost the equivalent of living in small villages with very few suitable mates versus online dating, for instance. - I'm not going to make a judgment call there because they do serve an important purpose. - I like restaurants too. - And so do supermarkets, thank God. I think they're not the culprits. I think the culprits of course are our reliance on foods that are not necessarily healthy. Now, going back to the supermarket, don't fall in love with the first, they need to work. You know, you take a tangerine, and you take an extract of tangerine that you used to cook that spiked, let's say with sugar and you equalize in both where they both provide the same amount of calories. If you eat them both, they're going to have a very different effect in your gut brain axis on your system. Once you make the extract and you process it and you add processed sugar to use it now to cook, to add, to make it really sweet tangerine thing. Now you're providing now fully ready to use broken down source of sugar, in the tangerine that sugar's mixed in the complexity of a whole set of other chemical components, fiber, long chains of sugar molecules that need a huge amount of work by your stomach, your gut system, to break it down. So you are using a huge amount of energy to extract energy and the balance it's very different that when I take this process highly extracted tangerine, by the way I use tangerines because I had a tangerine just before I came here. - Delicious, they are delicious. - And so this goes back to the issue of supermarkets. And to some degree, given a choice, you don't want to eat highly processed foods because everything's already been broken down for you. And so your system has no work. And so you are, co-opting hijacking the circuits in a way that they're being activated at a time scale that normally wouldn't happen. - Well, this is why I often feel that, and I think a lot of data are now starting to support the idea that while indeed the laws of thermodynamics apply calories ingested versus calories burned is a very real thing, right? That the appetite for certain foods and the wanting and the liking are phenomena of the nervous system, brain and gut as you've beautifully described. And that changes over time, depending on how we are receiving these nutrients. - Absolutely. Look, we have a lot of work to do. I'm talking as society. I'm not talking about you and I. - We also have a lot of work to do. - Now. I think understanding the circuits is giving us important insights in how ultimately, and hopefully we can improve human health and make a meaningful difference. Now, it's very easy to try to connect the dots A to B, B to C, C to D. And I think there's a lot more complexity to it, but I do think that the lessons that are emerging out of understanding how these circuits operate, can ultimately inform how we deal with our diets in a way that we avoid what we're facing now as a society. I mean it's nuts that over-nutrition happens to be such a prevalent problem. And I also think the training of people who are thinking about metabolic science and metabolic disease is largely divorced from the training of the neuroscientist and vice versa. No one field is to blame, but I fully agree that the brain is the key over, or the nervous system to be more accurate is one of the key overlooked features. - Is the arbiter, ultimately is the arbiter of many of these pathways. - As a final question. And one which is simply to entertain my curiosity and the curiosity of the listeners. What is your absolute favorite food? - Oh, my goodness. - Taste, I should say. Taste to distinguish between taste and the nutritive value or lack thereof. - Look, we, unlike every animal and every animal species eat for the enjoyment of it, it doesn't happen in the wild, most animals eat when they need to eat. Doesn't mean they don't enjoy it, but it's a completely different story. I have too many favorite foods because I enjoy the sensory experience rather than the food itself to me is the whole thing, is from the presentation, look, there've been these experiments done in psycho physics, I'm going to take a salad, made out of 11 components and I'm going to mix them all up in potpourri greens and other things here. And in the other one, I'm going to present it in a beautiful arrangement. And I'm going to put them behind a glass cabinet and I'm going to sell them. And I'm going to sell one for $2 and one for $8, precisely the same ingredient. Exactly the same amount of each. Ultimately you're going to mix them, they're all going to be the same, and people will pay the $8 because you know what, it evokes a different person. It gives you the feel that, oh my goodness, I'm going to enjoy that salad. So going back to, what is my favorite food, to me eating is really a sensory journey. I don't mean the every day, let me have some chicken wings, because I'm hungry it, but eh, every piece I think has an important evoking sensory role. And so in terms of categories of food I grew up in Chile. So meat has always been, but I eat it so seldom now. - Is that right? - Yeah, because I know that it's not necessarily the healthiest thing, red meat I'm talking about. And so I grew up eating it every day. I'm talking seven days a week, Chile, Argentina, that's the mainstay of our diet. Now maybe I have red meat. I don't know, once every four weeks. - And you enjoy it? - Oh, I love it. Part of it is because I haven't had it in four weeks. But you know, I love sushi, but I love the art of sushi, the whole thing, the way it's presented, it changes the way you taste it. I love ethnic food in particular. - You're in the right place. - You got it, that was the main reason I wanted to come to New York. No, I'm just kidding. - There's also that Columbia University that's- - And I came here because I wanted to be with people that are thinking about the brain, the same way that I like to think, which can we solve this big problem, this big question. - And certainly you're making amazing strides in that direction. And I love your answer because it really brings together the many features of the circuitries and the phenomena we've been talking about today, which is that while it begins with sensation and perception, ultimately it's the context. And that context is highly individual to person, place and time, and many, many other things on behalf of myself. And certainly on behalf of all the listeners, I want to thank you, first of all, for the incredible work that you've been doing now for decades, in vision, in taste and in this bigger issue of how we perceive and experience life, it's truly pioneering and incredible work. And I feel quite lucky to have been on the sidelines, seeing this over the years and hearing the talks and reading the countless beautiful papers, but also for your time today to come down here and talk to us about what drives you and the discoveries you've made. Thank you ever so much. - It was great fun. Thank you for having me. - We'll do it again. - We shall. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about perception and in particular, the perception of taste with Dr. Charles Zuker. If you're learning from, and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have feedback for us in terms of comments related to topics we've covered, or questions or topics or guests that you'd like us to cover on future episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. On today's episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we didn't talk about supplements, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements that are useful for sleep, for focus, for hormone support and other aspects of mental health, physical health, and performance. If you're interested in some of those supplements, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman to see the catalog of supplements that we've helped them formulate. And that map directly onto specific protocols described on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, we are Huberman Lab on Twitter and Huberman Lab on Instagram. And at both Twitter and Instagram, I cover science and science related tools. Some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information contained in the Huberman Lab Podcast. We also have a newsletter in which we spell out protocols and some summaries from previous podcast episodes. If you'd like to check those out, you can go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and you'll find the Neural Network Newsletter. You can sign up for that newsletter simply by providing an email, it's completely zero cost. We have a very strict privacy policy. We do not share your email with anybody. Again, that's hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and look for the Neural Network Newsletter. And if you'd like examples of previous newsletters, you'll also find those at hubermanlab.com. Once again, thank you for joining me today, my discussion with Dr. Charles Zuker about the biology of perception and the biology of the perception of taste in particular, I hope you found that discussion to be as enriching as I did. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light rock music]

========================================

--- Video 267 ---
Video ID: T65RDBiB5Hs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T65RDBiB5Hs
Title: Optimize & Control Your Brain Chemistry to Improve Health & Performance | Huberman Lab Podcast #80
Published: 2022-07-11 12:00:16 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the biological roles of the four major neuromodulators—dopamine, epinephrine (aka adrenaline), serotonin, and acetylcholine—and describe how these neuromodulators impact a wide variety of mental states and behaviors, including focus, creativity, motivation, drive, learning, alertness, mood, relationships, and feelings of well-being. Then, with that foundational understanding in mind, I describe a potent toolkit of science-supported behavioral, nutrition, and supplementation tools that can be used to increase baseline levels of individual neuromodulators and that can be modified for specific goals. This episode summarizes low-or-no-cost, actionable, science-based tools that can benefit anyone in order to enhance their levels of brain chemicals and improve mental health, physical health, and performance.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Rapid and reversible control of human metabolism by individual sleep states: https://bit.ly/3RofUmU
Resetting the late timing of ‘night owls’ has a positive impact on mental health and performance: https://bit.ly/3uD54Qd
Skin exposure to UVB light induces a skin-brain-gonad axis and sexual behavior: https://bit.ly/3uGvOz5
The Role of Gene Encoding Variation of DRD4 in the Relationship between Inattention and Seasonal Daylight: https://bit.ly/3Ob154l
Caffeine increases striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor availability in the human brain: https://go.nature.com/3c6AQi4
Human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures: https://bit.ly/3IumXX1
The effect of Cissus quadrangularis (CQR-300) and a Cissus formulation (CORE) on obesity and obesity-induced oxidative stress: https://bit.ly/3AChHib

Other Resources:
The Darya Rose Show: Sunscreen & Sunprotection with Dr. Brian Diffey: https://bit.ly/3IqHuf0
Huberman Lab: Controlling Your Dopamine for Motivation Focus & Satisfaction: https://bit.ly/3IqQzVb
Huberman Lab: ADHD & How Anyone Can Improve Their Focus: https://bit.ly/3uDo4Oo
Huberman Lab: Using Deliberate Cold Exposure for Health & Performance: https://bit.ly/3AFfDGi
Huberman Lab: Tools for Managing Stress & Anxiety: https://bit.ly/3AzlRay

Timestamps
00:00:00 Optimizing Neurochemicals to Improve Health 
00:03:40 Momentous Supplements
00:04:30 Sleep & Maintaining Healthy Metabolism 
00:09:52 Tools: How to Wake Up Earlier, Night Owls
00:19:32 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, InsideTracker
00:22:05 Nervous System Overview 
00:31:32 How Neuromodulators Work  
00:34:24 Baseline Neuromodulator Levels, 3 Daily Phases 
00:42:15 Hormones Modulate Neuromodulators
00:52:12 The 4 Major Types of Neuromodulators 
01:01:45 Tool Kit 1: Increase Baseline Dopamine & Focus 
01:08:52 Tyrosine-rich Foods & Dopamine 
01:10:59 Dopamine Supplementation: Mucuna Pruriens, L-tyrosine & Phenylethylamine
01:16:00 Deliberate Cold Exposure & Dopamine 
01:21:12 Tool Kit 2: Additional Tips to Increase Dopamine 
01:26:10 Tool Kit 3: Increase Epinephrine (Adrenaline) & Alertness 
01:34:34 Tool Kit 4: Increase Acetylcholine & Attention/Learning; Choline-rich Foods 
01:37:29 Acetylcholine Supplements: Nicotine, Alpha GPC, Huperzine  
01:44:47 Tool Kit 5: Behavior to Increase Focus & Acetylcholine
01:46:56 Tool Kit 6: Behavior to Increase Serotonin & Feelings of Well-being  
01:50:51 Tools: Tryptophan-Rich Foods & Serotonin
01:53:31 Tools: Serotonin Supplements: Cissus Quadrangularis, 5-HTP, Myo-inositol
02:02:14 Use the Neurochemical Toolkit to Meet Individual Goals 
02:06:44 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss your brain chemistry and how to control and optimize your brain chemistry for all aspects of mental health, physical health, and performance. Many times before on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and frankly, every time I'm a guest on another podcast, I get questions about science and science-based tools for things like enhancing sleep, enhancing focus, enhancing creativity, improving relationships, getting over grief and on and on, all of which are valid questions and for which there are protocols that are based in science and that work the first time and every time. However far more important than knowing a protocol is understanding why a given protocol works. That's why I'm always hammering on mechanism and explaining the cells and circuits and chemicals, at least to some detail, so that people can understand not just what to do, but why it works and therefore, how to change a protocol as their life circumstances change, or as goals change. Now today we are going to go even a layer deeper. We're going to explore the foundations of your biology in your brain and body that allow any protocol to work because as it turns out, all of the protocols out there, whether or not it's a breathing protocol or a supplement or a prescription drug or an exercise routine, they all tap into and leverage a core set of just a few biological mechanisms. That's right, beneath everything you are able to do and feel and indeed beneath every protocol that allows you to change for the better and optimize your mental health, physical health, and performance, there's just a small subset of chemicals that you're leveraging toward that change. So today we are going to talk about the four major pillars of neurochemistry that allow you to, for instance, be focused when you want to focus, that allow you to relax when you need to relax and de-stress, that allow you to optimize your sleep, that allow you to optimize your exercise routine or to work through a pain point in relationship or in career or in your relationship to yourself. So what I can say for sure is that by the end of this episode, you will have a much richer understanding about how your brain and nervous system and indeed your entire body work. And you'll have a much firmer understanding as to which protocols and tools to reach for given your particular goals in the moment, in the day, across the week, across the month, across the year, and indeed across your entire lifespan. So what we're really going for today are principles, deeper understanding of why any given protocol works and we are also going to discuss specific protocols. Some of those protocols I've discussed on previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but I must say, many of the protocols and tools that I will discuss are brand new and based on research that I have not discussed at all, simply because the research papers came out only recently, or these are papers that I only recently unearthed. In fact, I'm going to share with you two recent studies in a moment that are exceedingly important for optimizing your sleep and these are studies that, again, I've never discussed in any episode on sleep or on any other podcast. So by the end of today's episode, you're going to have far more knowledge about your biology and psychology than you did at the start and you'll be armed with many more tools and most importantly, principles so that you can navigate not just the tools presented on this podcast, but in the vast landscape of tools that are out there for mental health, physical health and performance. The Huberman Lab Podcast is proud to announce that we've partnered with Momentous supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, the quality of their supplements is exceedingly high. Second of all, we wanted to have a location where you could find all of the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast in one easy to find place. You can now find that place at livemomentous.com/huberman. In addition, Momentous supplements ship internationally, something that a lot of other supplement companies simply do not do. So that's terrific whether or not you live in the US or you live abroad. Right now, not all of the supplements that we discuss on the Huberman Lab Podcast are listed, but that catalog of supplements is being expanded very rapidly and a good number of them that we've talked about, some of the more prominent ones for sleep and focus and other aspects of mental and physical health are already there. Again, you can find them at livemomentous.com/huberman. Every so often, I come across a study or set of studies that I get so excited about that I start telling everybody in my immediate life and I insist on also sharing it with you, the listeners of this podcast, because I find the information to be so incredibly interesting and actionable. The two studies that I'm going to discuss both relate to sleep and sleep states and how to access better sleep. The first one was published in the journal Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. And the title of this paper is "Rapid and Reversible Control of Human Metabolism "by Individual Sleep States". We will provide a link to this study in the show captions. The first author is Nora Nowak, N-O-W-A-K. And basically what they did is they measured the different forms of metabolism that occur while humans sleep. As far as I know, this is one of the first studies of this kind. There are many studies of metabolism. There are many studies of sleep. This study focused on how different states of sleep such as rapid eye movement sleep, which is associated with dreaming and high emotional content dreams versus slow wave sleep, which tends to be more focused on physical repair of the body, more mundane dreams, how those different states of mind during sleep relate to different aspects of metabolism and what they found was absolutely fascinating. First of all, they found that sleep states regulate more than 50%, half of all the metabolite features detected in human breath. What does that mean? Well, it turns out that you can figure out what humans are metabolizing in particular, more lipids or more carbohydrate, whether or not they're relying more on glucose metabolism based on the contents of their breath. This is true during waking and during sleep. And this is what allowed them to do these incredible measurements of what's being metabolized during sleep. They measured close to 2000 metabolites in breath, every 10 seconds across the entire night's sleep. And what they found was that there are major pathways related to lipid metabolism, fat metabolism, or to carbohydrate metabolism or other forms of metabolism that are up or down regulated as human beings transition between slow wave sleep, rapid eye movement sleep and waking. And you might say waking? Well, yes, they also looked as people fell asleep and as they emerged from sleep. And believe it or not every so often during sleep, you wake up, you didn't know this, but you wake up in the middle of the night, you look around and you go back to sleep. You're not aware of it because you're still in a rather sleep like state, although you are awake. What they found was that sleep and the various states of sleep regulated individual metabolic pathways. They found for instance, that the switch from sleep to wakefulness reduces fatty acid oxidation. So that means while you're asleep, you're oxidating more fatty acids. And as you wake up, that becomes less the case. And there's a switch in slow wave sleep that increases fatty acid oxidation. And there's this transition from rapid eye movement sleep to other aspects of sleep that brings about things like the so-called TCA cycle. Some of you familiar with metabolism will be familiar with the TCA cycle, the so-called tricarboxylic acid cycle, intermediates, that's fancy nerd speak for specific aspects of metabolism being regulated during this rapid eye movement sleep transition. What does all this mean? And how is this actionable? Well, on many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast such as the master sleep episode and the episode that we're going into in further depth today, we're going to talk about sleep and how to optimize sleep. It's been thought of, but not really tamped down that quality and depth of sleep and duration of sleep is important for metabolism during the daytime. And indeed that's the case. If people are sleep deprived or they're not sleeping enough, things like glucose metabolism, et cetera, get really disrupted during the daytime. But what this current study shows is that the metabolism that you experience during sleep, or to be more specific, the range of different types of metabolism that you experience during sleep may serve to tune up or to ensure that the specific aspects of metabolism that you require during wakefulness are working properly. In addition to that, this study clearly shows that getting enough sleep allows you to transition through all the various forms of metabolism and use all those different forms of metabolites during sleep in a way that's immensely beneficial for the systems of your brain and body. So the take home message here is that, as the author state, sleep and experiencing the different states of sleep, slow wave sleep early in the night, predominantly, plus rapid eye movement sleep toward the end of the night is extremely important for optimizing metabolic circuits for human performance and health. In other words, by not getting sufficient duration sleep, you're not allowing your body and brain to transition through all the different aspects of fuel utilization and you're not teaching your brain and body how to use similar types of fuels during wakefulness. So again, all of this points to the fact that we need to be getting sufficient quality and duration of sleep. So if you're sleep deprived, even by an hour or so, you're going to get far less rapid eye movement sleep because rapid eye movement sleep is what occurs toward the end of a sleep night. During the early part of the night, far more slow wave sleep. In getting less rapid eye movement sleep, we know it makes you more emotionally labile, but now we know it's also going to alter certain forms of glucose metabolism during the night and during wakefulness. So that all underscores the need to get sleep. But then the question is how to get enough sleep and how to make sure you get into all these different sleep states. And this is particularly important for you so-called night owls. There's a lot of controversy out there as to whether or not different so-called chronotypes exist, that is people who just naturally or genetically want to be an early bird, wake up early and go to bed early. So these people that wake up at 4:00 AM and would be most comfortable going to bed by seven or 8:00 PM or 9:00 PM. Then they are so called night owls, people that would feel best or tend to feel best when they go to sleep at 1:00 AM, 2:00 AM, even 3:00 AM, and like to wake up later 8:00, 9:00, 10:00, or even 11:00 AM or noon. And then of course, most people go to sleep somewhere between 10:00 PM and midnight and wake up somewhere between 5:00 AM and 7:00 AM, or I suppose more typically 6:00 AM and 8:00 AM. Now whether or not real chronotypes exist or whether or not people simply select schedules for sleep and wakefulness that they like because of their social schedules or the activities they enjoy. For instance, some people like to really go out, they like to go out dancing or hear music, or spend time in venues that are only open late at night, and don't even open until noon or after. Other people like myself rarely go out at night but I like to get up early. I like to exercise. I like to see the sunrise, et cetera. So I don't know if I'm a morning person or an evening person. I just know the things I enjoy tend to happen in the early part of the day. And the things that I don't enjoy quite as much tend to happen late at night. Regardless of whether or not there are real genetic propensities to be a night owl or an early bird or a sort of typical person right there in the middle, it's very important that people have some control over their sleep schedule and even more important, that people are able to get sufficient amount of REM sleep and slow wave sleep, for many reasons, but including the reasons I discussed in the previous study related to metabolism. I'm very excited, therefore, about a study that came out in sleep medicine. This was a few years ago, but somehow I missed this one. It was published in 2019. And the title of this article is "Resetting the Late Timing of 'Night Owls' "Has a Positive Impact on Mental Health, "Physical Health and Performance". This is a study done in humans, focusing specifically on people that like to stay up late and sleep in, but who desire to be able to get up and feel alert in order to go to work or study and they want to go to sleep a bit earlier. And so there are a lot of questions embedded in this study in particular, whether or not people can actually shift their schedule by a few hours or more. Some people out there contend that if you're a night owl, that's just going to be impossible or very, very challenging to do. Turns out it's not impossible and it's not even that challenging to do provided you do the right things. Just a brief overview of the study and then I'll give you the key takeaways. It was a randomized control trial. It involved a number of different people, both male and female. And what they did was they used non-pharmacological, practical interventions in a real world setting, here I'm paraphrasing. They used targeted light exposure. They used consistent sleep, wake times. They used fixed meal times, caffeine intake and exercise. And this is one of the reasons I love this study so much because I've done episodes where I've talked about temperature, exercise, feeding, and most importantly, light exposure as a way to control and shift your sleep wake cycles, your so-called circadian timing and entrainment. What did they find? Well, they found "Significant improvements "in terms of mood so far less depression and stress", subjectively measured, "as well as improved cognitive performance", that was objectively measured. So improved reaction times, improved physical grip strength, which is actually a measure not just of strength per se, but also of nervous system function and a number of things that people could do in order to optimize their morning hours, even though they were night owls previously. What did they have people do? Well, I'm going to just going to list this off sort of rapid fire succession. Then we'll provide a link to the study if you want to learn more. First of all, they told participants to try and wake up two to three hours before their typical wake up time, two to three hours. That seems brutal to me and probably seems brutal to you if you're somebody who typically wakes up at 10:00 AM to try and get up at eight or even 7:00 AM consistently, but they were also asked to maximize outdoor light exposure during the mornings for reasons that if you've listened to this podcast before, if you've heard me talk about before, you know, that I'm constantly talking about, I'll probably go into the grave shouting, please get as much light exposure from sunlight early in the day as possible because it sets in motion a huge number of things that are beneficial for your mental health and physical health, including dopamine production, timing melatonin production correctly, reducing cortisol peaks late in the day, et cetera, et cetera. So they asked them to get a lot of outdoor light exposure. They didn't give them a specific amount. What they said, maximize outdoor light exposure during the mornings, the time before noon. And again, they had them waking up two to three hours before their habitual wake up time. They were also told, and this is very important if you're going to shift your schedule earlier, to try and keep sleep wake times fixed between their work days and their weekends. So not sleeping in on the weekends or not having any sleep in days, regardless of how well they slept the night before. How fixed? Within 15 to 30 minutes of their pre-designated time. So if they were waking up at seven o'clock one day, they set their alarm and they made sure they got out of bed at seven o'clock every day plus or minus 30 minutes, but never later than 7:30, never earlier than 6:30. Participants were also asked to try and go to sleep two to three hours before their habitual bedtime. So again, these are people that want to stay up late, like 11:00 PM, perhaps, but even as late as 1:00 AM or 2:00 AM. And now they are asked to go to sleep two to three hours before their habitual bedtime and to wake up two to three hours earlier, as I mentioned earlier. They were also told, and I love this because it fits with many of the things we've talked about on this podcast before, to try and limit light exposure during the evenings, dim the lights or limit altogether artificial lights. Lot of reasons for that, I covered that in the Master Sleep episode, I covered that in the Optimized Health Using Light episode. You can find those at HubermanLab.com. They're asking them to do that here. And they asked participants to keep a regular schedule for their daily meals, not eating on the hour consistently, you know, at 9:00 AM, noon, 3:00 PM, exactly. But within again, about 15 to 30 minutes, they're always eating at the same times. That was also important. And again, that's because we have these so-called food in trained circadian clocks. When you eat, tells your body when to be alert and when you're not eating, when to be asleep. And they were told to not drink any caffeine after 3:00 PM in the afternoon. Another theme that we've talked about on this podcast. They were also told not to take naps after 4:00 PM. Naps are an interesting feature of the sleep wake cycle. To be very brief about this and to pull from the episode that I did with world sleep expert from the University of California Berkeley, Matt Walker, naps are great for many people, but don't nap if it interferes with your nighttime sleep. And in this study, they told them don't nap after 4:00 PM. And if you are a napper, don't nap for more than 90 minutes. 10 minute naps are fine. 20 minute naps are fine. Zero minute naps are fine, but don't nap for more than 90 minutes. And don't nap after 4:00 PM. And to exercise during the morning. Now this one can be a bit controversial because I know a lot of the PTs out there and a lot of the online, you know, gym rats and people who, and runners too, for that matter, will say, well according to body temperature and research, it's best to exercise in the afternoon. Look, it's better to exercise sometime as opposed to no time, but if you're focused on how to shift your schedule earlier, meaning get up earlier and go to sleep earlier, this study had people exercise in the early part of the day, certainly before 2:00 PM and ideally before noon. So again, this is a really important study because it combines a lot of different variables to arrive at this very impressive shift where people can get up two to three hours earlier and then pretty consistently and reflexively start going to bed two to three hours earlier, feeling more alert during the day, again, improvements in cognitive performance, mood and physical performance, grip, strength, et cetera. Very few studies are able to or are willing to tackle so many variables and combine them in one study. This paper, I think, does a marvelous job of doing this and is incorporating things that individually, each have some support for them in animal studies and previous human studies. But as far as I know, this is one of the few studies that really combines all these different features in one place, eating times, keeping those consistent, getting maximal sunlight exposure earlier in the day, getting up at a consistent time, going to sleep at a consistent time and on and on. It's a really marvelous study for that reason. And I think for any of you that are night owls and any of you that want to reinforce your early waking and early to bed times, and I think for most all of you who fall into that general middle category of tend to go to sleep somewhere between 10:00 PM and midnight, 'cause that's most people and tend to wake up sometime between 6:00 AM and 8:00 AM, well, maybe you want to become more of an early riser or maybe you're going to travel or the seasons are changing and you want to shift your time or you have a new job, et cetera, or something that's actually very common in terms of relationship struggle. You want to match your wake sleep times, or maybe you want to offset your wake sleep times from a significant other, these sorts of approaches that I described here and that are supported by the data in this paper are absolutely powerful and science supported. And I'm certain that if you were to apply them, that you would see essentially the same effects that were observed here. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens now called AG1. AG1 is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that also includes adaptogens and digestive enzymes for health. Now the probiotics are particularly important to me because there is now a wealth of data showing that our gut microbiome, that is trillions of little microbacteria that are good for us, impact our immune system, our hormones, and the so-called gut brain access, the connections between our gut and our brain that go in both directions, gut to brain and brain to gut, that control things like our mood, our ability to think clearly and focus and overall brain health. And with AG1, I'm able to optimize that gut brain access through the probiotics and the vitamins, minerals, adaptogens and digestive enzymes, support a number of other things that relate to immediate and long-term health. In fact, anytime people ask me, what's the one supplement they should take, I say AG1 Athletic Greens, because it's going to cover all of your bases to the greatest degree. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it easy to mix up AG1 while you're on the road. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 and K2 are important for cardiovascular function and calcium regulation, and a number of other important aspects of health. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer of the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. And frankly, I'm not a big fan of the word nootropics. I've said that on various podcasts and on social media posts and the reason I'm not a fan of the word nootropics is it means smart drugs, but as a neuroscientist, I know that we don't have circuits in the brain or chemicals in the brain for being smart. We have circuits in the brain for focus and for task switching and for creativity. And oftentimes, those circuits differ from one another, although they collaborate to create things that we think of as intelligence or focus or creativity, et cetera. Thesis understands this and for that reason has developed custom nootropics that are matched to your particular goals and to your particular biology. They give you the opportunity to try several different blends over the course of a month and discover which ones work best for you and which ones don't. In addition to that personalization, they take it a step further by offering free consultations with a coach to help you optimize your experience and dial in your perfect formulas. I've be using Thesis for about eight months now and I can confidently say that their nootropics are the best that I've ever used. My go-to formula is the Clarity formula or the Motivation formula when I'm going to work or work out, meaning I'm going to do focus cognitive work, or I'm going to exercise. I also like their Energy formula prior to exercise. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman. You can take a three minute quiz that will help match you to the best custom nootropics to start with. And Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in that first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and your DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the things that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be measured from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA test, you can also get insight into, for instance, what is your biological age and how does that compare to your chronological age? And of course, your biological age is really the one that matters. With InsideTracker, there's an additional advantage over other blood tests and DNA tests. And that is with many blood tests and DNA tests out there, you get information back about hormones, lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have a very simple, easy to use personalized platform that tells you what sorts of changes to make in your nutrition, possible changes to supplementation, behavioral changes, et cetera, that will allow you to bring the numbers related to your hormones and your lipids, et cetera, into the ranges that are optimal for your mental health, physical health and performance goals. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Let's talk about how to optimize and indeed how to control your brain chemistry for a sake of health and performance. Now in order to do that, we all need to be on the same page about some basic facts. Some of those basic facts involve learning some basic biology. And I promise that even if you don't have a biology or chemistry background, everything I'm about to say should be accessible and clear to you. The important thing to know is that your brain and your spinal cord and the rest of your so-called nervous system control all the organs of your body and that all the organs of your body feed back, meaning they communicate through chemicals and other means, to your nervous system. Now your nervous system plays a particularly important role in generating everything from sleep to wakefulness, creativity, stress, calm, et cetera, by way of a particular type of cell-cell interaction. And that's called synaptic communication. What is synaptic communication? Well, in order to understand that let's dial back a little bit further and try and understand for a moment what makes up your nervous system. In its simplest form, your nervous system is made of nerve cells that we call neurons. Neurons communicate with one another through chemicals. They release certain chemicals that make other neurons more or less likely to be electrically active. What do we mean by electrically active? We mean, as it sounds, electricity passing down through cells and then literally causing electricity in other cells. The simplest way to think about this is maybe when you were a kid or maybe even still now, you would wear socks and you'd shuffle along the floor to generate some static electricity, and then you'd touch someone [playful whirring] and you'd shock them with your finger. I'm a younger brother so I'd occasionally do that to my sister. I had friends, we would do that to one another. I know it's kind of silly and childish, yet, it illustrates the principle that we can generate electricity and pass electricity to other beings or in the case of neurons, from one neuron to the next. The way neurons do that, is that in between the neurons, they're little spaces, those little spaces are called synapses and neurons literally vomit, well, they don't literally vomit, but they release little packets of so-called transmitter chemical into that space we call a synapse. It travels across the synapse. It attaches to the cell on the other side, the other neuron. And then depending on what that chemical is, it either makes that next neuron more electrically active or less electrically active, so called excitation, it either excites the next neuron to be electrically active also, or it inhibits, it prevents the next neuron from being electrically active. So again, very simply, we have nerve cells that communicate with one another through electricity and chemicals that inspire that electricity and the little gaps between neurons are called synapses. If you can understand that, I'm certain you can make it through the rest of the episode and that you'll get all the depth and important detail that you need to know. But I want to go just a little bit further and explain that neurons don't just talk one-to-one. There are trillions of neurons in your nervous system that allow you to be happy, to be in love, to be sad, to be in grief, to remember things and so on. And what you do at any moment, what you feel and what you think relates to which so-called neural circuits are active. So a lot of times we think about brain areas and we've all seen these pictures of the brain where, you know, someone was in a fMRI scanner, or they were in a brain scanner of some sort, and they saw a picture of something and a certain area of the brain lights up as it's called. That lighting up of the brain really reflects the activity of hundreds, if not thousands, maybe even millions of neurons in that region. Those images of brain areas lighting up and indeed talking about brain areas lighting up, can be a little bit or a lot misleading because in fact, no single brain area controls any one single perception or behavior or feeling state. Rather, we have so-called neuro circuits, chains of neurons, chains of specific neurons that is, that create different states of mind that lead to specific behaviors that lead to specific emotional states. And those neural circuits are made up of lots of different brain areas that light up in particular sequences. And when I say light up, excuse me, what I mean is that particular brain areas either excite or prevent the excitation, that is they inhibit other brain areas in a particular sequence. Much like keys on a piano played in a particular sequence, makes up a particular song, particular brain areas activated or made silent in a particular sequence leads to a particular behavior like getting up out of a chair or a particular feeling state like being particularly happy one day when you wake up or particularly depressed, whether or not that depression is caused by a life event or whether not it arises spontaneously. So we have neurons, we have synapses and we have neural circuits. And vitally important is the fact that which neural circuits are active and which neural circuits are likely to be less active at any given moment, depends on two major categories of chemicals. It depends on hormones and it depends on so-called neuromodulators. Now we're mainly going to focus on neuromodulators today because those are the things that if you can learn to control them, and indeed there are tools to control them, then you can control which neural circuits are more likely or less likely to be active in you at any given moment. And in doing so, you can control whether or not you are going to be alert and focused or deeply asleep. You can control whether or not you are going to be in a creative state or whether or not you're going to be in a state of mind more fit, more capable that is of doing focused work or math or more so-called linear types of work where there's a correct answer. There's a specific thing to follow and you're simply going to plug and chug as it were through a particular set of steps in order to accomplish something. Or for instance, whether or not you're going to be in a more relaxed and creative state where you're thinking about new ideas or new ideas just seem to be spontaneously coming to mind. All of that can be controlled to a considerable extent by leveraging these so-called neuromodulators. What are neuromodulators? Neuromodulators are particular chemicals that make it likely that certain neuro circuits will be active and not others. And the four neuromodulators that we're going to talk about today that are of the utmost importance for your goals are dopamine, epinephrine also called adrenaline, serotonin and acetylcholine. That's dopamine, epinephrine, serotonin and acetylcholine. Today, I'm going to teach you how each of those different categories of neuromodulators work and the things that you can do to control those neuromodulators, that is increase them or decrease them through behavioral tools and supplementation, in ways that allow you to access the brain and body states that you want at the times that you want. Just very quickly. I want to talk about how neuromodulators are able to work, regardless of whether or not it's dopamine or serotonin or epinephrine, et cetera. There are many features of how neuromodulators work, but for sake of today's discussion, we only need to focus on two of those features. And those are fast-acting features and longer slower features or what we call baseline features. What am I talking about when I say faster or baseline? Well, consider that at any given moment, whether or not you're asleep or awake, whether or not it's morning or afternoon or night, you have some amount of dopamine being released in your brain and body, some amount of serotonin, some amount of epinephrine and some amount of acetylcholine. It is rarely, if ever the case, that you have zero dopamine or zero serotonin. You know, so often we hear about someone being dopamine depleted or these days, you hear a lot about that anyways. Or you'll hear that people's serotonin is bottomed out. In reality, none of these neuromodulators ever disappear completely, but they tend to be present at different levels or different relative levels. Another important thing to point out is that they don't work alone. In fact, as you'll soon learn, dopamine and epinephrine are close cousins that collaborate in terms of creating states of focus and motivation, for instance, or in creating states of energy and the pursuit of particular goals. When I say they're close cousins, what I mean is that they tend to impact some of the same neural circuits. And believe it or not, dopamine and epinephrine are chemically related, too. I'll just tell you right now that epinephrine is actually derived from dopamine, chemically epinephrine, that is adrenaline, is made from the molecule dopamine. Now dopamine and serotonin can also work together to impact certain circuits in the brain. But in large part, they operate on separate circuits. And acetylcholine, which you'll soon learn is involved in states of focus and can actually open up, it can literally create states in the mind in which your brain is more plastic and able to change and learn more quickly. Well, acetylcholine can do that on its own, but rarely does it do it on its own. More typically, it gets assistance from some of the other neuromodulators. Now that might seem like it complicates the picture, but it actually makes the picture far simpler because what we can say for sure is that the fast actions of dopamine or the fast actions of epinephrine, serotonin or acetylcholine are actions that occur on the order of seconds or minutes or up to about an hour or so. Whereas the slower actions of those neuromodulators tend to occur on the order of hours, days, or even weeks. Now perhaps surprisingly, I'd like to focus on the slow actions of the neuromodulators first, because those slow actions of the neuromodulators are happening in you and in me and in everyone right now, and they set the backdrop, the context in which the various tools to manipulate dopamine, epinephrine, serotonin, or acetylcholine will work. What do I mean by the context or the backdrop or the baseline? Well, it's fair to say that most people are awake during the daytime and asleep at night. I do realize that there are people who are going to be doing shift work or they're raising young children, or that might have a sick person at home that they're tending to, et cetera, or even have insomnia, they're tending to them. So schedules of sleep and wakefulness will vary, but in general, everybody, regardless of whether or not you're nocturnal or you're, so-called, diurnal, your awake during the day, pretty much everybody follows a schedule in which from zero to nine hours after waking, that is from the time you wake up until about nine hours later, the neuromodulators, dopamine and epinephrine, tend to be at their highest levels that they will be at any point in the 24-hour period, in any period of the day. So we can call this zero to nine hour period phase one of the day, just for simplicity. And I've referred to this before in a previous episode, but not in this exact context. From nine to about 16 hours is what we would call phase two. And that's when dopamine and epinephrine levels tend to subside a bit compared to the earlier phase one part of the day and serotonin levels start to increase. And then phase three of the 24-hour cycle, which is from about, and again about the zero approximates, from about 17 hours after waking until about 24 hours after waking is phase three of the day. And during that time, there is chaos in terms of which neuromodulators are most present in the brain. And by chaos, what I mean is that during sleep, you have incredible peaks in acetylcholine and drops in acetylcholine. You have incredible peaks in dopamine and drops in dopamine. You have incredible peaks in serotonin and drops in serotonin. Most often, you are not going to see much if any release of epinephrine, adrenaline, and that's because epinephrine, also called adrenaline, tends to wake us up and put us into action mode behaviors and that's simply not happening during sleep. But for the other three neuromodulators, across the night, it's sort of chaos. You've got peaks and drops and peaks and drops in different combinations than you would ever see in wakefulness. And this plays important roles in dreaming, important roles in some of the reparative functions of sleep. The point is that during that phase three, the levels of neuromodulators are all over the place, but it's not random, right? I say it's chaos, but it's organized according to the specific reparative goals of sleep, the specific metabolic roles of sleep, et cetera. We're not going to focus too much on phase three today because phase three of the 24-hour cycle, that 17 to 24-hour period, is one in which you ought to be deeply asleep, whether or not you're nocturnal or diurnal, right? 17 hours after waking, you ought to be asleep. And there are a lot of episodes of this podcast. And indeed, today, I started talking about two particular studies related to sleep, and there are a lot of tools to enhance sleep, et cetera. And of course there are things that you can do in the late portion of phase two of the day in order to enhance your transition time into and depth of sleep. But you can't really do much during sleep, right? You're not taking supplements. You're not doing breathing practices. There are things to fall back asleep, but you're not really doing much during sleep. So we're mainly going to focus on what we're calling phase one and phase two. Phase one, being this dopamine epinephrine dominated phase of our day. And phase two being this more serotonergic or serotonin dominated portion of the day. And then you might say, well, what about acetylcholine? You forgot about acetylcholine? Well, we didn't forget about acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is under control more in terms of what we happen to be doing at any given moment, whether or not we're focusing or not focusing, whether or not we're learning or not learning. And here I'm referring to acetylcholine specifically in the context of the brain and thinking, because as some of you are probably shouting out there, right, if you're an exercise physiologist or you know anything about how the brain controls movement, acetylcholine is used at the nerve to muscle synapse, right? So neurons don't just control other neurons electrically. The way you are able to move in fact is because neurons are controlling the electric activity of muscles, literally the contraction of muscle fibers, and that control is exerted through the release of acetylcholine. So acetylcholine is working at muscles, as well, but we're not focused on that today. We're focused on what we can do during phase one of the day and what we can do during phase two of the day to control the specific neuromodulators, dopamine, epinephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine, toward particular end goals. And as I've been harping on for the last five or 10 minutes or so, it is important to understand that in the early phase one part of the day, again, zero to nine hours, dopamine and epinephrine already dominate the neuromodulator landscape. That is they are already elevated and then they will taper off in phase two. Whereas in phase two of the day, serotonin tends to dominate more than dopamine and epinephrine. And so if you think about that, what it means is that if your goal is to increase serotonin in order to get some particular effect on your mental performance or physical performance or health, or if your goal is to increase your dopamine or epinephrine, to get some particular effect on your mental health, physical performance, et cetera, well, then you need to consider what the background level of dopamine or epinephrine or serotonin happens to be because in doing so, you will know which tool to select and how hard you need to push on that tool, right? If your levels of dopamine are already riding pretty high, because it's the early part of the day, well then it doesn't take a whole lot more to get dopamine to a level in which it can, for instance, change your level of motivation. Whereas if you are in the late part of the day, let's say eight or 9:00 PM, and you have a lot of serotonin swimming around in your system and you really need to be focused and alert, well, you can do that by leveraging the dopamine and epinephrine system and indeed the acetylcholine system too, but you're going to have to resort to tools that can do that far more potently and that can do that in a much more sustained way if you're going to access the state that you want. So again, it's really important to understand what the backdrop of these neuromodulators is, the so-called baseline and that they vary across the day if you are going to be able to leverage tools to optimize your brain chemistry. Anyone that tells you do this protocol in order to increase your dopamine, do this protocol, or take this supplement to increase your serotonin, they can be telling you the absolute truth, but if you don't consider the backdrop over which that supplement or behavior is going to have its effect, well, then you can't really predict the effect it will have. But if you can understand these backdrop baseline elements to how neuromodulators work, well, then you're in a terrific position to leverage the best tools in the immediate and short-term and that is on the order of seconds, minutes and hours. Before we dive into the more pointed, directed effects of specific tools on neuromodulators, I'd like to just briefly mention hormones because they are also important for understanding the background and the context and these baseline levels of neuromodulators. Now here, I'm going to paint with a bit of a broad brush, but what I will say is accurate, even though it might not be exhaustive. What I mean by that is everything I'm about to say is true, but it doesn't cover every example in detail and nuanced possibility out there. Hormones have many different effects on the brain and body and not unlike neuromodulators, some of those effects are very fast. Some of them are very slow. In fact, certain hormones, for instance, the steroid hormones, like estrogen and like testosterone and corticosteroids and here, of course, I'm referring to the steroid hormones for what they are. They are indeed steroid hormones, but I'm not talking about steroids that people inject for sports performance or for physical augmentation. I'm talking about the steroid hormones that you make naturally because indeed you make these naturally. Well, the steroid hormones can actually control gene expression. They can change the identity of cells and the genes and proteins that cells express. This is why during puberty, for instance, testosterone and estrogen are released into the body, growth hormone is released into the body and bodies and voices and personalities and brains change tremendously because literally there is a transformation of the breast tissue, of the testicular tissue, of the ovarian tissue, of the bones, of the muscles, of the tissues and cells that control hair growth. Gene expression changes in all those cell types. And the child becomes an adolescent, becomes a young adult, right? That's what puberty really is. In fact, puberty is perhaps the most dramatic transformation that we go through in our entire lifespan in terms of our aging, 'cause indeed it reflects a very rapid, I should mention, period of aging and transformation of the identity of cells. So steroid hormones and other hormones can have very slow long-lasting actions in that way. They can also have very fast actions. So for instance, adrenaline, epinephrine, released from the adrenal glands can immediately make your heart beat faster, can immediately change the circumference of your blood vessels and arteries and capillaries and change the way blood flows. It can change the way you see the world, literally. It does change the way you see the world through your visual system. And that all happens on the order of hundreds of milliseconds or seconds, these are extremely fast actions. Corticosteroid also can have fast actions and slow actions. But since this isn't a discussion about hormones per se, and we've done entire episodes like the Optimize Testosterone and Estrogen episode. You can find that at HubermanLab.com. Or the interview with the incredibly knowledgeable and clear and really wonderful tutor of actionable information, Dr. Kyle Gillette, who is also on this podcast, you can learn a lot about hormones there. Today, we want to think about hormones as they relate to these neuromodulators, the dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine and acetylcholine, and in general, testosterone tends to collaborate with and increase the action of dopamine. That's not always the case, but in general, when testosterone goes up, dopamine goes up and sometimes even vice versa. When dopamine goes up, testosterone go up. And this is true for both males and for females. In general, when corticosteroids like cortisol and some related steroid hormones increase, epinephrine levels go up. And in general, when hormones like oxytocin or prolactin are increased, levels of serotonin go up. We can't draw a direct link between any one hormone system and acetylcholine. Acetylcholine kind of sits off in a category of its own in that way. But again, in general, testosterone and dopamine tend to collaborate in the same direction. Cortisol and epinephrine tend to collaborate in the same direction. Oxytocin and prolactin, which are hormones, and serotonin tend to collaborate in the same direction. And then we have poor old, lonely acetylcholine off on its own, but it's not poor and lonely. It actually has incredibly potent effects on its own. So it's really that it just doesn't mean much help from the hormone systems or at least not the steroid hormone systems in order to have its tremendous effects. Now a lot of what people think about and will do when trying to improve mental health and physical health is they will try and increase or decrease certain categories of hormones of the sort that I mentioned, testosterone, estrogen, oxytocin, and prolactin, so on. But oftentimes, the effects of those manipulations in hormones that are going to be most salient are not going to be due to the direct effects of those hormones. Sometimes it could be. But oftentimes it's going to be due to their effects on the brain and nervous system by way of how those hormones impact neuromodulators. So for instance, there are various things that people can do, both men and women, to increase their testosterone and estrogen in the appropriate ratios. I talked about one such approach in a previous episode, and that is to get sunlight onto a large portion of one's skin each day. Believe it or not, this actually works. And it works because your skin is actually an endocrine organ, a hormone secreting organ. It's a beautiful study. I've covered it on this podcast before. We will provide a link to this study again, but it had people spend at least 20 minutes or so, closer to 30 minutes, each day, trying to maximize sunlight exposure to as much of their skin as they could in terms of still maintaining decent exposure, meaning not over exposing themselves in a cultural way, meaning wearing enough clothes that they were decent, but still getting a lot of sun exposure, a couple of times per week or more. What they found was that people's testosterone and estrogen levels went up. Feelings of well-being went up. Feelings of well, or I should say increases in libido were observed, as well. They subjectively reported more passion, et cetera, testosterone and estrogen did indeed both go up. And again, I want to highlight that increases in estrogen, not just testosterone, are related to increases in libido in both men and women. This is why you never want to crush your estrogen down to zero, whether or not you're male or female, if you want to maintain some sort of healthy libido and general feelings of well-being, unrelated to libido. Well, many of those effects we know are not due to direct effects of testosterone and estrogen, but rather are due to the effects of testosterone and estrogen on the neuromodulators, dopamine and serotonin, because much of libido and feelings of well-being and feelings of relaxation, but also desire, motivation, et cetera, originate because of the activation of neural circuits that dopamine controls and promotes and that serotonin promote and control. So this is very important to understand as we move toward more specific discussion of the chemicals that we call neuromodulators, because hormones are controlling those neuromodulators in a very slow modulatory way. So yes, I said it, hormones modulate neuromodulators. I sort of said it twice on purpose. And this is a dramatic and potent effect. So I'll just give you one more example. The hormone prolactin tends to be antagonistic. It tends to reduce amounts of dopamine or at least when prolactin levels are high, dopamine levels tend to be lower. You observe this after the birth of a new child, you observe this post coitally after mating, in all species, humans and animals. When prolactin is elevated, serotonin tends to be elevated. And when prolactin is elevated, levels of dopamine and the effects of dopamine tend to subside. Now as I move toward explaining what each of the four categories of neuromodulators do, this will start to make more and more sense as to why this would be. I always say I wasn't consulted in the design phase, meaning I didn't design these circuits. And if anyone tells you that they did, you should back away quickly because none of us design these circuits. This is the way that evolution and nature created these systems. And they tend to work in a bit of a seesaw fashion, prolactin up, dopamine down, right? Dopamine up, prolactin down. In general, that is the way they work. So if we are to take a look at how each of these neuromodulator systems functions on its own, while understanding that they never truly function on their own, we can start to really make sense of the landscape of tools that are available to us and which tools are going to be most powerful to select if our goal is for instance, to be focused or if our goal is to be less stressed or if our goal is to be highly motivated and highly focused for sake of learning. All of that is indeed possible if you understand these four neuromodulators and you understand that while there are many tools ranging from pharmacologic to behavioral that can tap into these neuromodulator systems, that can kind of press on the gas of dopamine, pull back on serotonin and so on, but that there are particular tools, both behavioral and supplementation-based, and to some extent, prescription drug based, too, and we'll touch on a few of those. If you understand that and why they work, well, then you can create a sort of kit, a grab bag of things that you can use in any context or I should say that you can look to depending on the context you're in and create the states of body and mind that you want. Now once again, painting with a somewhat broad brush, but nonetheless, an accurate brush, we can say that dopamine, when elevated above baseline, tends to increase states of motivation, both mental and physical motivation, drive and to some extent focus. I've said it many times before, and I'll say it again, there's a lot of misconception about dopamine. Many people out there think that dopamine is all about pleasure. You hear about dopamine hits or people chasing dopamine or the need to have a dopamine fast, et cetera. Dopamine is not about pleasure. Dopamine is about motivation, craving and pursuit for goals or for things that are outside our immediate possession and experience. The motivation and pursuit of a mate. The motivation and pursuit to mate. The motivation and pursuit of food. The motivation and pursuit of a career goal, et cetera, et cetera, things we do not yet have, but that we want and we get into sort of a forward center of mass and a pursuit of, and that pursuit can be physical. That pursuit can be cognitive. It can be both cognitive and physical. And it can involve talking about something, right? Because in some professions, pursuit of things involves talking. I think about lawyers, they talk a lot in pursuit of winning cases and money, et cetera, putting people in jail or keeping people out of jail, et cetera, that's done with their mouths, not with their bodies. Athletes in a state of motivated training or in motivated competition use their bodies. All this is obvious of course, but perhaps what is not so obvious is that one molecule not working alone, but predominantly one molecule, dopamine, is responsible for all of those motivated states, which again, underscores the power of these neuromodulators. So dopamine, we can think of at least in the context of today's discussion as controlling and indeed promoting motivation, drive and pursuit and to some extent, focus. Epinephrine and a closely related molecule called norepinephrine and again, I want to emphasize that epinephrine is adrenaline and adrenaline is epinephrine. Norepinephrine is noradrenaline and noradrenaline is norepinephrine, but today we're going to just simply talk about epinephrine and norepinephrine. That category of neuromodulator is mainly responsible for generating our energy, our level of fuel and baseline level of forward center of mass, as I like to call it. You can also think of it as how high your RPM are. Now we're not a car and the car analogy sort of falls apart as we go further into the biology, but it's a decent one for now. When epinephrine levels are high, we tend to feel agitated, we tend to feel like we want to move, we tend to feel like we can't shut down our thinking and our anticipation of what's going to happen next. And when epinephrine levels are very, very low, we actually have less physical energy. We tend to have less mental energy in terms of generating thoughts very quickly and so on and so forth. And as I mentioned before, dopamine and epinephrine are closely related so much so that we know for a fact that epinephrine is actually manufactured from the molecule dopamine. So that's why I'm talking about these two neuromodulators in very close juxtaposition because they do indeed collaborate with one another. But for sake of today's discussion, we can just think of epinephrine as increasing energy, adrenaline increases energy in our state of readiness. It also, I should mention, activates our immune system. Contrary to popular belief that stress inhibits our immune system, epinephrine is deployed, it's released at great levels in our brain and body when we are stressed. And that actually protects us against infections of multiple kinds, at least in the short-term. That and all the details of that and tools related to that were covered in our episode on the immune system, if you want to check that out. Now the neuromodulator serotonin creates a number of different states in the brain and body, but for sake of today's discussion, we're going to think about the predominant states that it creates and those are states of contentness, being happy, feeling fairly relaxed, feeling soothed and to some extent, even some relief from pain or lack of pain. Serotonin is associated with a feeling of satiety of having enough of what we already have. Now when serotonin is very, very high, people can even be sedate. They can be completely amotivated, no motivation to seek out things like food or sex or work or et cetera. Whereas when serotonin levels are very low, people can actually exhibit agitation and high levels of stress. So the levels matter here, but again, for sake of today's conversation, when we leverage serotonin, we are really leveraging a neuromodulator that tends to increase the activity of neural circuits in the brain and body that make us feel relaxed and happy. And it tends to decrease the activity of neural circuits that make us rabidly in pursuit of things that we don't have, right. The opposite of content and sated is motivation, desire and hunger and thirst for things that we don't have. So serotonin is the molecule of peace. It is the molecule of contentness. It is the molecule of having enough, at least for the time being or the feeling that we have enough for the time being. Now acetylcholine is a fourth category of neuromodulator that as I mentioned earlier, is somewhat not totally, but somewhat distinct from any direct control by the major hormone systems of the body, or at least the major steroid hormone systems. And acetylcholine we can say is mainly associated with states of focus. And we can go a step further and say that it's mainly associated with steps of focus as they relate to learning and encoding new information, so called neuroplasticity. Now neuroplasticity, or the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience can be impacted by an enormous number of different chemicals, not just acetylcholine, but acetylcholine has a particularly potent ability to open up the thing that we call neuroplasticity to allow plasticity to happen in one moment whereas in a previous moment, it could not occur because acetylcholine had not been released in the brain or in the spinal cord. So acetylcholine is involved in focus and in learning, but it is not necessarily always associated with learning in the context of highly motivated, really ramped up states. It can be, but acetylcholine can also be released and can encourage the learning and neuroplasticity associated with calm states. For instance, if somebody has a newborn child, we know that they are flooded with oxytocin, which has actually even been called the love hormone or it does many things in addition to control feelings of romantic attachment and attachment to children, et cetera. It does all of that, but it does a lot more, as well. But when people have a new child, they also tend to be hyper-focused on that child, not just its well-being, but they narrow all their thinking, all their vision, all their hearing to that child and there are obvious adaptive reasons for wanting to do that. I recall a family dinner we had. Gosh, this was over 10 years ago. We had a couple over. My mom was in the habit of inviting people over who didn't have places to go on the holidays, 'cause that's just who she is and I think it's quite nice. So she brought over this couple, they had a newborn, I think this baby had been born maybe two or three weeks before and it was seated or not seated [laughs]. It was lying down. I couldn't see it. It was like a potato bug. It could barely hold its head up. But it was lying in a little bassinet on the floor as we ate dinner. And it was almost hilarious, it actually was hilarious. We laughed a lot about this, that the entire meal, they were basically staring at this baby. They were so clearly in love with the baby and so flooded with oxytocin and also prolactin that they couldn't take their focus off this baby. It was actually really wonderful and endearing to see. But in addition to that, I'd be willing to bet had I been able to do a little bit of microdialysis, which is a ability to measure the amounts of neuromodulator given location in the brain, had I been able to do that experiment on them in that moment, I would've found that levels of acetylcholine were exceedingly high because they were so hyper-focused on this child, not just in love with, but focused on that child. And without a doubt, the neural circuits related to focus and plasticity were heavily engaged again for obvious adaptive reasons related to child rearing and learning the coos and cries and pain signals and pleasure signals of one's offspring. So we have dopamine associated with motivation, drive and pursuit and to some extent, focus. We have epinephrine and norepinephrine associated with energy of having a forward center of mass, mentally and or physically. We have serotonin, which is associated with a peaceful, content, sated state of being. And we have acetylcholine, which is associated with focus and in particular focus as it relates to learning and encoding new information. So let's say you want to be more motivated. You want to be more in pursuit of goals. And you want to have more energy and to be more focused. There are many ways to go about that. In fact, there's a near infinite cloud of opportunities, everything from prescription drugs to illicit drugs, which I certainly do not recommend, supplements, nutrition. You can listen to particular music. You can do all sorts of cognitive behavioral, nutritional supplementation tricks. Or you can just understand that what you're really after are increases in dopamine above baseline that you control and there are ways to control them that are quite potent and science tells us which tools are going to be the most potent and the most versatile for you. So I'm going to share those tools with you now with the caveat that each one of those tools could be its own entire podcast episode, and that we've done near entire episodes on each of these tools or small collections of these tools. So I'm going to cover these in somewhat superficial manner. We can provide links to previous episodes that relate to each of these tools in detail, but I'll give you enough detail about them that would allow you to incorporate them into your routine should you choose. Let's say you want to increase dopamine for sake of increasing motivation. The first thing to do is to understand what the natural behavioral tools are for increasing dopamine and to do those as consistently as possible. Again, these are tools that you'll want to do nearly every day, if not every day. And I know I'm sounding like a broken record on this one, but here again, we come to sunlight and I should say, not just the desire to, but really the need for viewing the maximum amount of sunlight that one can reasonably get given schedules and locations in the world, time of year, et cetera, in the early part of the day, within the first hour of waking, ideally, but certainly in the first three hours of your day, you are going to want to maximize sunlight exposure to your eyes. Never look at the sun or any other light so bright that it's painful to look at. And yes, of course blinking is fine, but no, take sunglasses off, go outside once the sun is out and get some natural light in your eyes. And if it's appropriate or I should say in a way that's appropriate, maximize the amount of sunlight exposure to your skin, but please don't get burned. Please do wear sunscreen if you're prone to getting burned. Typically early day sunlight is not going to burn you, at least not most people, unless you're extremely fair-skinned. So don't get burned. Do what you need to in order to protect yourself from burn. There's some emerging controversy about sunscreen and which ones are safe and which ones aren't safe. We have not done an episode on that yet, but I find it to be an important and interesting topic. Darya Rose, Dr. Darya Rose, I should say, has a podcast called The Darya Rose Podcast and did an episode all about sunscreens, which are safe, which are not safe, by interviewing an expert on that so I refer you to that podcast as it relates to sunscreen. But get some natural light exposure in your eyes. And if you wake up before the sun comes out, turn on as many bright lights inside as you can turn on reasonably given your electric bill, et cetera. Get a lot of bright sunlight exposure early in the day and get a lot of sunlight exposure to your skin in the early part of the day, in a way that doesn't burn you, meaning burn your skin or blind you, please. Please don't do anything that harms your vision like stare into a bright light, that's painful. What does that do? Well, it sets in motion a number of different biological cascades. Some are very fast. There are fast actions of sunlight that will trigger for instance, dopamine release from different parts of your brain and your endocrine system. And we now know that it increases levels of genes related to thyroid hormone and actually increases certain dopamine receptors. So there's a wonderful paper. We will provide a link to this paper that shows that sunlight exposure can actually increase the amount of so-called DRD4. This is a particular type of dopamine receptor, the dopamine receptor four. The genes for dopamine receptor four are actually under photic control. So if you get sunlight exposure to your eyes and it does have to be to your eyes in the early part of the day, you increase the amount of dopamine receptor that you have, which allows whatever circulating dopamine happens to be there to have a greater effect on motivation and I should say also on mood and feelings of being in pursuit and generally, in craving and pursuit of things in life. Now there's another way to increase the effect of whatever dopamine happens to be circulating in your brain and body. And this again, relates to increasing the number or the efficacy of the receptors for dopamine. Now here we're not talking about the dopamine receptor four, but a different category of dopamine receptors, the D2 and D3 receptors, which are expressed multiple places in your brain and body and bind dopamine, meaning dopamine parks in them like a parking spot and allows dopamine to generally increase the activity of the neurons and cells that express those dopamine receptors. How do you do that? Well, turns out that regular ingestion of caffeine at safe and appropriate levels, about a hundred to 250 milligrams is going to increase the number of D2 and D3 dopamine receptors. I talked a little bit about this on a previous episode. Again, we'll provide links to these studies, but this is an important finding, I believe, because this is not about the acute, the immediate effects of caffeine on alertness, although those occur, too. When you drink caffeine, it's going to increase your levels of adrenaline and so-called epinephrine, which will increase your energy levels. It's going to decrease levels of something called adenosine, which builds up while you're sleepy. It's going to make you feel less sleepy, more alert, more energetic. That's sort of obvious. But what's less obvious is that it's increasing the number and efficacy of dopamine receptors so that whatever dopamine happens to be around in your system is going to have more of a potent effect. So how much caffeine should you drink? That's going to vary from person to person. Some people are very sensitive to caffeine, others are not. I tend to be fairly insensitive to caffeine, 'cause I've been drinking it for a long period of time. But you know, after one or two cups of espresso or coffee, I feel like I've had enough. I tend to drink my caffeine early in the day, which is what I'm going to recommend that you do, not drinking caffeine past two and certainly not 4:00 PM, if you're on a typical schedule and you want to be able to sleep that night, even if you can fall asleep. Having too much caffeine in your system is not good because it disrupts the architecture of sleep. And now knowing about all the metabolic variability across the night, according to different stages of sleep, it should be even more obvious as to why disrupting the architecture of sleep would be bad for you. So limit that caffeine intake to early in the day and don't go ballistic. Certainly don't go ballistic in any case, but for most people anywhere from 100 to 400 milligrams of caffeine is going to have this effect. And this effect again is a slow accumulating effect by drinking caffeine consistently day-to-day. I get my caffeine mainly from Yerba Mate tea. I want to emphasize that it's probably a good idea to stay away from the smoked mates. There's some evidence those can be carcinogenic, but I brew my own Yerba Mate tea, or sometimes I'll drink coffee or espresso, or sometimes both frankly, as long as I'm hydrating enough and I'm getting enough salt, then I tend to feel fine with that much caffeine. The other way to increase dopamine and to make sure that your baseline levels of dopamine are high enough is to make sure that you're eating sufficient numbers of tyrosine-rich foods. You can look up which foods include tyrosine. Tyrosine is a precursor to dopamine. It's an amino acid that is in direct pathway to dopamine synthesis and tyrosine foods include things like certain meats, Parmesan cheese, very high in tyrosine, for instance. In fact, there's something called the cheese effect, believe it or not. I don't want to go too far off topic, but the cheese effect is kind of interesting because certain people will take antidepressants that are so called MAO inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Anytime you hear ASE, that's an enzyme. They will take these inhibitors that prevent the breakdown of dopamine and other so-called catacholamines, which allow more dopamine to be in circulation. But if these people eat certain cheeses, including Parmesan cheese, and there are other foods, of course that include not just tyrosine, but one of the derivatives of tyrosine, called tyramine, that generates what's called the cheese effect, which is people get potent migraines, headaches, blood pressure goes up. Why, well, because they've got a lot of tyrosine in their system and dopamine in their system. And they've got less of the enzyme that removes that dopamine or limits its action and so they have an excess of dopamine and dopamine has effects on blood pressure, et cetera. So the cheese effect is something to avoid if you are somebody who's taking drugs that tap into or manipulate the dopamine pathway, either for Parkinson's or depressions, obviously you're going to want to be careful about adjusting up or down levels of dopamine too potently. So mind the cheese effect if you're taking an MAO inhibitor. There's a lot of information about this online. For most people, eating foods like Parmesan cheese, eating foods like certain meats and certain vegetables also can increase tyrosine levels, which will increase dopamine synthesis. So these are ways of modulating, more or less, the baseline of dopamine that you are able to produce and the ways that dopamine can have its action by way of binding to receptors more potently. Now there are other ways to increase dopamine in a more acute or directed way, ways to spike your dopamine, to enhance your state of motivation, mood, focus and so on. And in thinking about the vast landscape of tools that can do that, we have one category of tools, which are the really, really bad things that I don't recommend anybody do. In fact, I recommend nobody do ever, which are things like cocaine, methamphetamine, et cetera. They are incredibly destructive for lives because of the way that they so potently increase dopamine and then the crash in dopamine that occurs later. I mean, they can indeed and often do ruin lives. So we're leaving those off the table. There are of course, prescription drugs that many people, especially people who have clinically diagnosed ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, rely on and in fact benefit from in many cases, things like Ritalin, Adderall, Vyvanse. Nowadays, there's also a lot of interest in use of things like Modafinil, Armodafinil. I covered all of those in the episode on ADHD. And you can find that on HubermanLab.com and the other places this podcast is found. Prescription drugs aside because they require a prescription and a discussion that's in-depth and appropriate with your physician, healthcare provider. There are supplements that can very potently increase dopamine as well, perhaps not to the extent that some of those other prescription drugs can, but certainly to a degree that will impact and increase dopamine and motivation and the other states dopamine is associated with. And the two main categories of supplements that are very effective in raising dopamine and here I should provide the caveat that anytime you're going to add or remove anything from your supplementation protocols, please talk to a physician who is knowledgeable on these topics. If you're somebody who has, or is taking drugs for depression or mania, please be very cautious about manipulating your dopamine in any case. I don't just say that to protect us, I say that to protect you. But if we were to look at the supplement landscape and ask which supplement increased dopamine, there are a vast number of them, but the three main ones, the most effective ones that are readily available out there without a prescription are mucuna pruriens. This is actually the outside of a velvety bean that has been extracted and put into a supplement. Mucuna pruriens is actual L-dopa. It's 99% L-dopa, which is a prescription drug that is given for Parkinson's and for other purposes where increasing dopamine is important. I don't recommend mucuna pruriens. I'm not saying that no one should take it, but I don't take it. And I don't recommend it because it tends to so potently and acutely increase dopamine, that there's a pretty substantial crash afterwards. So I avoid it and I don't generally suggest that anyone take it unless there's really a clinical need, or they're working very closely with somebody that can really monitor that. The other two supplements that can increase dopamine in a short-term way, but in a significant way, are L-tyrosine so you can buy that as a supplement amino acid. I sometimes take this. I would say, I probably take it about once a week maximum for work bouts or workouts. I'll take it in dosages of anywhere from 500 milligrams to a thousand milligrams. People vary tremendously in their sensitivity to supplementing L-tyrosine. I know people that can take two grams. I know people that can barely take a hundred milligrams. I know people that the best dose for them is zero milligrams. So there's a lot of variation there depending on sensitivity and they're natural baseline levels of dopamine and whether or not they're doing a lot of other things to support dopamine, but nonetheless, taking L-tyrosine will lead to fairly substantial increases in dopamine within about 15 to 45 minutes and it lasts for about 30 minutes to two hours and then there's kind of a tapering off. Some people experience a little bit of an emotional and or I should say energetic crash, some people don't. And then the other supplement that I certainly use, and that I know a number of other people use is more fast-acting, but more potent, which is phenylethylamine. This relates to the so-called PEA molecule, PEA, P-E-A, and phenylethylamine increases dopamine and some metabolites related to dopamine in ways that really increase energy and feelings of well-being and motivation. And again, it's fast-acting. So my particular protocol, the one I use is I'll take phenylethylamine at dosages of about 300 to 600 milligrams along with some L-tyrosine, or I'll take it on its own with a molecule, or I should say a compound that we'll talk about a little bit later as it relates to acetylcholine, Alpha-GPC, but tyrosine and phenylethylamine taken alone or together will make you feel more motivated and more alert, more willing and able to lean into particular motivated behaviors, whether or not they're physical or cognitive. If you'd like to learn more about these compounds and their supplementation and their effects, I encourage you to check out the ever valuable website, examine.com. It's zero cost to access, and they provide references and some more details about these sorts of compounds and other related compounds. Now if we are going to look at behavioral tools for potently increasing dopamine, that too is a vast landscape. And we know based on hundreds, if not thousands of studies that things like winning at some sort of competition or succeeding in reaching a goal can certainly increase dopamine. We talk a lot about this in the episode on dopamine, motivation and drive, but leaving that aside, there are certain behavioral protocols that are unrelated to your overall goals and motivations that can increase dopamine in a very sustained way. And without question, the most potent behavioral tool for doing that is going to be deliberate, cold exposure. Deliberate cold exposure has been talked about a lot here and elsewhere in terms of its ability to do things like reduce inflammation as a way to test and improve resilience because uncomfortable cold, provided its applied safely is a great way to learn to be more resilient because you're essentially staying or forcing yourself to stay in a circumstance where your system is flooded with adrenaline. But one lesser known aspect of deliberate cold exposure is one that's been demonstrated quite convincingly in humans, comes from a study published in the year 2000. I'll link to this study. I love this study by the way. Covered it many times on this podcast because I love it so much and I think it's truly important. And that's the study from Srámek et al, entitled, "Human physiological responses "to immersion into water of different temperatures". I'm not going to go into this into a ton of detail for sake of time, but basically what they show is that putting people into cold water, and I should mention the water that they used in this study wasn't that cold. They had a bunch of different conditions, but they had people that got into, for instance, 60 degree Fahrenheit water for up to two hours, had them sitting there, had them in a lawn chair up to their neck, had very long sustained increases in dopamine transmission and dopamine circulation in their brain and body. And also some of the other catacholamines, as I mentioned before, dopamine tends to collaborate with epinephrine and vice versa. Now you don't need to put yourself into 60 degree Fahrenheit water to get these kind of sustained increases. And you certainly don't need to do it for two hours. We have a strong reason to believe based on subsequent studies, in fact, published just this last year, that getting into much colder water of say 50 degrees or 55 degrees or even 45 degrees Fahrenheit can potently increase dopamine and epinephrine, as well. And that you don't need to expose yourself to that cold water for nearly as long. So perhaps even as short as one minute or even 30 seconds exposure to really cold water, can lead to these potent long-lasting increases in dopamine. Many people will ask which protocols to follow. For instance, will a cold shower suffice? Very likely, yes, if your shower gets cold enough. Do you need ice floating in the bath? No, it's all about the temperature not whether or not there's ice present or not. How long to stay in there? There are a lot of details that we don't have time to go into this episode. Please see the episode on the Use of Deliberate Cold for Health and Performance. You'll find that at HubermanLab.com. We have a newsletter related to this. It gets into a lot of detailed protocols, but in general, we can say that the way to evoke dopamine and epinephrine release using cold water is to ideally you would do cold water immersion. If you can't, you'd use cold shower, but you want to use a temperature that is safe, meaning you're not going to have a heart attack, but that is uncomfortable such that you really want to get out and then staying in for anywhere from one minute to 10 minutes, depending on how cold adapted you are, and then getting out and drying off and going about your day, unless you have some other protocol that you're trying to extract from the cold. So this is a cold exposure protocol specifically aimed at increasing dopamine. For some people out there, you might think this is kind of silly using cold water to increase dopamine. But when you look at the data in humans on the effect of cold water exposure to stimulate long-lasting, very significant increases in dopamine and epinephrine, I think you'll agree that this is a really potent tool that provided its given safely and gone about safely, is giving you the kinds of increases in dopamine that you would seek using prescription pharmacology. Now it shouldn't be used as a replacement for prescription pharmacology, although people have done that to success. One of the previous guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast was Dr. Anna Lembke, our director of the Dual Diagnosis Addiction Clinic at Stanford. She has an amazing book called "Dopamine Nation", all about dopamine and both its uses, healthy, and its perils in things like addiction. And she describes a patient of hers that used deliberate cold exposure to try and maintain dopamine levels while coming off of drugs that were increasing dopamine so potently that they were putting him down the path of addiction. So the use of cold water for increasing dopamine is a real tool. It's, I would say, a power tool. In fact, it's the kind of thing that if you want to increase dopamine for sake of motivation, it might be your first go-to provided you're also doing the things to maintain dopamine baseline like sunlight exposure in particular, making sure you're getting sufficient amounts of tyrosine-containing foods and so on. And now just very briefly, I want to point to a few quick tools that good peer review data tell us can be leveraged in order to make sure that you have sufficient dopamine when you want it or that it's available for it to be released by any number of the tools I provided thus far. And those are sufficient number of B vitamins. So it turns out that B vitamins, in particular B6 or vitamin B6, can potently reduce prolactin levels. And again, prolactin and dopamine tend to work in kind of push pull fashion. That said you should be cautious about taking excessive levels of B6. It is a vitamin that if you take too much, you'll likely excrete it through your urine, but there is evidence that having excessively high levels of B6 or supplementing with excessively high levels of B6 can cause some peripheral neuropathy, some death of nerves in the periphery. If you want to know what dosage levels are relevant there just simply look it up online. There's a lot of information about this. But you do want to make sure that you're getting enough B6, B12, et cetera, such that you can keep prolactin levels in check. And if you suspect that you have a dopamine deficiency, please talk to your doctor and talk to them about ways you might adjust that prolactin down and thereby dopamine up. The other way to ensure that dopamine levels stay high or put differently, that you don't quash whatever dopamine you have in your system is to really avoid bright light exposure to your eyes between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM or another way of putting this because I realize people sleep at different times, et cetera, is to avoid bright light exposure to your eyes, not just blue light, but all colors of light in phase three, that is 17 to 24 hours after waking up because that's really when you should be asleep or trying to get asleep, if you're having trouble sleeping. Work from Samer Hattar's lab, the director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, again, a previous Huberman Lab Podcast guest, tell us that bright light exposure in phase three of your circadian cycle, 17 to 24 hours after waking, can have dramatic effects in reducing dopamine levels by way of activating a neural circuit involving something called the habenula. I don't want to get into too many details right now, but really try and keep the lights dim in the middle of the night or off, if you can do that safely. It's really going to help if you're turning on your phone brightly, if you are turning on bright lights, it's not just going to negatively impact melatonin, the hormone that helps you fall and stay asleep. It's also going to negatively impact dopamine levels, not just that night, but the subsequent day. So that more or less summarizes our coverage of ways to use behavior and supplementation and nutrition to increase dopamine and dopamine receptor efficacy and number, and to keep sufficient amounts of dopamine in your system day-to-day for motivation, mood and focus. And of course, keep in mind those things that can suppress dopamine, the bright light exposure, elevated prolactin, and so on. My hope is that by understanding those tools and how they work and understanding that dopamine does certain things and not others that you can assemble a versatile kit of behaviors and other things that you can do in order to adjust your dopamine levels according to your particular goals. I want to just briefly return to the fact, however, that all of that is riding on that phase one, phase two background, meaning, it's probably going to take less cold water exposure, or I should say less time doing cold water exposure early in the day to get a big increase in dopamine than it would later in the day. Because later in the day, your baseline levels of dopamine are lower and you've got more serotonin circulating. That should make sense to you now as to why that's the case. And does that mean that you should really modify your protocols dramatically? Probably not, but you might keep that in mind that if, for instance, you need to be in a highly motivated, focused state in the late part of the day, for whatever reason, it might take a few or more of these tools in combination in order to accomplish that. Whereas if you're somebody who feels pretty good during the day, but you're kind of lacking motivation and you want to increase dopamine levels and you don't yet need to, or want to resort to prescription drugs or supplementation, well, then you might layer in a couple behavioral protocols paying attention to of course, the things that you might be doing that would also potentially suppress dopamine. So again, that kit of tools is designed for you to play with, if you choose, if it's safe for you to apply them, then do that. Consider doing them individually, not trying to hit all the tools all at once, right? I mean, why throw all those tools at your dopamine system at once? Better would be to have those tools in your kit and be able to deploy them depending on whether or not you're on travel, whether or not you're eating well or less well, whether or not you're sleeping well or less well. That's highly individual and I'd like to think that in having those tools in hand, you'll be able to adjust them and apply them in the ways that allow you to access the dopamine increases that you're after. So next I'd like to talk about epinephrine, also called adrenaline. I want to point out that epinephrine is released both in the brain and the body. In fact, there's a barrier between brain and body that prevents the epinephrine that's released from your adrenal glands, from crossing the blood brain barrier. So your brain has a separate site called the locus coeruleus. This is a collection of neurons in the back of the brain that kind of sprinkler the rest of the brain with epinephrine and essentially wakes up whatever neural circuits happen to see, or I should say, wake up any circuits where that epinephrine happens to arrive, right, and generally increase the excitability of those networks. That's why we say epinephrine increases energy. I'm not talking about caloric energy, although that's distantly related to this, but really energy and the desire to move, the feeling that we can think, the feeling that we can be alert. In fact, if you look at somebody and their eyelids are wide open, in large part, that's because of a lot of adrenaline in their system. If their pupils are really big and their eyes are really wide open, in general, that means they have a lot of epinephrine circulating there, whereas when we're tired and we're kind of hood-eyed and we're sort of sleepy, or our pupils are really small, in general, that's because levels of epinephrine and also dopamine, remember they work together, levels of epinephrine and dopamine tend to be lower. This is also why when people take any drug, like again, not recommending this, amphetamine or cocaine or any stimulant, their pupils tend to be huge. Their eyes tend to be wide open. They don't blink very often. And the opposite is true when people take sedatives. So it all starts to make sense when you think about the basic actions of these things. For many people, increasing adrenaline or epinephrine might seem like a crazy idea. Most people probably associate this molecule with stress and then would like to be less stressed. And we've done entire episodes about stress, how to master stress, how to leverage stress, how to conquer stress. There are a lot of great tools to do that that are behavioral, supplementation-based. Please see the episode on Mastering Stress for those tools, but there are people, including me, that want to increase our levels of epinephrine at least early in the day. I'm somebody who wakes up rather slowly. In fact, right after waking up, I rarely want to bounce out of bed. I try and push myself to do that. I'm always impressed by these chakra-willy types that are up at 4:30 or up at five and already into action. I tend to be kind of thinking about thinking about maybe being in action early in the day, but I try and push myself to get into action, which itself can increase epinephrine. I should mention that any physical activity, any physical activity, walking, running, weight lifting, swimming, even talking for that matter is going to increase levels of epinephrine. Locus coeruleus is a brain structure that is tightly coupled with behaviors in a bidirectional way. That is, when you are in action, you increase the amount of epinephrine released from locus coeruleus. You wake up the brain. And conversely, when locus coeruleus is active, the brain wakes up, so it's reciprocal. It goes both directions. So I saw a funny tweet actually earlier today, it was something like going to the gym gives you energy, but you need energy to go to the gym. Sounds like a pyramid scheme to me, which made me chuckle. But of course overlooks the fact that, indeed, if you have energy, you are more likely to be willing to get into physical movement or cognitive movement and thinking hard or thinking a lot about something. But also it is absolutely scientifically proven that being in action increases levels of epinephrine. This is why exercising early in the day gives you more energy for rest of day. You still might experience a little bit of a crash in the afternoon, especially if you're getting up extra early, or if you're drinking caffeine too close to waking. I've talked about this before. If you drink too much caffeine close to waking, you're going to have an afternoon crash. Better to push that caffeine intake out about 90 to 120 minutes after waking. I know this is really painful for certain people, but caffeine does increase epinephrine. Caffeine does other things to limit sleepiness. And by pushing it out 90 to 120 minutes after waking, you will avoid the afternoon crash to a large degree. And if you get up and you exercise or even do any movement of any kind, a hundred jumping jacks or a walk, if you can't do that, anything like that will increase the total amount of epinephrine that you secrete into your bloodstream and in your brain and will get you more energy, not just in that moment, but throughout the day. So keep that in mind. Exercise does indeed give you energy. It burns caloric energy, but it gives you neural energy by way of increasing epinephrine transmission from locus coeruleus. And presumably if the exercise is intense enough, adrenaline, epinephrine release, from the adrenals within your body, as well. So we have exercise and we have caffeine as potent tools for increasing epinephrine and thereby, energy. Another potent tool that's purely behavioral, but is known to work, based on excellent studies in humans. And actually my laboratory has been doing similar types of studies that are soon to be published, we hope, is so-called cyclic hyperventilation. Some of you may be familiar with Wim Hof breathing. There's also Tummo breathing, which is very similar, Kundalini breathing. All of those styles of breathing involve cyclic hyperventilation, deep inhales, and either passive exhales or active exhales, but repeating, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, in a very deep and repetitive way. If you were to do that right now, doesn't matter if you do it through your nose or mouth, although ideally you would do the inhale through your nose and the exhale through your mouth, if you did that for 25 repetitions, 25 inhales and exhales, you would feel more alert. You'd also feel more warm, why? Because you increased epinephrine, adrenaline release in the brain and body. It works the first time and it works every time to increase epinephrine and thereby energy. And in fact, there are protocols and great scientific studies of using cyclic hyperventilation for periods of minutes, if not longer, where for instance, you would do 25 big inhales and exhales followed by a brief breath hold with your lungs empty, then repeat 25, then brief breath hold, excuse me, exhale, hold your lungs empty. And then repeat again for a third round, if you like. If you do that over and over, you're going to be very alert. You're going to have more energy. You're going to feel like you want to move around a lot more. In fact, you might even feel agitated. So people with a lot of anxiety or prone to panic attack might want to be cautious in how they train and embark on that type of breathing, might want to approach it a little more carefully or avoid it altogether. But for most people, cyclic hyperventilation is simply going to get you more energized and feeling like you want to move, feeling like you can think more clearly, and you'll be more wide-eyed and alert because you are releasing adrenaline. And the cold water exposure protocol that I talked about earlier and that's covered in our episode on cold and in the newsletter on cold. Well that, as I mentioned earlier, potently increases dopamine, but also epinephrine. So that's another terrific tool, whether or not it's applied by cold shower or cold immersion or some other thing like cryo, that is going to make you more alert because it releases adrenaline. Now we can't really say that there are foods to increase epinephrine. Rather, there are foods that include a lot of tyrosine that will increase dopamine. And remember, dopamine is the molecule from which epinephrine is synthesized. So we can't really point to a particular food or categories of food for increasing epinephrine. I think caffeine and things like it will increase epinephrine. There are of course prescription drugs that will increase epinephrine. And of course, there are all sorts of so-called beta blockers that will block the receptors for epinephrine to make you feel calm for public speaking or for various heart conditions, et cetera. That's really the domain of physicians and should really be worked out with your cardiologist, with a physician et cetera. I think the tools of exercise and should you want very potent increases in adrenaline, high intensity exercise, as well as the tools of caffeine, cyclic hyperventilation and deliberate cold exposure, really combine to give you a nice little kit, I would say a versatile kit, of ways to increase epinephrine for sake of having more physical and mental energy. So next is the neuromodulator acetylcholine. And as I mentioned earlier, acetylcholine is associated with states of focus and those states of focus can be high energy states of focus. So the ones that are accompanied by high levels of dopamine and epinephrine and where we're really excited about and really lasered in on something, or they can be the calmer, more relaxed states of focus like reading a book or practicing music or listening very carefully to somebody in a way that's relaxed and calm. And yet nonetheless, where we have a narrow cognitive and typically a narrow visual aperture, and typically also a narrow auditory aperture. That is our auditory system and our visual system and our thinking can be very broad. It can be all over the place. Or it can be very narrow. And it can be very focused. Acetylcholine is released from two major sites in the brain, nucleus basalis, which is in the forebrain and extends connections out to many different brain areas to offer the opportunity to release acetylcholine locally and more or less in a chemical way, highlight those particular neurons and synapses for strengthening, for plasticity later. And it is released from sites in the back of the brain in a way that can increase the so-called fidelity of information coming in through our eyes, our ears, our nose, et cetera. What do I mean by fidelity? Well, we are constantly being bombarded with sensory information through all of our various senses and acetylcholine released from this area in the back of the brain, has the ability to increase the extent to which say, visual information or just visual and auditory information would make it through to our consciousness whereas all the other types of sensory information that are coming in are filtered out. So your brain, because it's taking in all this information needs to decide what to pay attention to. And in this way, we can say that acetylcholine has a lot to do, not just with "focus", in air quotes, but literally attention, which neural signals become relevant to our consciousness. There's a whole discussion to be had there and we don't have time for that. Rather, I'd like to focus on what are the tools that one can use to maintain healthy baselines of acetylcholine and increase acetylcholine for sake of learning any type of information, physical, cognitive, or otherwise. Now it turns out there have been a lot of studies, including many quality peer reviewed studies carried out in humans, looking at what happens when you increase acetylcholine levels in the brain and you accompany that with the attempt to learn. And what you find almost always is that people experience increased focus, that when measured the neuronal responses become more specific, so less broad scale activity in the brain and more specific neural circuit activity and that this triggers immediate and long-lasting changes in the way those circuits work, even when acetylcholine is not being deployed, so-called neuroplasticity, the circuits literally change. So this is great. The work of Michael Silver at Berkeley, the work of Mike Merzenich at UCSF, the work of Michael Kilgard down in Texas, all of those laboratories see this again and again, and again. Increase acetylcholine before and during learning. And there's a much higher probability that the learning will quote, unquote, "sink in", that the information will be retained because those neural circuits change. Now ways to increase acetylcholine in a potent way include again, nutrition and supplementation. It is important to have baseline levels of acetylcholine be sufficiently high, as well. And for that really the ideal situation is to regularly ingest foods that provide enough of the precursors for acetylcholine to be made. If you go online and you were to do a search of which foods contain a lot of choline, which is related to the synthesis of acetylcholine, you would get some interesting information back. For instance, beef liver is the most potent source of choline. I know nowadays there's kind of a growing micro trend if you will, of ingesting beef liver, even raw liver, which to be honest, the thought of ingesting raw liver of any kind activates my area postrema, which is the area of the brain that triggers nausea. In fact, I'm starting to salivate a bit, not because I'm hungry, but I think the whole concept makes me ill. Nonetheless, cooked liver or raw liver for that matter, or liver of any kind seems to contain a lot of choline. I realize most people, most people are not going to be running out and ingesting large amounts of beef liver. Eggs contain a lot of choline. Beef contains choline. Soybeans contain choline. So there are vegan or non-meat sources, chicken, fish, mushrooms, kidney beans, these sorts of things contain a lot of choline and there are other vegetables that contain choline. So depending on your dietary preferences and needs, you can select certain foods to ingest, to get enough choline to synthesize enough baseline acetyl choline. In the realm of supplementation, there are some excellent tools for increasing acetylcholine in the acute short-term, meaning over the course of about 30 minutes out to about two hours or maybe even four hours. And the number of different molecules that can do that, that are available without a prescription, at least in the US, is pretty vast. The most common of those molecules is actually nicotine. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are abundant throughout the body and brain. They're in various brain circuits. They are on muscle and yes, smoking nicotine either by vaping or cigarette will activate those nicotinic receptors. But of course, smoking is a terrible thing. It will also activate things like lung cancer. So I definitely don't recommend that. It also activates addiction because of the ways that it triggers activation of the dopamine circuit. So I think that triggering activation of acetylcholine-related pathways by ingesting nicotine by way of inhalants is generally a bad idea. However, some people will chew Nicorette or other nicotine type gums. I've never done that, but I have friends who actually rely on that. These are typically former smokers that are trying not to smoke, but still want to get some of the focus enhancement that they experience from nicotine. Some people are very sensitive to nicotine, and this is important. Some people are very sensitive to ingested nicotine. So nowadays there are nicotine-dipped toothpicks, there of course, is nicotine gum and other sources of nicotine. Some people can take that and feel fine. Some people take it and feel absolutely terrible. I confess, I've never actually tried nicotine in any of those forms so I don't know how they work for me, but some people do use them as cognitive enhancers. In fact, I know one Nobel prize winning neuroscientist, who's quite well known in our field for chewing Nicorette all day long. He insists that it really helps him with his focus and he is exceedingly smart and productive, although I'm sure there are other reasons for that. Supplements that I have used and do use for increasing acetylcholine are things like Alpha GPC or Huperzinene. Alpha GPC is in the choline pathway, such that more acetylcholine is synthesized after you ingest it. That's the general logic or framework of how it works. Whereas Huperzinene is mainly in the enzymatic pathway. It tends to adjust how much acetylcholine is broken down and lead to net increases in acetylcholine. I will often take 300 milligrams of Alpha GPC prior to workouts or prior to cognitive work bouts. But when I say often, I tend to do this anywhere from three to four times a week, typically not every day. Although there are people including people who are trying to offset age-related cognitive decline, that will take 300 milligrams of Alpha GPC three times a day, every day, which closely mimic some of the studies that have been done on humans, looking at offsetting age-related cognitive decline, using things like Alpha GPC. I should point out that there have been a few studies, a few, not many, but these studies emphasize that people who take a lot of Alpha GPC chronically over time may be at increased risk for stroke. I think the data are still out on that and we need more data. But for me, in terms of thinking about the risk benefit profiles, taking 300 milligrams of Alpha GPC, most certainly does increase my ability to focus. I've noticed that. I tend to take it alongside caffeine and phenylethylamine. So I take that in combination either before workouts or workbouts, really sharpens my focus. And again, I'm doing that three, maybe four times per week. And I'm careful to do that in the early part of the day so that it does not disrupt my sleep. Although I have taken Alpha GPC in the second half of the day, and I had no trouble sleeping at all. I don't know what the exact half life is of the given form that's typically in supplementation. It's actually hard to get that information. But typically the focus effects wear off after about two, maybe four hours maximum. Now one thing that I don't think has ever been discussed before, certainly not on this podcast is that if you take Alpha GPC, even semi-regularly, you may notice that a particular feature of your blood work will increase and that's TMAO, which is sometimes associated with increased cardiovascular risk. This may, again, may relate to some of the potential risk of very high levels of Alpha GPC ingestion over many years, increasing stroke risk. Again, those studies looked at people who've been taking it for up to a decade, but in any case, one way to prevent the increase in TMAO, if you're taking Alpha GPC at all is to take 600 milligrams of garlic because it contains something called allicin. This was a trick that was handed off to me by Dr. Kyle Gillette, who again, was a guest on this podcast some time ago, talking about hormones and hormone health. Turns out that ingestion of 600 milligrams of allicin alongside or even just same day as Alpha GPC can really clamp those TMAO levels that would otherwise increase if you're taking Alpha GPC. And indeed I've done the blood work and that turns out to be the case. I saw a spike in TMAO. I started taking 600 milligrams of garlic and those TMAO levels came down. And last as it relates to acetylcholine, but certainly not least, just as acetylcholine can increase focus, focus can increase acetylcholine. I talked a lot about this in the episode on focus, but there are behavioral tools that you can use to enhance focus. Things like staring at a particular visual target at the same distance at which you're going to perform some work and doing that for 30 to 60 seconds, narrowing in a very deliberate way, your visual field, and then moving into a focused work about. That behavioral practice of narrowing your visual aperture will increase the amount of acetylcholine transmission in particular neural circuits that will then make it easier to focus. How do we know that? Well, I covered in that episode, some of the peer reviewed studies that relate to protocols that are now actively being deployed in schools in China and elsewhere, where kids are doing deliberate visual focus exercises in order to increase their mental focus. And while they're not doing microdialysis or brain imaging on those kids in real time, the cognitive effects and indeed the performance effects in terms of academic ability and output are pretty impressive. So acetylcholine increases focus. We talked about some dietary and some supplementation-based ways to improve acetylcholine, or I should say increase acetylcholine. And that does in fact lead to increases in one's ability to focus. This is why a lot of the prescription drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's age-related cognitive decline and indeed, even some of the drugs that tap into treatments for ADHD also involve the acetylcholine system. So there's nothing surprising or heretical here, but it is important to point out that your behavioral ability to focus is also related to your ability to access and deploy acetylcholine. So never do we want purely pharmacologic treatments to be the only way that people are increasing a given neuromodulator. I always say behaviors first, then nutrition, then supplementation. And then if there's a need, certainly a clinical need, then prescription drugs, et cetera, of course administered through a physician. So let's discuss serotonin. Serotonin, as I mentioned earlier, is associated with brain and body states of well-being, of comfort, of satiety, and therefore should come as no surprise that a lot of the prescription drug treatments for things like depression involve increasing levels of serotonin in the brain and body. That said, anytime you talk about prescription drugs for serotonin, we also want to acknowledge that there are often side effects associated with increasing serotonin, in particular, if serotonin levels go too high, that is if the dosages of those treatments go too high, people will, for instance, feel reduced appetite, reduced libido, increased lethargy, et cetera. And there's a so-called serotonergic syndrome. All of that can and should be considered with a well-trained physician, so because they're prescription drugs, controlling the dosage, deciding what dosage to take, deciding which SSRI to take and whether or not to come off those drugs, how to come off those drugs. Again, all of that should be handled with a licensed physician. That said, there are behavioral tools, nutritional tools, and supplementation tools that can tap into the serotonin system, not to the same degree in potency, but nonetheless, in ways that can still impact our feelings of well-being in positive ways. So let's focus first on the behavioral tools and some of these might make people chuckle a little bit, but I want to point out that a lot of these tools are quite potent. In fact, they are power tools for modulating serotonin. And we know that based on human neuro imaging studies, human and animal microdialysis studies and other studies that really have evaluated circulating levels of serotonin and the particular brain circuits that release serotonin when people do certain things. What sorts of things? Well, for instance, physical contact, in particular with loved ones, this can be romantic love. This can be children, so your own children or your spouse, even if it's not sexual contact, friend to friend contact, even friend to animal contact, you know, as a former dog owner, I hope to have another dog soon 'cause unfortunately Costello passed away, but there is something really comforting and wonderful about petting your dog. And certainly, given that many of the studies on serotonin and these other neuromodulators were done on animal models, we also know that serotonin is being evoked in the dog and of course in the child and in the significant other, et cetera. So things like holding hands, believe it or not, hugs, cuddling, et cetera, can increase serotonin transmission and they make people feel good. This shouldn't really come as a surprise. There's also gratitude. And we did an entire episode about gratitude. There's a lot of misunderstanding about gratitude. Oftentimes when people hear gratitude, they think, oh, gratitude, this is just being thankful for what you have and it's kind of a weak sauce effect, meaning, you know, it's kind of like, maybe a little serotonin goes up or maybe there's a little bit of increased feelings of well-being. Nothing could be further from the truth. It turns out, first of all, that receiving not giving gratitude is what has the most potent effects on increasing serotonin and activity of the brain circuits that involve serotonin and that lead to increases in feelings of well-being. So this is interesting. Receiving much more than giving gratitude is what activates those serotonergic pathways. So the takeaway from that is both give and receive gratitude and of course, do it in an authentic way. The other thing about gratitude that's somewhat counterintuitive is that observing others giving and receiving gratitude is immensely powerful for evoking serotonin and the activity of serotonergic circuits in you, the observer. So receiving and observing gratitude turns out to be the most potent way to increase serotonin in the brain and body. And these again are dramatic effects that are quite long-lasting and not the sorts of effects that are going to lead to side effects, at least there's no reason to think they would. Now what about nutritional approaches to increasing serotonin? Well, just as we have tyrosine as an amino acid precursor upstream of dopamine synthesis, we have the amino acid tryptophan, which is upstream of serotonin synthesis. And one simply has to go online and put in tryptophan containing foods and you will discover that there are a lot of foods that are enriched in tryptophan that can lead to net increases in the amount of serotonin available in the brain and body. The most kind of famous or infamous of these is white meat turkey, the so-called tryptophan effect where people get very sleepy after eating white meat turkey. And it is indeed highly enriched in tryptophan although typically the getting sleepy after eating turkey is most often associated with the Thanksgiving meal and the Thanksgiving meal, at least in the US, is often associated with people vastly overeating. And so I do want to point out that if you fill your gut with food, no matter what that food is, there's going to be a diversion of blood to your gut that's going to make you feel sleepy because there's a diversion of blood away from other tissues. So if you eat a lot, you're going to get sleepy, period, whether or not you eat turkey or some other substance. Nonetheless, there are a number of foods that contain a lot of tryptophan and that some people will leverage in order to try and increase the total amount of circulating serotonin available to them in order to have a modest increase in overall mood and well-being. So what are some of these foods? These are things like milk, in particular, whole milk, so full fat milk. I know a number of people choose not to drink milk 'cause they're lactose intolerant. I'm raising my hand 'cause I'm one such person, although when I was a kid, I did enjoy milk. Canned tuna. Turkey, as we mentioned before, high in tryptophan. Oats, I am a consumer of oatmeal so that resonates with me. Cheese and here I read, although not as high in tryptophan as meat and other dairy sources, certain cheeses like cheddar cheeses can be rich in tryptophan. Certain nuts and seeds, certain breads. Chocolate, I know a number of people will be relieved to hear that. I know chocolate lovers are always looking for an excuse to eat chocolate. I confess I've never really liked chocolate, except dare I say, I like the smooth 100% percent chocolates. I know many people gag when they hear a hundred percent, but I actually really like them. And some fruits can be highly enriched in tryptophan, things like bananas and apples and things of that sort, although not nearly to the degree of things like turkey, canned tuna and milk. I'm sure there are other excellent sources of tryptophan from the diet, including vegan sources so please peruse the internet to try and find the sources that are compatible with your nutritional program, if indeed your goal is to increase tryptophan. Now there are supplements that can increase tryptophan and can do so quite potently. One of the ones that has received increasing attention as of lately is cissus quadrangularis, complicated name, when taken in dosages of about 300 to 600 milligrams can pretty dramatically increase serotonin levels. In fact, anywhere from 30% to 39% increases in circulating serotonin. That's a big increase and I can provide a link to that study. The study was focused, not so much on serotonin, but was focused mainly on treatment of obesity and appetite and weight loss. And it should come as no surprise that serotonin, if increased, might lead to decreases in appetite. A cautionary note, cissus quadrangularis may need to be cycled. How quickly to cycle it, meaning do you do two weeks on, two weeks off? Whether or not you need to do more rapid cycling like two days on, two days off, is a matter of debate. There are not a lot of data on this just yet. There are a lot of opinions about this on the internet, but again, not a lot of quality peer review data. Nonetheless cissus quadrangularis has been shown to increase serotonin in humans and for people that are seeking to increase serotonin maybe in particular, for sake of appetite and weight control, that might be a useful compound. I know many people also take 5-HTP, one of the precursors to serotonin in dosages of anywhere from 300 to 500 milligrams. Typically people are doing this in anticipation of sleep, meaning in the final hour of wakefulness before going to sleep. I myself have tried 5-HTP prior to sleep and all I can tell you is that it led to very deep sleep for about one to three hours. And then I woke up and I could not fall back asleep. I ran that experiment twice before I decided to abandon 5-HTP as a sleep aid. And that's why I've never put it into our sleep kit or at least my sleep kit. And when I refer to the sleep kit, that's something you can find at HubermanLab.com. This is zero cost resource where you can see behavioral tools and also supplementation tools that can improve the transition time into and the depth of sleep. And none of those rely on 5-HTP supplementation. That said, I know a number of people use 5-HTP supplementation outside of sleep, or I should say during the daytime to try and increase serotonin and it will indeed increase circulating serotonin. But again, people vary in their sensitivity to these sorts of things. Some people might find for instance, that 300 milligrams of 5-HTP is just far too much. It blunts their appetite, might even reduce libido. There aren't a lot of very well controlled studies looking at this and so it has to be figured out on an individual basis, if you decide to approach it at all. Now one molecule that I've found to be particularly interesting and useful and this is one that I haven't talked about yet on this podcast is inositol, in particular myo-inositol. Myo-inositol can have the effect of increasing serotonin and other neurochemicals, but primarily at least in terms of the neuromodulators discussed today, serotonin. I've been taking 900 milligrams of myo-inositol every third night or so as a test of its ability to improve sleep. And I have to say, the depth and quality of sleep that I've been obtaining on myo-inositol is pretty remarkable. In fact, I've used it alone and in combination with the magnesium threonate, apigenin, theanine sleep kit that I've talked about and that's included in that, again, zero cost kit that's available as a PDF on our website. So myo-inositol is known to increase circulating levels of serotonin. It has been explored extensively in both animal models and in humans for its daytime use for treating anxiety. It does seem to reduce anxiety. And for all sorts of things. It's been explored for bipolar disorder. We're going to do an episode about bipolar disorder coming up. It's been explored for the treatment of migraine. It's been explored for ADHD. It's been explored for a huge number of different conditions of brain and body. Again, I've been using the 900 milligrams of myo-inositol in the 30 to 60 minutes before sleep to improve my sleep and it has been doing that very dramatically, especially when I take it alongside the rest of those sleep kit supplements. A quick note about myo-inositol for sake of increasing serotonin. if you look at the human studies on myo-inositol that are out there and in particular focus on the human studies, what you'll find is that the dosages that are often used are tremendously high, things like five grams, eight grams, 18 grams of myo-inositol taken throughout the day. I don't know how people stomach that. And in fact, many people drop out of those studies because of gastric discomfort. And yet I also wonder how people tolerate it because it has somewhat of a sedative effect and this kind of anti-anxiety effect. And I can't even imagine given my experience with 900 milligrams, what one would experience taking multiple or many more grams per day. So I certainly am not encouraging that. And the only reason I mention myo-inositol is that it has a known effect of increasing serotonin. At least in my experience, it does not lead to this falling deeply asleep and waking back up. Actually to the contrary, if I wake up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom, or I wake up at the middle of the night, for whatever other reason, I find it far easier to fall back asleep if I've taken 900 milligrams myo-inositol prior to sleep. So for me, it's proving to be a quite useful compound. I'm not aware of having any serotonergic deficiency overall. I don't consider myself depressed. And of course I should mention that no supplement either added or withdrawn from your protocol should ever be used as a direct replacement for prescription drug treatments that your physician has given you. You should always talk to your physician anytime you remove or add something to your drug protocol or prescription protocol, of course. So we've got behavioral protocols that as silly as it feels to say, have been shown to potently increase serotonin, things like physical contact, cuddling, holding hands with people that you love, of course, right? I think if they were people that you despise, it would have the opposite effect for obvious reasons. But also receiving gratitude and observing gratitude, very potent increases in serotonin and things like cissus quadrangularis, things like 5-HGP may have their uses, right? They're very potent at increasing serotonin, but they do seem to have the need to cycle them and they are nuanced. Some people respond well to them, others like myself don't and of course, always be on the lookout for dramatic or even subtle decreases in appetite or libido or things that you might not want if you are going to be tinkering with your serotonergic levels and pathways. And then myo-inositol actually is proving to be quite useful to me and whether or not that's because of its effects on serotonin or through some of its other effects on maybe reducing anxiety, which certainly I experience if I wake up in the middle of the night, I don't like waking up in the middle of the night, but on myo-inositol, I sort of seem to not really care that I woke up and I fall right back asleep. So the direct source of the positive effects that I'm getting aren't clear, but nonetheless, I thought I'd pass it along as a useful tool because it is out there and it is available over the counter and provided you're taking the appropriate safety steps in considering whether or not to use it or not, I think it might be a useful tool. And of course, as with all the other neuromodulators we discussed, you have both a baseline of serotonin and the ability to give or provide yourself peaks of serotonin through these various protocols. The dietary interventions of the sort that I mentioned, meaning eating foods that are enriched in tryptophan, those are mainly going to adjust your baseline levels of tryptophan. For instance, if you really want to be sleepy, sure you could eat some white meat turkey in hopes that that tryptophan will convert to serotonin and make you sleepy, et cetera. But in general, those are going to be pretty long-lasting effects, especially given the fact that not all of the tryptophan you will ingest is going to be converted into serotonin in your brain. It's going to have other effects on other tissues and organs of your body. Nonetheless, if you want to increase serotonin, providing the appropriate baseline context is going to be useful. And again, this is a general theme of all four of these neuromodulators, dopamine, epinephrine, acetylcholine and serotonin. You want to make sure that you have sufficient baseline levels of those things through things like diet, regular behaviors, and then you have the opportunity to use supplementation and if it's appropriate for you, prescription drugs, and certain behavioral protocols to try and get these potent increases, these acute increases in whichever the neuromodulators you happen to want to leverage for your particular goals. So that brings us to the end of at least this exploration of the neuromodulators, dopamine, epinephrine, acetylcholine and serotonin. Some of you who are regular listeners of this podcast might be saying, well, we've heard all this before, right? You had an episode on dopamine. You had an episode on anxiety. You had an episode on sleep. And indeed that's true. But what I've tried to provide today is a framework that cuts through all those episodes and at the same time builds out a new and what I believe to be a really important theme and principle, which is that whether or not you're using nutritional tools or supplementation or prescription drugs or any other sort of protocol to try and create a desired effect of focus or energy, motivation, relaxation, you are playing with the same neurochemical ingredients, just as in the realm of nutrition, you have macronutrients, you have proteins, carbohydrates, and fats that can be adjusted in different ratios and arranged at different times in order to achieve certain desired effects. Well, when it comes to your neurochemistry and your ability to perform mentally, to perform physically, and your overall well-being, you are dealing with a small handful of especially potent molecules. And I acknowledge that there are many neuromodulators. There are indeed many neurotransmitters, glutamine, glycine, GABA, et cetera. But today we focused on the main four, meaning the most potent and most widespread neuromodulators in the brain and body that give you access to particular brain states and body states of the sort that most people desire. So what I'm hoping is that rather than decide that any one tool is the most useful or that any one neurochemical is most useful for that matter, that the information that I've provided today allows you a kit of versatile tools that allows you to figure out what levels of dopamine and augmentation of dopamine are appropriate and necessary for you. What levels of acetylcholine and tools for manipulating acetylcholine are going to be most useful for you and so on and so forth because at least at this stage in time, that is June, 2022, there is no simple at home test. In fact, there is no simple laboratory test that allows us to know whether or not our dopamine levels are high and our serotonin levels are low. We can look at somebody and their behavior. We can look at ourselves and our own mood and behavior. And we can infer what those levels may or may not be. But unfortunately, we don't have a really good test of dopamine levels or serotonin levels that would allow us to say, okay, this person, or I need to increase dopamine two-fold in order to achieve the kind of motivation that we want. Unfortunately, that doesn't exist. Rather, we are confronted with a situation where we understand generally what these different neuromodulators do, the different mental states and physical states that they tend to put us into. And we reviewed those. And we know that there are really potent tools to adjust those neuromodulators, if not alone, but in certain combinations, that is ingestion of caffeine will tap into and support dopamine and epinephrine. Increasing dopamine and epinephrine alongside increasing acetylcholine will allow us to access certain brain states, that is focused, alert, energized, brain states, great for learning and plasticity of all kinds. Whereas augmenting serotonin is going to put us into a more relaxed state and so on and so forth. And I'd like you to keep in mind that there is no negotiating the fact that we all have different phases of our 24-hour cycle during which those very same neuromodulators tend to be naturally higher or naturally lower and I reviewed that at the beginning of the episode. So my wish for you is that you will take this information, experiment with it as you see fit for you and in a safe way. And as you go forward, to really try and gain intuition and understanding as to not just how these protocols work, but how any protocol that you might encounter, supplement-based, drug-based, behavioral-based, how those might tap into these different major neuromodulator systems. And from that, to be able to better predict and evaluate whether or not they're going to be useful to you, detrimental to you, or whether or not they should be used in combinations that would be more useful to you. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have feedback for us or you have topics or guests that you'd like us to cover on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put that in the comment section on YouTube. We do eventually read all those comments and that's the best place to give us that sort of feedback. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. During today's episode, we talked a lot about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. As mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, we partnered with Momentous supplements because they're extremely high quality, they ship internationally, they are available in the dosages and single ingredient formulations that are ideal for building a supplementation protocol. You can find all those at liveMomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, we are @hubermanlab on Twitter and @hubermanlab on Instagram. There, I cover science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast. And if you're not already subscribing to our newsletter, we have a Neural Network Newsletter as it's called. It comes out about once a month. We provide summaries. We provide protocols based on podcast episodes. All of that is zero cost to access. You just go to Hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, click on newsletter, and you can sign up. We do not share your email with anybody and our privacy policy is there. In fact, if you want to see previous newsletters, they are available without having to sign up in PDF form also at HubermanLab.com under the newsletter tabs, things like a toolkit for sleep and a neuroplasticity super protocol, all available as immediately downloadable PDFs. So I'd like to thank you once again for joining me today in our discussion about these incredibly powerful molecules we call neuromodulators and the things we can do and take in order to control them so that we can enhance our mental health, physical health and performance. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 268 ---
Video ID: UNCwdFxPtE8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNCwdFxPtE8
Title: Jeff Cavaliere: Optimize Your Exercise Program with Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Podcast #79
Published: 2022-07-04 12:00:16 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Jeff Cavaliere, MSPT CSCS, a world-class physical therapist and Certified Strength & Conditioning Specialist. Jeff has coached athletes ranging from novice to professional and has taught science-based physical training protocols to tens of millions of everyday people via his enormously clear and actionable online programs. Jeff is a true expert on proper resistance and cardiovascular training, injury prevention and rehabilitation and has extensive knowledge on proper form, posture, nutrition and supplementation. We discuss how to best design and optimize a physical training program to achieve your specific goals. We also discuss how to build and leverage mental focus during workouts, when and how to stretch, pain management and enhancing workout recovery and sleep, and how to personalize your training and nutrition program over time. Jeff’s knowledge and science-based approach ought to benefit everyone in reaching their desired fitness, aesthetic and overall health goals.

#HubermanLab #Exercise #StrengthTraining

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Jeff Cavaliere
Website: https://athleanx.com 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/athleanx 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/athleanx
Twitter: https://twitter.com/trainer2thepros
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/athleanx

Jeff's Articles  on Workout Splits: 
https://athleanx.com/articles/the-best-workout-split-for-maximum-muscle-gains 
https://athleanx.com/articles/the-best-way-to-split-up-your-workouts-surprise 

Hand Grip Dynamometer: https://amzn.to/3P3Y2M9

Jeff's Videos:  
Jump Rope Video: https://youtu.be/FpE7TbADcYs
High Pull Video: https://youtu.be/1SnVJDt7jts
Fixing Back Pain Video: https://youtu.be/DWmGArQBtFI

Timestamps
00:00:00 Jeff Cavaliere, Physical Training
00:03:27 Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Eight Sleep, ROKA
00:08:38 Tool: A Fitness Plan for General Health
00:13:27 Tool: Optimizing Body Part Training Splits 
00:20:12 Two-a-Day Training
00:22:33 Cardiovascular Conditioning, High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT) & Skills 
00:28:24 Tool: Mind-Muscle Connection, The Cavaliere Cramp Contraction Test 
00:35:05 “Muscularity” & Resting Tone
00:41:31 Tool: Muscle Recovery & Soreness, Grip Strength 
00:50:39 Sleep & Sleep Position
00:57:24 Active (Dynamic) vs. Passive Stretching, Timing & Healing Muscle 
01:07:23 Tool: Jumping Rope 
01:12:56 Internal & External Rotation, Upright Row vs. High Pull 
01:24:27 Back Pain Relief & Medial Glutes, Body Pain & Origins
01:37:39 Tool: Properly Holding Weights & Deepening Grip 
01:43:54 Tool: Physical Recovery, Heat & Cold Exposure 
01:47:19 Tool: Record Keeping for Training Performance & Rest Time
01:51:47 Nutrition Principles & Consistency, Processed Foods & Sugar
02:00:15 Tool: “Plate Eating”: Protein, Fibrous & Starchy Carbohydrates 
02:11:25 Training in Men vs. Women, Training for Kids & Adolescents 
02:18:05 Tool: Pre- and Post-Training Nutrition 
02:26:30 Intensity & Training Consistency 
02:29:53 AthleanX, Jesse Laico & Fitness Journeys 
02:38:27 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science, and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Jeff Cavaliere. Jeff Cavaliere holds a Master of Science in Physical Therapy and is a certified strength and conditioning specialist. He did his training at the University of Connecticut Storrs, one of the top five programs in the world in physical therapy and sports medicine. I discovered Jeff Cavaliere over 10 years ago from his online content. His online content includes information about how to train for strength, how to train for hypertrophy, which is muscle growth, how to train for endurance, as well as how to rehabilitate injuries to avoid muscular imbalances, nutrition and supplementation. I've always found his content to be incredibly science based, incredibly clear, sometimes surprising, and always incredibly actionable. It is therefore not surprising that he has one of the largest online platforms for fitness, nutrition, supplementation, and injury rehabilitation. Jeff has also worked with an enormous number of professional athletes and has served as head physical therapist and assistant strength coach for the New York Mets. Again, the content that Jeff Cavaliere has posted online has been so immensely useful to me over the years, that I was absolutely thrilled to get the chance to sit down with him and ask him about everything from how to train in terms of how to split up the body parts that you train across the week, how to integrate strength training and endurance training, when to stretch, how to stretch. Indeed, we talked about nutrition, we talk a bit about supplementation. We talk about how to really avoid creating imbalances in muscle and in neural control over muscle. This is one thing that's really wonderful about Jeff is he really has an understanding of not just how muscles and bones, and tendons and ligaments work together, but how the nervous system interfaces with those. We talked about the mental side of training, including when to bring specific concentration to the muscles that you're training, and when to think more about how to move weights through space and think more about the movements overall. I'm certain that you'll find the conversation that we held to be immensely useful and informative for your fitness practices and also for how you mentally approach fitness in general, and how to set up a lifelong fitness practice, one that will give you the strength that you desire, one that will give you the aesthetic results that you desire. One that will set you up for endurance and cardiovascular health, basically an overall fitness program. I really feel this is where Jeff Cavaliere shines above and beyond so many of the other PTs and fitness so-called influencers that are out there. Again, everything is grounded in science, everything is clear, and everything is actionable. And while we do cover an enormous amount of information during today's episode, if you want to dive even deeper into that information, you can go to athleanx.com, where you'll find some of Jeff's programs. You can also find him at Athlean-X on YouTube. There you'll find videos for instance, like the, how to repair or heal from lower back pain. Something that I actually followed directly long before I ever met Jeff, has over 32 million views, and that is not by accident, it's because the protocols there again are surprising and actionable. They relieved my back pain very quickly without surgery. So I'm immensely grateful for that content. And it extends into everything from again, hypertrophy, endurance and strength training and so on. Again, it's athleanx.com as the website, Athlean-X on YouTube, and also @athleanx on Instagram. The Huberman Lab Podcast is proud to announce that we've partnered with Momentous Supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, the quality of their supplements is exceedingly high. Second of all, we wanted to have a location where you could find all of the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast in one easy to find place. You can now find that place at livemomentous.com/huberman. In addition, Momentous Supplements ship internationally, something that a lot of other supplement companies simply do not do. So that's terrific whether or not you live in the US, or you live abroad. Right now, not all of the supplements that we discuss on the Huberman Lab Podcast are listed, but that catalog of supplements is being expanded very rapidly, and a good number of them that we've talked about, some of the more prominent ones for sleep and focus and other aspects of mental and physical health are already there. Again, you can find them at livemomentus.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, now called AG1. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason that I started taking AG1, and the reason I still take AG1 twice a day, is that it covers all of my foundational health needs for mental health, physical health, and performance. As I mentioned earlier, it has vitamins and minerals that cover any deficiencies I might have in my diet. It also has probiotics, and the probiotics are key for supporting the so-called gut microbiome. The gut microbiome are trillions of little microbacteria that live in our gut from our throat all the way down to the base of our gut, that support everything from our immune system to our hormone health, to the so-called gut brain access. That is, our gut and our brain are in direct communication with one another in ways that support our mood, our ability to think, and overall brain health. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3+K2. Vitamin D3 and K2 are essential for an enormous number of aspects of your mental health, physical health, and performance by impacting things like hormone regulation, calcium regulation, and cardiovascular health. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with heating and sleep tracking and importantly cooling capacity. I've talked many times before on this podcast or another podcast about the close relationship between temperature and sleep. That is, your body temperature has to drop by about one to three degrees in order to fall asleep, and waking up involves heating up of your body by about one to three degrees. Now, some people run cold during the night. They need to heat their sleeping environment. Other people run too hot during the night. I'm one such person, I tend to wake up in the middle of the night if I get warm at all. With Eight Sleep, I'm able to cool my sleeping environment in a very precise way, even so precise that I can control the temperature at the beginning, middle, and end of the night so that I fall asleep easily, stay deeply asleep, and wake up feeling better than I've ever felt before. The Pod Pro Cover by Eight Sleep is their most advanced solution on the market for thermal regulation. It pairs dynamic, cooling and heating with biometric tracking if you want to use that. Also it has this nice feature that it'll vibrate in the morning to wake you up. I'd rather like that vibration feature too. You can add the cover to any mattress and start sleeping as cool as 55 degrees Fahrenheit, or as hot as 110 degrees Fahrenheit. So again, it can be customized to your sleep needs. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out the Pro Pod Cover and save $150 at checkout. They currently ship within the USA, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two, all American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is made with performance in mind. That said, the aesthetics of ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is superb. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system. And I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order to be able to see clearly. ROKA understands this and has developed their eyeglasses and sunglasses in a manner such that when you move from say a shady area to a brightly lit area, or when you are in different lit environments indoors, you can always see with crystal clarity. And they won't slip off if you sweat. In fact, they were originally designed for exercise. You can wear them while running or cycling, but they have a terrific aesthetics. So unlike a lot of so-called performance or exercise glasses that are out there that make people frankly look like cyborgs in my opinion, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses look terrific. You'd be proud to wear them to work, or out to dinner, or when you exercise. If you want to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com. That's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off on your first order. Again, that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. And now for my discussion with Jeff Cavaliere. Jeff, such a pleasure for me to have you here. - I'm glad to be here, it's amazing. - I'm a longtime consumer of your content. I've learned a tremendous amount about fitness, both in the weight room and cardio, nutrition things that I've applied for over a decade. So for me, this is particularly meaningful. And my goal here is really to ask a bunch of questions to which I'm interested in the answers, but also for which I know the audience is really curious about. So one of your mantras is, "If you want to look like an athlete, train like an athlete" and I think that's something really special that sets aside what you do from what a lot of other very well qualified people do. And in terms of the use of weights and resistance, whether or not it's body weight or weights in the gym, or pulleys versus cardio, in terms of overall health aesthetics and athleticism, is there a way that you could point to the idea that maybe people should be doing 50% resistance training and 50% cardio, maybe it's 70/30, maybe it's 30/70. And here I'm talking about the typical person who would like to maintain, or maybe even add some muscle mass, probably in particular areas for most people, as opposed to just overall mass. Although we'll talk about that later, and people who want to maintain a relatively low body fat percentage and be in good cardiovascular health. What's the sort of contour of a basic program that anybody could think about as a starting place? - I think it's like a 60/40 split, which would be leaning towards weight training, strength and then the conditioning aspect be about 40%. So if you look at it over a course of a training week, I mean, five days in a gym would be a great task. And obviously not in the gym, it could be done at home. But three days strength training, Monday, Wednesday, Friday. Conditioning, Tuesday, Thursday, you know, two days. It's a pretty easy roundabout way to split that up, of course, depending upon training goals. And as you said, the aesthetic goals like that will shift dramatically. But if you want to see the benefits of both, that's probably the effect of dose for strength training and the effect of dose for conditioning at the bare minimum level. Again, being a much better performer conditioning wise, you're going to want to do more than that. - And in terms of the duration of those workouts, what's your suggestion? I've been weight training for about 30 years, running for about 30 years, and mainly for health. And have found that if I work hard in the gym or at resistance training for more than 60 minutes or so, it's very hard for me to recover, I start getting cold, I start getting weaker from workout to workout, but amazingly, at least to me, if I keep those workouts to about 10 minutes of warmup and 55 minutes or so of really hard work for resistance training, and I keep the cardiovascular work to about 30 or 45 minutes, I feel great. And I seem to make some progress, at least someplace in the workout from workout to workout. - Yeah, I mean, those are good numbers, 'cause those are kind of numbers that we usually preach. We try to keep our workouts to an hour or less if possible. Now, depending upon the split that you're following, if you're on a total body split, there's just going to be more that has to be done in a given amount of time. And again if you're training primarily for strength, that could prolong the workout, 'cause of the longer rest time is in between sets. But in general, when you're not focused on that one aspect, but the overall health picture, then you can get the job done in under an hour. And again, I always say, on top of "If you want to look like an athlete train, like an athlete," is, "You could either train longer or you could train hard, but you can't do both." And I really believe that the focus for me, I have a busy life, I have a lot of other things that I do believe it or not. And it's like, I want to go hard and I want to go get out. And I find that my body also responds to that, and I think a lot of guys' body respond to that. And particularly as you start to get older, I think it's the length of the workout that actually causes more problems than the intensity of what you're doing. Particularly if you're warmed up properly like you said. I've found personally that my warmup has had to become more of an integral part of my workout than it ever has before. I could get in the gym when I was 20, and I'm going right over, I'm doing the one set, two sets, I'm ready to go. You know, and I never do another workout warmup set for any of the other exercise I do the rest of the day. That's not true anymore. And I found that as long as I'm willing to sort of give myself a little bit of a warmup, the intensity is not what bothers me. I'm very much in control of the weights that I use and it doesn't bother me. But if I start to go pretty long, I start to feel achy or I start to have problems. So again, depending upon age, that also plays a factor in the length. But again, I think everybody can achieve, on a standard program, can achieve the results that they want within an hour. - In terms of splits, you mentioned splits. And so for those who aren't familiar with this term splits, it's really which body parts are you training on? Which days? Seems like almost everybody follows a weekly workout schedule. Although the body of course doesn't care about the week. There's no reason thing that once every seven days or twice every seven days makes sense physiologically, it's just the body doesn't work that. But, that's the way life is structured. I've seen you discuss three days a week, whole body workouts. I've heard of splits like a pushing one day, pulling another day, legs another day, a day off, repeat. I mean, there's so many variations on this. What are some general themes that we can throw out there? And in order to avoid the huge matrix of possibilities, you have some wonderful content that points those. And we will cap- In our caption show notes, we'll link out to some of those that different ways to design splits. But in terms of giving people a logic of how to think about splitting up body parts, what's governing the split? What are the rules and the logic that dictate a split? - For me, the first rule is will you stick to it? Like if you, 'cause there are split, I don't particularly like full body splits. And I was actually talking to Jesse about that the other day like, I don't necessarily like to have to train everything. Now of course the volumes will come down per muscle group. But if you don't like to do that, and you actually don't look forward to your workout because you're dreading having to do everything and feeling maybe too fatigued by the time your workout's over, or the fact that those generally do take a little bit longer and don't fit into your schedule. I don't care how effective the split is, a split not done is not effective. So you need to find one that fits. So maybe you go into an alternative option, like a push-pull-legs, like you mentioned. And that could be done either one cycle through the week, on a Monday, Wednesday, Friday split, or it could be twice in a week. So you're actually training six times, where you repeat it, pull-push-legs, pull-push-legs, or however you want to do it with either a day off in between the three days, or at the end of the six days. And again, that actually impacts your schedule. I've broken that down before where it's, if you put it in between the three days, it's good because you're giving yourself an extra rest day in between, but it starts to shift that day off every week as we wrap around. So for those guys that we're choosing that seven day schedule out of convenience in our heads, it starts to mess with that off day. So others like to just keep it predictably, let's say on a Sunday, and train six days in a row. But that's a better way to maybe group similar muscle actions together, which I think, I definitely prefer that, because if I'm going to be training pulling movements, at least there there's a synergy between them. And I feel like I'm looking to achieve one goal that day. And then, I mean, quite honestly, you can go back to the bro-split days, and those still work effectively. There's a reason why they worked in the past. I think that science shows that there's smarter ways to do them these days. Like you can come back and hit a related muscle, so you could do, let's say biceps on one day and then come back two days later and do back, realizing again, synergy between the exercises there, your biceps are going to get re-stimulated again. So you could figure out ways to make that work, but the thing that I think is effective there, is that tends to be one of the ones that people like the most. Because they can go in, they get their pump, they feel good. It's pretty solely focused on one muscle group. - Is that the definition of a bro-split? One... - One muscle group a day? - Yeah, I see, so it's very much geared towards strength and aesthetics really maximizing... - Probably more aesthetics than strength, yeah. You're just... - Hence the bro, the bro name. - But again, like, you know, in here I am a science guy and I could appreciate the benefits of a bro-split. Especially 'cause again, like to what end? Who's goal are we trying to achieve here? Those are ours. Like if I'm applying my standards and my goals or even like athletic ideals, but they just want to get in shape, then it's perfectly fine to do a bro split in that instance, if you're sticking to it again and you're seeing the results that you want to see from it. But they're able to really keep their focus on one muscle, they get to focus on. Look, a lot of times people struggle with the way of an exercise feels until their second or third set. Like they don't have that proper percept of ability to kind of lock in on an exercise. So spending a few, not only sets in the same exercise, but then doing another exercise for the same muscle group helps them to dial in a little bit better and get more out of their training. - Yeah, that raised a really interesting, I think important question. Early on when I started resistance training, which was when I was 16 in high school, I got in touch with and I was learning from Mike Menzer. - Me too, that's crazy. - And Mike was very helpful. Very, very helpful. We got to be friendly... - So, I just read his book, I didn't get a chance to be him, so I'm jealous, right? - Well, back then no internet, I paid by Western Union type thing to send him some money - From the back of the magazine. - And then he got on the phone with me and my mother at the time was like, why is this grown man calling the house? And he gave me a very straightforward split, which was shoulders, arms one day, he had me taking two days off and then training legs and then two days off and then chest and back, et cetera. - And that's a variation of a bro-split too. Where you're sort of breaking them down that way, chest them back or chest them bis, you know? - And it worked very well for me, I probably would've, because of my age I think, and because I was untrained, I think, largely untrained, I think it would've grown on many different programs, but it worked very well for me. I eventually just made that in every other day thing. Shoulders and arms day off, legs day or two off, 'cause if you hit legs right, at least for me, I'm not training the next day. And then I'm not doing much of anything athletic the next day, and chest, back and repeat and so on. And the reason I found that helpful is I almost always recovered between workouts. The six day a week program of push-pull-legs, push-pull-legs, to me seems excruciating from two standpoints. One is, at least with my recovery abilities, or lack of recovery abilities, I can't imagine coming back feeling fresh. And the other one is, if I'm in the gym more than four days a week, I really start to fatigue it about the whole psychological experience of it. Whereas if I'm in there three or four days a week. In other words, if I put a day off in between each workout, I really want to be there. And I get in there with a lot of fire. And I'm also doing other things on the off days. So I think that, I love that you mentioned the split that you'll stick to. And that you can bring the intensity to, because I think that that's really important. I sometimes hear about two a day training. I've done two a day training twice in my lifetime, both times I got sick two days later. That's correlation, not causation. But is there ever an instance where two a day weight training makes sense for the non-drug assisted, typical recovery ability person? - Actually, I think it makes sense in some scenarios, but it doesn't make sense practically for a lot of people's schedules. So like if you could break down, let's say you were going to do even some version of a total body session, or maybe like you're going to do an upper lower split, right? You could do an upper workout and do the anterior chain or the pushing portion of that in one session and then come back and do the pulling session later on at night, if you had the opportunity to. The thing that you benefit from there is the freshness of focus. Again, like something in my head is sacrificed by the time you get towards the latter half of whatever workout you're in. To the same point you made before like, when you start to approach that 50 minutes an hour mark, you are either losing focus, you're losing energy, you're losing contract viability, you're losing something. And if you're relegating whatever it is, the pulling portion of that to the end of that workout, something suffers so that, and if they realize that's happening, then maybe you switch them up the next time you do the workout where the pulling portion of the upper workout goes first, and then the pushing goes later, so you're at least not just continuing that cycle, but at the same time, if you were able to kind of split them up, you get a chance to kind of take a break, you could have that freshness of focus again, and you could actually get a better effort in, 'cause again, I think effort drives the results. So if the effort is not compromised, then you should be able to do that. But systemically is that a problem? And I think that it is a problem for a lot of people. It's just hard to, it's hard to rev the engine up a lot of times in the day. You warm that thing up once, it's like that car in the winter, you get it going once, you're lucky, okay, now you got to drive it the rest of the day. But you put it in the garage and try to start it the next day, it's a problem. So, you know, young people can get away with it a lot more than older people could. - Well, I've never had a strong recovery quotient, but if I stick to this one day off in between, every once in a while, two days in a row training, maybe because I have to travel and I want to make sure I get all the workouts and kind of thing, I seem to be okay. I like your example of warming up the car, spoken like a true east coaster, or those of us are on the west coast, I took a moment there, but we folks from the East Coast and the Midwest, get it, and certainly from Europe. In terms of the mixing up of cardiovascular training and resistance training, same day, different day, which one should come first, which one should come second? If one main goals, again, everyone listening has different goals are, most people would like to either maintain or gain some muscle. I don't know many people that want to lose muscle. To maintain or gains some muscle, usually in specific locations on their body, most people would like to be a bit leaner or a lot leaner. There are a few people out there that are either naturally lean or don't want, or actually just want to gain weight. But assuming that people want to get leaner, put on some muscle, maintain muscle, and want to have a healthy heart and a healthy brain, which basically requires a healthy cardiovascular system, how would you incorporate cardiovascular work into the overall weekly regimen? - So again, I think that the bare minimum is probably twice a week in terms of cardiovascular. If you want to have some semblance of cardiovascular conditioning. But I think most people who actually need it more or want to pursue it more than that are going to need more time to do that. So at some point it can't just be relegated to a day off, or a day off from the weight training workouts. So at some point it has to occur on the same day. And in that case, I just like to put it, if that is, you're not your primary goal, but you're looking more for the, just the overall picture, the aesthetics you mentioned, putting muscle on in certain areas, then I would put it at the end of the workout. 'Cause you don't want it in any way compromise the weight training work out. And as we've sort of referenced a couple times already, the intensity of those workouts is important. And we know there's a strength component to those workouts also that is going to be a helpful stimulus for growth. So the conditioning, the cardio, that stuff done prior to any training, strength training, workout, is likely going to impair your ability to perform at your best. So unless it's just done for a quick little warmup in the beginning, but then it's not sustained long enough really to be a benefit for cardiovascular conditioning. So I just like to put that at the end, realizing that even if my effort level is lower, my output is lower, if it's still placing a demand on my cardiac output to get that conditioning effect because I'm fatigued, it still has a demand on my cardiac output, so it's still achieving its goal, but it didn't interfere with my main goal of being able to increase my performance in the gym. - Got it. And in terms of the form of cardiovascular training, I've seen you do a number of, I have to say very impressive high intensity interval type work. So burpee type work, or pushups with crunches mixed into them, anyway, people can see your videos, I didn't describe those in the best way, but rather than on the treadmill or out jogging for 30-45 minutes, is that because you prefer higher intensity, higher heart rate type training, or is it because you live in cold Connecticut, and you don't want to be out jogging on the roads in the middle of the winter? - I think all the above, I mean, those are factors from a personal level, but I think that if you are- If we could blend function across these realms and not have such a delineation between, this is my way training, and this is my conditioning, but figure out a way to blend them together, I always think that you've got a better opportunity to get that more well rounded result. And I like to kind of mix up that straight conditioning work and also some of the footwork drills. We have some high expectations for guys that come into our programs, like to just do some footwork drills. - Like ladders. - Like ladders, or line drills or something. And you know what happens? People become intrigued and interested. Like I never, I haven't tried this since high school. And they become interested in just the challenge of it, and then as we become almost distracted by the challenge, we're now like finding ourselves conditioning. And I always think that's an important part, that sometimes you got to draw people in to show them what they might be interested in. And from the output or the effect of it, I just think that when you're able to blend some, still maintain some of that strength training into the exercise, as you mentioned, let's say I'm doing some kind of a push up or a burpee, there is an anaerobic component to that that is going to be helpful, that then rather than just walking or just jogging. Not to say that that isn't an effective means for strict cardiac conditioning, it's one of the ways that we've had for centuries, how to do it. But I just think that if we can blend it, then it becomes maybe a little bit more interesting and you get some of those crossover benefits, and it doesn't become so segmented in terms of what we're trying to do. - I love the idea of bringing some mental challenge and some desire to improve a skill while conditioning. That's not something that I've thought of before, and it's simply 'cause I've overlooked it, but it makes sense because, my sister who's reasonably fit, although I'm always trying to get her to do a bit more, she always asks me, what should I take? And I'm a, I don't believe her in supplements are for certain people in certain instances, but I keep telling her, you know, it's, the behaviors are going to end, nutrition are going to have the greatest outsize positive effect. And she loves things like dance classes and things, or kickboxing, these kinds of things which, so it makes sense that if you can hook somebody on the conditioning aspect or the skill aspect and kind of trick them into doing more cardio, so to speak that's terrific. Also the neuroscientist in me just has to say, forgive me, that anytime you're engaging the two sets of motor neurons, the ones in your brain, the upper motor neurons and the ones in your spinal cord, anytime you're engaging those upper motor neurons, which are for deliberate well controlled action, you're doing a great thing for your brain in terms of brain longevity. So, now I need to incorporate some actual skills into my training. Going back to weight training a bit, one of the most important things I learned from you, so over the years was that, when training to increase muscle size, to really think, not so much about moving weights, but more about challenging muscles. - Yeah. - I also heard this from my friend, Ben Pakulski, who's a very well accomplished, He was a bodybuilder, now he's into other aspects of fitness, teaches fitness, but don't move weights challenge muscles, unless you're trying to power lift or something of that sort, which I'm not, immensely helpful. But the other thing that I learned from you that, combined with that was this idea that certain muscles will grow better and get stronger much more easily, maybe even will recover better because of our ability to contract them really hard. And this what I call the Cavaliere test, which is at least if I could paraphrase, so for instance, if I can, it's always the bicep, isn't it? Let's use the calf or the bicep. If you can flex your bicep to the point where it hurts a little bit, like it almost feels like a cramp or a cramp, where you can flex your calf to the point where it really cramps up a little bit, almost feels like it's nodding up, that's a pretty good indication that you're going to be able to stimulate that muscle well under load if you're doing the movement properly. And that's the feeling to actually aim for each repetition, maybe even throughout the repetition. For me, this completely transformed my results. And this was, I think maybe five/six years ago that I first heard this from you, body parts that for me, lagged behind, that I thought maybe genetically weren't going to work for me, immediately just started growing, right? And I was getting stronger and stronger, and I thought this is really something so much so that I've dedicated a portion of my research along with, in collaboration with another group to try and understand what's happening in these upper motor neurons in the brain that can engage the muscles even more. And that it's not just about progressive overload or putting a pump into the muscle. That it's really this mind muscle connection is a real thing when it comes to predicting results and that you can get better at it. So forgive me if we're paraphrasing your incredible content around this, it made a tremendous difference for me and a number of other people that have passed that along to. But what can you, first of all, how did you arrive at that? Because we hear about the mind-muscle connection, but I really heard it first from you. How did you arrive at this kind of cramp test, the Cavaliere test as I'll call it? It's always weird when people name things after themselves in science, but other scientists can name things. So there is now officially the Cavaliere test, is whether or not you can cramp the muscle in the absence of load, just flexing it to the point where it hurts a little bit. That would be a good indication that you could grow that muscle well. How did you come up with this? - I mean, honestly, it's something that made sense to me, because during my workouts, even as a young kid just starting out, I always wanted to know what is it working? A lot of people ask that question more so than you think, like, what is this supposed to work? And a lot, I don't know if you've ever noticed, but like when people ask that question, if they're being trained by a trainer, and the trainer's saying, well, just do this, do this exercise and they'll show you how to do it. But then they'll say, but what is it supposed to work? Where am I supposed to feel this, right? People, did they just inherently ask that question? A lot of people will. I was one of those that did that, and I asked that question. Not because I knew what I was doing, but just because I don't know, I wanted to know what was supposed to be doing the work. Once you do that, and you start to seek that out, and say, okay, well, the bicep is what's supposed to be doing the work, then I want to make sure the bicep's doing the work. So then I would just sort of really like tweak the movement to make it do more work or feel more uncomfortable, or get it stronger contraction, knowing if that's supposed to do the job, it wasn't until PT school that I'm learning, oh, well, the flexion of the elbow is the brachial and the bias and the bias' responsible for supination. You started to, I learned other components of it, but all I wanted to know was to bring my arm up in a curl, what is supposed to do the job? So I would seek out ways to make that happen better. And when I was able to do that, I could feel the stronger contraction. And I just, I don't know what it, I just, I was no visionary, I just felt like I knew that that was going to be better for me if the muscle I was trying to grow was being stressed more effectively. So when I was attempting to do this across different exercises, I would notice that what I could do potentially on a curl where my arm is up, where you asking me to flex my bicep that position, I couldn't do if I was doing a concentration curl, or I couldn't carry over to a cable curl, and that shouldn't really change, 'cause the function is still largely the same, there's still elbow flexion, there's still supination, why am I not able to do it there? And that's when it sort of clued into me that like, your mind-muscle connection on not just your mind with one muscle, but on every exercise matters, and it varies from exercise to exercise. And even if you don't gain muscle size from doing that, although I think it's very hard not to, especially if you're not used to doing that, there's a term I like to call muscularity, which is a difference, right? It's the level of sort of resting tone in the muscle. That improves dramatically. If you can learn how to just start to engage that muscle better, the muscularity, the resting tone of that muscle is harder, it's more at attention, it's more alive. And it's all driven from being able to connect better neurologically with the muscle that you're trying to train. I've talked about a lot in efficiency is really what you're trying to seek in movements when you're trying to create hypertrophy. When strength is your goal, efficiency of the movement is what you're looking for. You're looking to have muscles tied together and work well efficiently, the chest, the shoulders, the triceps, to get a bar off of your chest or in a bench press. You're not looking to make it a very inefficient leverages for your chest, to try to grow your chest in a bench press, you're trying to let the whole package come together for a greater output. But when you're trying to go and create muscle hypertrophy or even this muscularity that I talk about, you need to seek ways to make it feel more uncomfortable. If you don't feel the discomfort, then you're doing something wrong. And I struggle to this day on certain muscle groups to still do that, even knowing what I'm trying to work and knowing what the goal of everything I'm preaching here. It's very difficult for some muscles and for certain people to do this on certain muscles. But as you mentioned, practice does help. And the more you become consistent and deliberate with what you're trying to do, the more of a result you actually get. - It's couple of really couple of points I'd like to delve into further. First of all, my hunch was always that the muscle groups that grew most easily and that I could contract hardest without any- The first time I did the Cavaliere test, got 10 out 10. If we give it a 10 out of 10 scale. It could just like cinch, isolate those muscles, cinch them, grow them easily. I mean, there's certain body parts, I don't want to say which ones, 'cause it doesn't really matter, that I always felt like if I just did pushups, they would grow, and these muscles are far away from any of the muscles that are supposed to be involved in pushups, even though I like to think I'm doing pushups correctly. You'll tell me if I'm not. But some of that I think is genetic, and some of that has to do with the sports that I played when I was younger. So I swam, I played soccer, I skateboard. And then later I boxed. And so the muscles involved in those sports were always very easy to engage later when I went into the gym. So I guess perhaps a call to parents, having kids do a lot of dynamic activity, seems like it might be a good idea. The other thing is this issue of muscularity. I am so glad you brought that up. There are, I have to imagine a large number of listeners who don't want to get bigger. They don't want to take up a larger clothing size. They don't want to take up more space. In fact, some of them would like to take up less space, but they want that quality that you're describing, which is that, oftentimes you hear it more in the, here I'm stereotyping a bit, but with kindness. You hear from women who haven't weight trained, they say, I don't want to get big, often. Sometimes they do, but most women that I've helped weight train or talked to about weight train say, I don't want to get big, I want to get toned. And I think what they're referring to is this quality of muscularity. - A hundred percent, - This idea that at resting or at close to rest, or anytime someone reaches out and grabs a glass, that the muscles almost look like they're kind of twitching underneath the skin. And yet it's Saran wrap skin anatomy chart type skin. So this thing of muscularity, or resting tone, has a physiological basis, I think it's how readily the nerves are communicating with the muscles. And you're saying that by learning to engage the muscles more actively, the resting tone or muscularity can improve. Have you seen that both in men and women? - Yeah, oh yeah. - And do you think this is something that takes upkeep, maintenance, or that once you develop that in a muscle, you can just kind of let it coast. - I think like everything at key, it requires upkeep, you know, user lose it, I do believe firmly, but like I think that the development of the connections is going to be harder than the maintenance of the connection. As I said, I still struggle to this day for myself with unnamed muscle groups, they also,- But there's just certain areas that are harder for your brain for whatever reason to just develop that connection at that type of level to create that extra strong contraction. But I think that with proper dedication and focus, and then I'll go right out and say, calves is one of the areas that I don't necessarily have a great connection with, and I also obviously must not care so much 'cause I don't put in the time and effort to create that connection as I could. So I think what might happen is, you know yeah, there could be a struggle there, but then with struggle comes disinterest, 'cause you're like, well screw it, I'm a calf knot and I'm not going to do anything about it. So I think if you put the required effort in, and the time and repetitions that you will develop that, and once you do develop it, it's going to stick around a lot longer than it would had you not invested any time into it at all, not requiring as much of that. But I mean, I don't know, like you mentioned, now when you train, it's like, you're just, this is just part of how you train now, like you're going hard, you're trying to really forcefully contract. You're not just moving the weight, I say from point A to point B, but you're like trying to contract the weight through that range. That is a mindset that I try to put into what everything I'm doing, unless of course I'm focused on a strength exercise where I'm just trying to lift a greater amount and use all the muscles together. But when the goal is inefficiency for hypertrophy, I am really trying to create that contraction, and it's just part of my training. So I guess that for consistency's sake, as long as I'm training is happening. If I get away from training that it's not happening at all, but you know, even there, I probably another embarrassing admission probably, will mindfully do it throughout the day, even with no weight in my hand, in certain muscle groups, whether it be my abs or my arm or my shoulders or something, I'm doing something just to sort of engage the muscles. And I do think that some of that sort of inane practice actually helps by the time you go back into the gym. You just kind of keep that connection going. - Well, it certainly obeys all the rules of neuroplasticity. You know the fire together wired together mantra, which is the words of my colleague, Carla Shatz, hold true for all aspects of neural function, including nerve to muscle. So these flexing throughout the day or the deliberate isolation of contracting a muscle throughout the day is without question engaging neuroplasticity. And if you were to do fewer those repetitions, you're going to get less engagement of the nerve to muscle connection. I can say this with a smile and with confidence because, one of the first things all neuroscience students learn is about the neuromuscular junction, 'cause it's a really simple example of where the more times the nerve fires and gets the muscle to contract, the stronger that connection get, receptors are brought there, et cetera, et cetera, there's a whole bunch of mechanisms for a topic of another podcast. But basically that practice throughout the day makes total sense and works. - Yeah, and there's no, believe me, there's no science behind that in terms of the application of it. You do it when, you catch yourself doing it from time to time. But it is definitely something that's easily done discreetly and you wind up doing. I actually, I think in a recent video when I did talk about growing your arms by just improving the connection. Not that that connection itself is applying any load or resistance that's significant to create overload for growth, but it's the development of that connection that I then take back with me into the gym at a more effective level that takes every exercise I do there and makes it more effective. - That's like sharpening the blade, so to speak. Yeah, certainly obeys the laws of nerve to muscle physiology. Wanted to just touch on a couple of things. If the goal is to challenge muscles, and one is dividing their body into, let's say, a three or four day a week split or so, or maybe up to six, how do you know when a muscle is ready to be challenged again? Again, I've heard, okay, every 48 hours is protein synthesis increases and then we'll get into this and then it drops off. But frankly, if I train my legs hard, I can get stronger from workout to workout, or at least better in some way, workout to workout, leg workout to leg workout, training them once every five to eight days. If I train them more often, I get worse. So whatever that 48 hour to 72 hour thing is, somehow my legs don't obey that, or maybe something else is wrong with me, but I'm sure there are many things else wrong with me, but how do you assess recovery at the local level, meaning at the level of the muscles, so we'll talk about soreness, and getting better, stronger, more repetitions, et cetera? And then at the systemic level, the level of the nervous system. And I'd love for you to tell us about the tool that, again, I learned from you, which is actually using a physical scale, because it turns out that, will let you tell what the tool is, but that tool is also actively being used for assessing cognitive decline, and cognitive maintenance, and cognitive function in people with Alzheimer's and dementia. - That makes total sense. Makes total sense. So regarding the first part of the question, how would you kind of dictate when a muscle's recovered? So I do think that what you're experiencing is totally real, that different muscles recover at different rates. And I've always been so fascinated by this concept. I've talked about internally with my team, but like, I feel like what we really need the holy grail to training, is going to be when we're able to crack the code on an individual basis, when a muscle is recovered, and that is going to dictate its training schedule. And the fact that you might have a bicep that could be trained via a pulling workout, a regular bicep dedicated workout, forget to split at the moment. You may have a bicep that's able to be trained, that can be trained again the next day. And then the next day, and then maybe you need a day off after that. But like, that can vary from person to person for sure, and it can vary from muscle to muscle in that person over the course of time as you mentioned, 'cause the systemic recovery is going to impact all those muscles anyway, but let's say you're systemically recovering, every muscle itself is going to have a recovery rate. And I think what's fascinating is that, when you talked about before we like to train in this week, or we have, like the way our mind looks at training, well, if that was the case with the biceps, that bicep is a slave to the rest of your training split. Where it's like, well, why does it have to be also at the end of every eighth day or whatever, when it might respond better to something much more frequently? And your legs are also being thrown into that mix. There's a Mike Menzer concept where he's like, train one set and be done for 14 days. I mean, there's such variability between muscle groups and you're linking them all together. I think that coming back and using muscle soreness as a guideline for that, is one of the only tools we have in terms of the local level. You know we don't really have, being able to measure, let's say CPK levels inside of a muscle would be amazing, at a local level to see how recovered that muscle is, but that becomes fairly invasive, at least to my knowledge, it becomes fairly invasive. So what are our tools? I mean, I think that at the basic level, that's the one that most people can relate to and easily identify, and then use that as a guideline. And if you're training when you're really sore, it's probably not a great idea. And it's probably a good indication that that muscle's not recovered, but at least hearing what you and I are saying here might be a comfort to the person to say, yeah, it is possible that it's not recovered. Just because 48 hours is the recommendation. And just because research points to muscle protein synthesis needing a restimulation, well, maybe not, maybe you're not necessarily there yet. For that muscle that you're not there yet. So it's all really interesting stuff, but as far as the systemic recovery, I think there's a lot of ways people talk about resting heart rate measured in the morning, all different kinds of core temperature and things like that that might become altered in a state of non recovery. But grip strength is very much tied to performance and recovery. And when I was at the Mets, we used to actually take grip strength measurements as a baseline in spring training all the time. Now, obviously as a baseball player, you're gripping a bat, you're pitcher, you're gripping a ball like- Having good grip strength is important, so if you've noticed somebody had a very weak grip, it's just a good focal point of a specialized training component for the... - Would you use this every day with those guys? - No, we would do, in spring training, we do sort of a baseline entry level measurement. And then we would measure it throughout the season, maybe once every two weeks or three weeks. And the idea there was to manage the recover, measure the recovery. But I just gave it away, to determine overall recovery, your grip strength is pretty highly correlated. So we have found that with one of those scales, those old fashioned bathroom scales at like the bathroom and beyond, or whatever you can get, which by the way, almost impossible, I believe Jesse and I were searching for the last scale to put in that video. And we almost couldn't find one, 'cause everything is like digital and everything. I'm looking at the old fashioned dial controls. - It's like old Macintosh computers. There's a huge market for them and old phones. Kids keep your phones now. In 30 years, the lame phone now will be worth a lot of money. - It'll be worth a lot. So, I wound up finding one, and it's a great tool for just squeezing the scale with your hands and seeing what type of output you could get. And I think we all can relate to this when you just visualize, imagine the last time you were sick, or that when you, or just try this, the next time you wake up in the morning, when you first wake up in the morning, you're still groggy. Try to squeeze your hand, try to make a fist as hard as you can. You're going to sit there angry at your fist because it won't contract as hard as you know it can. You don't have the ability to just create the output. And that is because in that state, you're still sleepy, you're still fatigued, you're not even awake the whole level at this point. Well, that is still an actual phenomenon that happens that, a lack of recovery, or lack of wakefulness, or whatever you want to say is going to lead to a decreased output there. So when you start to measure that on a daily basis, you can get a pretty good sense of where you're at. And I think when people start to see a drop off of 10% or so, or even greater of their grip output, you really should skip the gym that day. Because I don't think there's much you're going to do there that's going to be that beneficial, even if it is the day to train legs or whatever day it is. - I love this tool, it's simple, it's low cost, if you can find such a scale. I guess you could also find one of those grippers that, and you could do this in a very non quantitative way, but better would be a scale where you could actually measure how hard you can squeeze this thing at a given time of day. It draws to mind, just a little neuroscience factor, in the world of circadian neurobiology, one of the consistent findings is that in the middle of your nighttime, they'll wake people up and they'll say, do this test. In the laboratory they use a different apparatus, but it's essentially the same thing. And in the middle of the night grip strength is very, very low. And mid-morning, grip strength is high, and as the body temperature goes up into the afternoon, grip strength goes higher and higher and higher, and then it drops off. There's this circadian rhythm and grip temperature. So you probably want to do this at more or less the same time each day if you're going to use it. But it I think it's brilliant in its simplicity and it's directness to these upper motor neurons, 'cause that's really what it's assessing your ability. Again, it's about the ability to contract the muscles hard. If you can't do that, you're not going to get an effective workout. - Yeah, and they also, I mean, there certainly are more sophisticated tools too. As PT, we have hand grip dynamometers, we can measure one side at a time too. I'm not really, I'm getting a little bit blinded by the fact that both hands are squeezing into that scale and I don't get really a left right comparison. But even at that level, that could give you a little bit more detail, but that comes with a cost, those are pretty expensive devices. But if it's, listen, if you were an athlete, the $200, $300 it cost to have one of those would be well worth the added investment. - And I'm sure some of our listeners will want one too, 'cause there are a lot of tech geeks out there, not tech industry geeks, but people who like tech gear. What's it called again? - It's a hand grip dynamometer. - Hand grip dynamometer. - Dynamometer. Said by Jeff with a great East Coast accent, and by me in a terrible botched at West Coast version. Thank you, well, I'll put that in the show notes also. Now I think recovery is key, we always hear about sleep. You grow when you sleep and incidentally your brain, you stimulate learning when you're awake obviously, but the reordering of neural connections happens in sleep. This is why sleep is the way to get smarter, provided you're also doing the learning part. The sleep's the way to get stronger provided you're also doing the training part. You've had some really, you've put out interesting content over the years in terms of even sleep position. One of the major changes that I made to my sleep behavior is to not have the sheets tucked in at the end of the bed. And I'll tell you, this had a profound impact on several things. First of all, my feet have always been the bane of my existence, broke them a bunch skateboarding. And I noticed when I'd run, I'd get shin splints. And then I started to notice that my feet sort of, you're the PT, they were kind of floppy, as if I was pointing my toes slightly all the time at rest. And I realized that based on listening to you previously, that my sheets were wrapped tight, not hotel tight. - Right. - What their thing in the hotels. And I started releasing the sheets at the end of the bed, and I also started doing some tibialis work. Front of Shin's work essentially, changed everything. My back pain from running my shin splints disappeared, my posture improved, although my audience will tell me that it still needs improvement. They're always five or 10 people that- I've actually had chairs sent to our mailing address. Very nice chairs, right? So I'm trying there. But this is fascinating, right? The position that one sleeps in, I fortunately have never had any shoulder issues knock on wood, but maybe you could just talk to us a little bit about sleep and sleep position for sake of waking position and movement. 'Cause this, I think is a very unique and very powerful way to think about sleep. This podcast has done a lot of episodes about keeping the room cool, getting sunlight in your eyes, et cetera, how to get into sleep. But you've talked about physically, what positions might be better to sleep in. So please, please enrich us. - I mean, first of all, some people's opinions of that type of content is that, you sleep in the position that's most comfortable so you ensure that you're sleeping. Oh great, I understand that we all want to sleep, that's the goal when we put our head on the pillow, is to actually fall asleep and wake up in the morning and not know what the hell happened, unless you had a dream. But you know beyond that, there are certainly physical components to sleep. That is why a lot of times people will wake up and say like that you can incur pretty serious injuries in sleep. People will wake up and have like a shoulder that did not bother them at all, be humming the next day or even for weeks after, because of the one sleep position they put themselves in, in a prolonged way. And they happened to have a deep sleep, even through the discomfort. That can do actually some damage. So it's understandable that the body can incur some strain and stress if you're sleeping in the wrong way. One of the things I say right off the bat is, sleeping on your stomach just doesn't really have many benefits. You're putting yourself into a position that is, depending upon the orientation of your mattress or how many pillows you're using, but you're basically putting yourselves into excessive extension of the lumbar spine, which for most people, isn't very good, if you're a disc patient, I guess that might be helpful, for relocating the disc. But I mean, for the most part, your hands are then usually not at your sides, but they're up under your arms, so you've got them into sort of internal rotation up over elevation in your head. It's just not a great position. You also have to crank your neck for one side or the other in order to breathe, or you're going to your face down, straight into the pillow. So I would skip that one. And there's some people that are total belly sleepers. And I would just say, listen, I don't think that is the most helpful, long term way for you to sleep. Try to adopt a different position. Sleeping on your side oftentimes is, is also brought along with that, the legs knees coming up towards the chest, prolonged hip flexion. Listen, we're doing enough of that during the day. - What we're doing right now. - We don't need to do another 10 hours or eight hours or something at night like that. And it just is reinforcing, and as we said too, let's say you trained that day, you're just reinforcing muscle shortening overnight. Where the body is healing and trying to create some changes in your body. One of the reasons why I recommend stretching or static stretching prior to going to bed, a lot of people don't really want to do it at that point, 'cause it could take 10 minutes, 5-10 minutes, depending upon how many muscles you have to stretch. But it's good to sort of try to establish just longer length temporarily prior to going into a state where you're going to be not moving and recovering and creating new changes in the muscle. So, that kind of, I don't say it doesn't rule out the side sleeper. The side sleeper could be very, very helpful for somebody that has apnea or other conditions. So again, it's not an all or nothing approach, but it's something that you need to pay attention to. When you are on your back, like you were talking about and your feet are wedged underneath a tight sheets at the end of the bed. And most of us, unless we consciously are pulling them up, don't prefer our beds to have really loose sheets at the end of the bed. - It's hard to make the bed in the morning. - So it's like you you're going to want to have them tight. Well, I'm saying as you experienced, you're going to have these prolonged plant reflection, that's going to likely lead to shorter calves over time because you're lacking all that length for that long period of time that you could have if you just loosened up the sheets and allowed your feet to just hang out where they are. Now, the resting position of the ankle is not endorse reflection, it's going to be still in some plain reflection, but not being driven down and pulled down into that position. And I think what happens actually is people who get uncomfortable that way, even in their sleep will shift away from that by turning either onto their side of their stomach. So there's definitely an impact of the body position and sleep in figuring out the best way that you can still sleep of course, and get your rest, but have a mindful eye towards what it's doing to your body and choose the one that's least abrasive to your body is the way you should go. - That's terrific, and again, it's really helped me and I'm a big believer based on good science out of Stanford and elsewhere that as much as we can be nasal breathers in sleep, we probably should be. I don't know if you've done any content yet about taping the mouth shut with some medical tape, but you know the benefits of nasal breathing in sleep are pretty tremendous, but it takes a little bit of training for people to do, and the training is very simple. It's a little piece of medical tape. So again, a topic for another time. I'm glad you mentioned stretching, I was going to ask about stretching a little bit later, but let's talk about stretching. When's the best time to stretch for particular types of results? And maybe you could define some of the different types of stretching. So you just mentioned a little bit of, what you call it, light stretching or? I'm completely naive here on stretching. So let me just say, I can think of stretching where I hold the stretch and really try and "lengthen" in air quotes folks, I don't want the PTs jumping all over. I don't know what it is, but nutrition and the PTs online are really, they've got pitchforks in both hands. Academics... - That's a recent evolution, I think. And not the nutrition as much, but the PTs have become a little bit angry these days. - I see, well, I always say with feelings of powerlessness comes aggression. Remember that folks. So in any case, they're stretching where I'm trying to consciously "lengthen," again in air quotes, the muscle I'm not yanking on the limb or bobbing up and down. Maybe you could define the different types of stretching for people, maybe give us some rough guidelines about what or not to do if cold or warm, before training, after training, et cetera. - So, yeah, there's obviously there's a lot of different types of stretching that could get even to P and F stretching and things that are a little bit more niche. But in general, the two basic forms of stretching are active stretching and passive stretching, and your dynamic work. And your passive stretching is done with the goal of trying to create an increase in the flexibility of the muscle. So whether you're actually increasing the length of that muscle, more so what you're doing is increasing the- or decreasing the resistance of that muscle to want to stay at a certain level of flexibility. So when we can sort of take the breaks off and allow that muscle to allow us more range of motion, we're inherently increasing flexibility without necessarily having to increase the length of that muscle. That is usually done at a time far away from your workout, because they have shown where this type of stretching done prior to an activity, and it could be like a structured activity like lifting, or it could be a little bit less structured, like competing in a sport in a spontaneous type way, that there is a period of recalibration that is needed after doing this, because you're disrupting the length tension relationship of the muscle that causes you to not necessarily be able to rely on these, I've talked about before, stored motor engrams in your mind in terms of, this is the pattern for how I swing a golf club, say. And now introducing a little bit of flexibility, or added flexibility, or range, because of the stretching I did before, it takes maybe a whole or two or three to match up again. Oh, this is what he's trying to do, that golf swinging thing that I remembered again, like it's not remembering that every component, like I have to bend my right wrist back 10 degrees, and then I have to bend my elbow and I have to break, like your body stores these patterns for motor efficiency. And when I have to start matching up that stored pattern with what's feeling new because of the increased range, I can impair performance. And again, it could happen even in a gym workout where you're talking about your first, second set, third set, where maybe the repercussions aren't as big, 'cause I'll just do a few extra sets. But in performance, if you screw up your first three rounds, you're playing on a PJ tour and you shoot your six over after three, you're done. So I think it matters there. As far as the dynamic, so we relegate that as I mentioned, sort of towards the end of the day when it's not going to impact performance, but even maybe have the additional benefit of creating the feeling of length or the increase or decrease in resistance to this length at a time when I know my body is going to try to tend to heal and heal shorter, never longer, but heal shorter. So if I can introduce a little bit of that extra length or decreased resistance to that length, it's a better time to do it. So I think it promotes a better recovery. If I want to... - Sorry to interrupt, but so stretching later in the day, because I'm intrigued by this concept of heal shorter. So part of the healing and recovery process means the shortening of the muscles. This is the tensing up in sleep. - Yes, yeah. - Could you elaborate just a bit on that and then sorry to break your flow, but then to continue... - No, just basically, what's been shown is that, when the repair process, muscular repair from, let's say strength training during the day, the repair process usually results in a muscle that is slightly shorter rather than increased in length. It's just, muscles prefer to sort of ratchet their way down into that contraction, and then maintain that more comfortable length tension relationship. So when you're sleeping, it tends to air on the side of shorter rather than longer, when ideally we don't really want that. We want to maintain as much of that length because with more length, we actually have more leverage. That muscle has more leverage to contract. If it was all the way contracted, you really can't obviously we know generate much force in a muscle that's already maximally contracted. So I think we want to do something that we, whatever we can, whatever little weapons we have in our arsenal that could allow us to do this prior to sleep. And again, it's just making it a conscious choice to do it at a time of the day that makes a little bit more sense. Dynamic stretching is really not done for that purpose of trying to create any type of feeling of act or increasing the potential length as you said of the muscle, but more so the readiness of the muscle to perform. And increasing exploring the ends of that range of motion in a more dynamic way so you're not hanging out there in disrupting that length tension relationship but just sort of touching the ends of those barriers so that when you feel movement again, it feels looser, it feels more ready. And obviously at the same time warming up blood flow, all the benefits we get from just warming up in general. So like that's the series you've probably seen a bunch of times but like leg swings and butt kicks and lunge, walking lunges and all types of- - Toe touches. - Toe touches, all those kind of drills, those active stretching drills or lunging with rotations for the upper body to try to get some of the thoracic spine involved too. Those are the drills that people will do prior to training that are both excitatory in terms of just the nervous system but also helpful for just the general warm up the body 'cause the blood flow. But from a muscle readiness standpoint not impairing the performance while at the same time exploring the increased ranges 'cause as you know the first toe touch you do is not as high as the last toe touch you do. - For me it doesn't even include the toe. - The shin touch. - The touch attempt. - So like those are going to improve with each subsequent rep and I think that's what people actually, when you can see those, those actual changes from rep one to rep seven, you just feel ready, you feel more alert and ready to go in your workout. So the dynamic type of stretching and I mentioned earlier on what I've had to do to sort of increase my warm up focus. I think that's more of what I try to do these days. I try to be a little bit more alert to the fact that, my body's not ready. When I was working with Antonio Brown I remember like he would spend 20 minutes, 30 minutes on all dynamic work. And I've never seen anybody spend that long on their dynamic work. But like he said, he just didn't feel right and ready to go unless he did a lot of that. And I mean his dynamic stretching routine would be a workout for most everybody. And it's crazy how much he did. - These pro athletes are amazing. And you've had the great fortune of working with and improving their abilities. But I can only imagine 'cause I also imagine he is pretty strong in the gym also. - I mean, it always amazes me the guys that make it to that level no matter what sport they do. They're so gifted in everything. Like David Wright used to make me laugh all the time with the Mets because no matter what I, Ping pong, like anything because of his hand-eye coordination. Like anything great at. Jump rope. I remember he hadn't done a lot of jump rope and I think jump rope's one of the best things you could do from a conditioning standpoint. It's actually fairly interesting, it's not just, it's not too harsh on the joints even though it's a ballistic move and he wasn't- I have to admit, if he listens to this, he's going to want to kill me, but I was better at him at jump roping. One of the only things I could do. And then I gave him about five days and he completely blew me out of the water to the point where I could never keep up with him anymore. He made it look effortless. It's like that's where the athlete in someone comes out. No matter what they pick up, they're good at it. And I think that when you see guys like this in the gym like their strength levels tend to be pretty damn good and their abilities, their coordination, their everything just tends to sort of be good at that level. And it sort of amazes me. Why those guys can go pick up a golf club and go shoot 72 and having never really played. They're just naturally good at whatever they do. - Yeah, I have a couple, I'm smiling 'cause I have a couple really close friends who did a number of years some several decades in the SEAL teams. And I don't know that their skill level at everything is so high as you're describing for athletes but their level of competitiveness is beyond. I ocean swam with one, there's no chance that I'm going to right out swim Pat ever, ever. He actually goes back and forth sometimes just to check up on me, which I appreciate. Thank you Pat. I haven't drowned yet. But in addition to that, we could play horseshoes and it's like this switch that just flips on, like he's going to murder me. Of course he's a very nice guy, right? In general, they tend to be very nice. But the level of competitiveness is kind of unreal. They're selected for it. - They're trying to beat themselves they're not even trying to beat you. - That's right, I'm not even in the competition. - You're not even there. - Yeah, exactly. Thank you. Now I won't feel so bad or worse. It's true, it's a remarkable thing. I'm glad you mentioned jump roping. I used to skip rope for warmup for boxing, like three minute rounds or something like that. But I'm glad you brought it up because skipping rope is something that obviously has a cardiovascular component, there's the conditioning component, there's timing and it is kind of interesting, right? It's frustrating when you don't get it especially when it whips you on the air if you're using a proper rope. I'm just curious if you could just give us a quick skipping rope 101. Do you like to see people jumping with both feet and toes? We'll link to a video if there was one and I missed it. Do you like to see people doing high knees? Do you like people basically like shuffling? You want to see people doing double Dutch? What do you want to see people doing over time? - All of the above maybe not the double Dutch, but all of the above. I mean, I think that's the cool thing about it, right? Like once we sort of master the skill 'cause for all of us, that first jump with the two feet going together is a challenge. 'Cause you just got to time that rope, you got to time your jump and then we get bored as we often do as humans, we get bored with what we can do and we want to take on new challenges so then it becomes one leg at a time or then it becomes side to side hops, right? All of those things are beneficial I believe neurologically to enhancing the ability to do the skill as a whole but also just because I'm such a believer in training in all three planes. So like just doing straight up and down versus now I can do frontal plane side to side motion and then I can even do small little twists or core screws you call them. It requires a different, you would know more better than I do that it requires different neurological patterns to be able to coordinate that because you're changing the orientation of your body in space. So it's not just them changing the exercise but I'm changing how my body interprets that exercise because what's happening to my body in space. So I love whatever people wind up doing, but I am amazed there are people, I just started following this young woman on Instagram who is like, I'll give her a plug out, I think it's like @anna.skips or something and she is ridiculous. Like I watch her and I'm like mesmerized at what she can do with the rope. It's like is an extremely athletic endeavor believe when it gets to be at that level and the speed and the precision and the- I think one of the goals that you want to be able to have is to where you're feeling as if you're almost effortlessly dancing without a rope. Like where you're just bouncing off of the ball of your foot. And it's an important skill to learn too whether you go back to run or even even jog, right? Just like more casual running, learning how to land is so important. One of the drills that people should try is like, try to jump on your heels. So just stand up, pull your toes off the ground, right? And just jump from your heels and land on your heels. You'll feel it in your jaw. You'll literally feel your jaw rattle when you land on your heels. There is no shock absorption capabilities through your heels. Meantime, a lot of people land on their heels a lot when they run and you're just, your body's not built to absorb the forces like the ball of your foot could. It's really built as a spring. And the foot is a, to me as a physical therapist, the foot has always been one of the most amazing, you talk about having bad feet I have flat feet it looks like I got flippers if I took my shoes off. Like I'm wearing scuba fins. There is no- There is no adaptability of that foot to the surface. When it's completely caved and flattened like that, the job of the foot is to be a adaptable. Well, maybe there is some adaptability because it's so floppy, but at the same time at some point that critical junction when you're going to then step through and you need to be able to push off the foot has to actually changes in the midfoot itself to become a rigid lever is what they call it. You're going from a mobile adapter to a rigid lever. That rigid lever literally locks up the metatarsal joint to become solid so that you can push off of it with leverage. If you lack that capability, all those stresses that are supposed to be born by the foot, go up into the ankle, into the knee, into the hip, into the low back. So learning how to land and start to train your body to experience ground reaction forces the right way is so critical to all other function and all other disability of the kinetic chain and jumping rope is like one of the best ways to learn how to do that. - Great. I own a jump rope I love doing it in the morning while I get sunlight in my eyes. It's actually a protocol I picked up from Tim Ferris who mentioned 'cause listeners in my podcast know I'm like a broken record with get sunlight in your eyes even through cloud cover it's just sets your sleep rhythms and your waking rhythms of yada yada on and on. But sometimes it'd be kind of boring for people and I want to get them off their phone. So jumping rope is also just a great way to wake up. So jumping rope can be the cardio workout, the 15, 30 minutes. - Definitely. And there's sort of that hybrid that we were talking about before of like, you're not necessarily dropping down to the ground and doing burpees, but I just look at it as a more athletic endeavor because of the coordination involved than just simply walking or jogging. - Yeah, and it's not much of equipment requirement. Very minimal cost. You could even use a rope or something if you... - We even instruct people they could use no rope and just pretend and just move the arms, right? - Truly zero cost. - You're never going to hit the rope which is good but at the same time, So you're never going to know if you're doing it wrong, but at least you can move through that and get the same benefits through the feet. - I love it, I love it. I told myself before sitting down with you today that I wasn't going to focus on specific exercises because there's such a wealth of incredible content that you put out there that people could just put into YouTube or elsewhere and arrive at the proper way to do a chin or a dip, for whatever purpose. But there's one exercise and one particular motion that I'd like to discuss for a moment because I believe that learning about this cautionary note from you is one of the reasons that I've maintained steady training for 30 years with no major injury knock on wood and that's the upright row. One thing that whether you weight train or not. - Do we censor this podcast? I mean censoring, do we beep this out or not? - I do. Do you get beef about this? - No. You know what, we always get beef in any social media platform where we're put out. But like, no, I guess some, I get some from it, but I'm fully prepared to defend myself. - But here's the reason for asking about this. I never really cared much for upright rows it's not an exercise I tend to do. But one thing that's apparent in all my colleagues, in every child I see, in every adult I see is that almost everybody is in inward rotation now. So folks think if you stay, I think I learned this from you also, if you stand up straight and then you just point your thumbs out, like a thumbs up but your hands are down you're pointing your thumbs straight out, ideally they would go straight out. Most people the thumbs are going to be pointing toward one another because most people are starting to look somewhere between a non human primate and a melted candle. Bent at the hips, et cetera, from too much sitting, we're all sitting, we're in an inward rotation, but I learned from you that the upright row compromises some important aspects of our shoulder mechanics and could be actually sort of a dangerous movement in some ways. I'm sure there's a safe way for people to do it. But so I've always made it a point now on the basis of this advice to A, not do upright rows, but I wasn't doing them before but to really strive for external rotation on things like bench dips, on a number of different things. Whenever I can I try and go into external rotation provided that without looking like an idiot walking around with my palms facing outward. Please tell us about internal external rotation. The upright row is one aspect of that, but why this is so important not just for weight training, but as in terms of posture and mechanics and not looking like a melted candle or partially melted candle. - I actually love it. I'm happy to talk about it cause I love the shoulder as a joint. I think PTs tend to fall in love with certain areas and the shoulder is one of the cool areas for me, it's like the foot is but like, the shoulder has the most mobility in the body of any joint, but it's also got the least stability, right? There's always that trade off of mobility and stability. So your stability comes from certain muscle groups and 101 is that the only muscle group that actually externally rotates the shoulder is going to be the rotator cuff, okay. And unless you are devoted to training through external rotation and exercises that are going to externally rotate the shoulder, you're not training that function. And it's so easy for us in everyday life especially those that aren't training to not ever really undergo any of those stresses that could be beneficial to counteracting what happens freely and naturally, which is internal rotation. So when you think about the imbalance created just by nature and how we live our lives, internal rotation far, far, far outweighs external rotation. So you need to address it. And the reason why you need to address it is because you need to normalize those biomechanics to the shoulder if you want their long term health. And one of the functions of the shoulder is to raise our arm up over our head. And if we do that from an internally rotated position, we're going to have a higher likelihood of creating stress inside that joint. Funny thing is I talked about before my PT brethren who can be somewhat angry these days, I don't know what happened, but fairly angry. They want to discredit the existence of something like shoulder impingement, which I don't know how, I mean, certain studies, look, we both all read studies and studies will say one thing one day and potentially conflict entirely in a different direction. Some studies will point to the non-existence of a shoulder impingement. Meanwhile, we have thankfully digital motion x-rays that will literally show the impingement occur in real time, in real function. And that's one of the limitations I'm off on a tangent here, but like those types of x-rays or that type of fluoroscopy that we have nowadays, like gives us such insight that we never had before 'cause we're taking static x-rays of someone laying down on a table. Well, I want to see what happens when you actually raise my arm up over my head in function and the tools now exist to do that. We see the problems occurring because in order to get normal mechanics and free up the joint maximally inside you need to externally rotate as you raise the arm up. So if your muscles aren't firing and they're not necessarily as strong as the internal rotation bias that pulls them in, you're asking for trouble every time you do that. Well, this exercise is literally putting you in elevation and internal rotation. And if you were to walk into a PT office and someone said, "I think he's got impingement, will you diagnose him?" There's a test called a Hawkins Kennedy Test. And I would put you in the position I know we're not visible at this point through the podcast, but I'll put you in this position here where I have your arm elevated and your hand pretty much under your chin pushing downward on that to create that internal shoulder rotation. Pretty much the exact position that we're in when we're holding a bar in an upright row. Some will say, well, just don't go so high going up to the level of the chest, but you're still in this internally rotated position. The thing that I think frustrates me the most about the exercise is that I have an alternative and the alternative does the same thing in terms of helping the muscles grow by simply fixing the biomechanics of the exercise by just allowing the hands to go higher than the elbows. So instead of the elbows being higher than the hand which drives you into internal rotation, if the elbow is lower than the hand, the hand being higher here, I'm in external rotation. And I could do something called a high pull and still get the same abduction of the arm and still get the same benefits of the shoulders, the delts and the traps without having to undergo any of the stresses that would come from the somewhat awkward movement of an upright row. - And for those listening, we'll put a link to a short clip of what this looks like. But basically what Jeff is doing and tell me if I'm describing this incorrectly or correctly. Jeff is taking your two thumbs and pointing behind you, so elbows up kind of near the chin and pointing behind you like, oh, headed that way. Like somebody directing the airplane, like come back, come back and back. I forget what they call that. I think it's called semaphorin, is the action of like where they direct the planes or something the flags or whatever. Someone will, of course tell me I'm wrong about that too, which is why I say these things because I like being told what the correct answer is. In any case, so this replaces the upright row and probably does a number of other important things as well. - Well, again, listen, without naming names or programs or anything like that. When I got involved in, when I got involved in Athlean-X, when I first my online presence, there was a very, very, very popular program that was out there that I just for fun I wanted a as a PT, is the nerdy things we do, but I wanted to evaluate the workout structure. And I went and I looked at every rep over the course of a week. And there was something like 890 repetitions or something done and zero of them were dedicated external rotation in the shoulder. So if you think about it, I mean, again, it was a very popular program that was done by a lot of people. There was no focus at all, no dedicated focus towards creating a balance to an action that is so predominant. And remember, it's not just because we sit with bad posture, but the fact that our chest can internally rotate, our latch can internally rotate, there's like muscle, other big muscles that participate in things that we do every day that will further internally rotate the shoulder. The only weapons we have for external rotation are those little rotator cuff muscles and three of them actually three of the four. And the job is to sort of actively and consciously train them through really the boring exercises, right? Like you've seen them with the band, you anchor a band to a pole, you stand with the band in the opposite hand. So if it's anchored to the pole on my left side I've got the band on my right side and you see people where they kind of rotate their hand towards the back. Again, kind of what you were saying but at a lower elevation taking the back of my hand and trying to point it to somebody behind me. Well, that is one of the ways to train the muscle. It's just a one function of the shoulder, external rotation of the shoulder and you need to do it. And again, it's not that if somebody was doing more external rotation work could they absorb the upright row better? Probably, because as they elevated the arm, they probably have a little bit more of a contribution from the rotator cuff to what one of the functions is to centralize the head of the humorous inside of the glenoid, the capsule. So as it rises up, it stays central as opposed to migrating up because the deltoid likes to pull up. So if the rotator cuff has some ability to counteract the upward pull of a del then it can maintain a more healthy relationship with overhead movement. So just realizing that that function is only gained through doing these exercises, we would probably dedicate more time there, the upright row might be better absorbed by that person 'cause they have a little bit more strength. But again, why? Because if you have an exercise that does the same thing for what you're trying to do muscularly, to build the muscles that it affects, why wouldn't you just do it where you can still see actually pick up more repetitions of external rotation? So you're getting none of the harm all of the benefits. I see zero reason to ever do the upright row and people will argue, this is the way they argue that, I've done this for 30 years and I've never hurt myself. And I always say yet, yet. Like, listen, the goal is to not hurt yourself ever. So even if you, it's sort of like the championship game. You might play the game of your life, but if you lose you lost. And when you get into the end of the record books, you still lost. So even if you had the game in your life you lost, I don't care if you do it for 30 years, no pain, you're still doing it and there's no pain I'm giving you an option that's going to give you the same results in the exercise that you're seeking. That's why you're doing the exercise without the possibility of having the the bad outcome come from it. So I get a little bit defensive of the move, but I feel like it's like, why would you do that? - No, it makes me say, being able to train for a long period of time and feel good. I'm proud to say and I don't have the kind of genetics where like we don't have a lot of impressive athletes in our family tree or anything. It's some fit individuals some less fit individuals, but I really believe it's about putting in the work consistently over time. And the more often you can wake up not in pain the better. And so I think that being in external rotation as often as possible is good. This is actually a good friend who's a yoga teacher told me this is also a problem with the yogis, all the downward dog stuff. For those listening, you can think of inward rotation as like thumbs down. Just think thumbs down and rotation isn't bad but less thumbs down more thumbs up is external rotation. So for those just listening, maybe that gives a visual. The more exercise you can do in external rotation the better it seems on average. I'd love to chat with you just a little bit more about biomechanics, and this is a personal thing that again, your content really helped solve for me. One is I thought I had lower back pain, that I had sciatica so badly that on a few trips Work trips years ago when I was doing a lot more international travel. I mean, it was hard to stand up sometimes. I mean like excruciating pain. I didn't want to take medication, I didn't want to do back surgery. In the end, turns out it wasn't a back injury at all. And one of the things that helped fix it was this just learning about this thing called the medial glute. And you had a video that said fixed back pain and then you quite accurately say that some back pain isn't really about the back at all. And had me do an exercise or allowed me to try an exercise where I lay on my side and essentially pointing my toe down the top toe down, almost like pointing a toe down and then would slowly lift the leg up while pointing the toe down. Maybe I got it... - No, you got it good. - And then holding that, and there's a muscle that sort of sits at the top of the glute it kind of peaks out every once in a while. You can feel it there with your thumb, which is I think you had push back on it. A bit creating that mind muscle link again and there with proprioception, the actual feeling of a muscle literally with a limb, we know based on the neural circuits for movement, that that enhances the contractibility of a muscle. So like if you touch your bicep, you literally can contract it more more strongly. And this makes total sense based on neuromuscular physiology. So had me do that repeatedly. And I started doing that in my hotel room and the pain started to disappear. And then it came back again the afternoon so I did it again in the afternoon. So this is something I did for three or four days and lo and behold a back pain's gone. I handed this off to my father because he like me has a slightly lower right shoulder. I think that our gate is probably thrown off by this. It's probably a genetic thing, who knows. He handed off to somebody. It turns out that we don't suffer from back pain and in fact, now I don't suffer from any pain because I was doing this exercise which I think is helping my medial glute. Two reasons why I raised this. One, I know a lot of guys who have this right side sciatica 'cause people keep the wallet there is one idea or left side sciatica. There are a lot of people male and female who think they have back pain when they don't actually have back pain. And the other thing is that is a general question about biomechanics or statement about biomechanics. I had of a feeling that a lot of what people think is back pain or knee pain or neck pain or headache or shoulder pain is actually the consequence of something that's happening above or below that site of pain. And this is a whole landscape of stuff related to PT and recovery and pain management. But maybe if you could just educate us a bit on this and why this works, what is the medial glute? Why did it make my so-called back pain disappear? And how should people think about pain? And I'd like to use this as a segue to get into a little bit deeper discussion about pain and recovery. - Sure. So this is definitely like a big cornucopia PT stuff here, but like and this is what I love. So first of all, that video, it's my proudest video that I have. And the reason being is that it's helped so many people. Like we get comments on that video every day. I don't even know how many views it's got now, 30 some what million. - We will link to it. - There's a lot of views. And quite honestly, it was a little bit of an afterthought video in terms of it's origin. I think that that day maybe Jesse was having some problems or something like that, a little bit of low back pain and I showed him and it helped right away and he was like, well, we can make a video on it 'cause this will help people. Not everybody, if you have a real disc problem, it's not going to help because you're not changing the structural problem that's there. But as you said, a lot of people don't and even disc issues a lot of them are non-operative. So you'd want to try these things first. As far as what you're sort of experienced sometimes as that glute medias really tightens down and that's again, from poor biomechanics up and down the kinetic chain, it can actually press on the sciatic nerve and give you what they call a pseudo sciatica. Where it's not like you're making it up, it's not like you're not feeling that pain over that same sciatic distribution, but it's not caused from a disc, it's not caused from something mechanical there, it's caused by the fact that this gluteus has posturely become a problem for you or weak because you don't train it and you need to address it. So, unlike any other muscle in the body, there are common trigger points in common areas where the muscle will become tightened or painful or spasmed and you can basically apply pressure to these areas and then sort of thread that muscle through the pressure by pushing down through there and then contracting the muscle which is why you go through that action of, I think we call it toast stabber, but like stabbing down and lifting up and stabbing down and lifting up. Taking that glute medias through its function. So it's basically kind of working underneath the downward pressure of the finger and that tends to help you to almost need out what might be that trigger point. And that's why people can see immediate relief there because once the trigger point lets go, it feels like, and that's what the comments are in that video. Like my God, I literally, I couldn't walk, I've been on my hotel floor, I did this and I'm fixed. And meanwhile then it could come back because your body is like, well, I like being more like this. This is how I've been ingrained to be. So it might come back but then when you do another round of it and another round of it and then finally it starts to say, all right, I'm not going to do that anymore. It kind of eases up and you can relieve yourself of those trigger points. You could do that up and down the back. There's other people that get that and that sort of inside their shoulder blade, that same type of cramping in another area. But once that takes place, well, then the job that I think people have is like become educated that the glute medias is different than the glute maximus. Like their functions are different. You have to work on not just extending the hip but also abduction of the hip. External rotation of the hip, same thing as in the shoulder. And this actually segues nicely into what, into the whole concept you were talking about. Like the body is like a mirror image. The hip is like the shoulder, right? The ankle is the wrist. The foot is the hand. The knee is the elbow, they're two hinge joints, they function that way. Well, with the shoulder, you've got that mobility that comes from having all that freedom of motion but the stability is lacking. Well, the same thing with the hip, like you've got mobility, but if you don't fully stabilize it by training all the muscles of the hip and if you don't strengthen the external rotation of the hip, then you're going to have issues. Like it's not biomechanically going to work the same way. If you think of the body as a series of bands pulling in different directions at different levels of tension, you're being pulled into one direction or the other just by the balance of tension from one weak area to one dominantly tight area. And you need to make sure that you can sort of balance this out in order to eliminate some of the adaptations and compensations that happen. So what I say, when we look at sort of the body as a whole, most often wherever you're feeling the pain is absolutely not to blame. There's not to blame. It is somewhere above or below as you hint to that. You're talking about, the knee is my favorite example of it. Whenever you have knee pain, patella tendonitis which I have forever. I've had bad, bad cases of tendonitis where squatting is very difficult for me. It's not the knee, the knee is literally a hinge joint that there's minor rotation capabilities in the knee but it's a hinge joint. And it's being impacted by the hip and the ankle and the foot, as I said before, how critical the foot is. If you thought of the knee being like the middle of a train track, where the femur down your thigh and your shin down below your knee, where the train track, well, what would happen if the foot collapses at the bottom? All of a sudden that train track on the bottom gets torqued just a little bit. Well, who's going to feel that the most, the area where it's torquing, which is at the knee. So the stresses are going to be felt there meanwhile the problem is the foot or the problem is the ankle. People that are chronic ankle sprainers are almost always going to wind up having back pain because the ankle sprain causes weakness in mal adaptations in the ankle that then gets connected through the chain. Because now once I distort the ankle and the shin, now the knee is trying to maintain its ability to hinge smoothly. So it toques on the femur to do that. Well, the femur is now inside the hip joint pulling on the pelvis and the pelvis is out of whack. It's really is fascinating. Like it's one of my favorite things about how the body works is like how interconnected it is and how one little thing somewhere causes repercussion somewhere else. And the easiest way to find out what your problem is, is to say, okay, I know where my symptom is, but I got to find someone who can help me find the source somewhere else, because it is going to be usually either above or below. Mostly, usually below 'cause it usually translates up the kinetic chain. But usually it's going to be below where the real source is. So people with low back pain usually have hip issues weaknesses, tightnesses, flexibility issues, it's almost always below. When you get into really high performance athletics though, it almost works the other way. Like where we have pitchers, who can't, I'm always fascinated by guys that have Tommy John issues in their elbow, right? Pitchers. Like if you can't externally rotate the shoulder that we talked about, again, the ability to get your shoulder back into external rotation. Well, your arm has to get to a certain position for release of the baseball. And if it can't get there, if you can't externally rotate the shoulder to get there then the elbow has to sort of torque more in order to allow the arm to get back further. And it will try to take some of that motion from a joint that's not really, again, it is the hinge joint, really capable of doing that. So it starts to stress that media level ligament to get a little bit further back because the shoulder's not working and that just ultimately places strain on the elbow. So when you see a guy that has pain that floats around, a pitcher that floats around their arm, all that is is sort of this balance of compensation. Once his elbow starts hurting, then he can't get the range from the elbow, so he tries to dig a little bit further back into external rotation and then the rotator cuff gets inflamed and then he feels that's inflamed, and by the way, during that time period, it takes some of the strain off the elbow so the elbow feels better. Then he decides, okay, now I got the extra rotation, but I'm getting too much of that so now he starts straining the elbow again and then keeps going through this cycle. So your body is very smart and it's going to compensate every single time. It's going to find the compensation but there's no guarantee that that compensation doesn't leave you with a whole host of other issues. - Yeah, it's fascinating. In another lifetime, I would've gone and been a PT although it sounds like the community among PTs online... - I don't know what they, listen, we're good people but it's like... - Yeah, scientists and neuroscientists can get into pretty intense battles. Coming from the academic community, the etiquette is so different online because I would say, I think in person people would probably behave a bit differently. - They shake your hand and say, hello. - Yeah, they shake your hand and say, hello. And there's also, look, I'll just be very direct about this. There are a lot of people online for whom their only content is pointing out the misunderstandings or alleged flaws of other people. It's like the bulk of their identity. Which to me is sort of a sad existence but there's always more to gain by thinking about what's possible, and what's new and what's good. But teach their own demise or win. - I mean questioning what's out there is healthy, it's normal, is great, it actually sparks conversation. But as you said, some people's existence is solely to find things to nag about and not actually with the goal being to advance anything, but rather just to. - Yeah, in the world of science being skeptical but not cynical is encouraged. But I always say that the longer that somebody's in a career path that's certainly in science or medicine and they realize how hard it is to do various studies. Once they publish a few studies, generally they sort of get a better understanding of how the various things are done. In any case, along the lines of pain and pain relief and misunderstandings about the origins of pain in the body, one of the great tools that I picked up from your content which is benefit I know a huge number of people is I think I used to hold weights sometimes in the tips of my fingers as opposed to in the meat or the palm of my hands. And I had elbow pain. And I always thought that, I felt it most on tricep exercises and pushing exercise and I thought I was doing those exercises wrong. Turns out toward the end of my pull ups or my bicep work, I was letting the weight or the bar drift into my fingertips. And the mere shift to making sure that my knuckles were well over the bar or that the weight was really in the meat of my palms has completely ameliorated that for reasons that you point out and maybe you could just share with us why that is you have this kind of finger pull exercise. Usually when someone says, pull my finger, it's like a bad middle school or elementary school joke... - Yeah, we would say push your finger. - [Andrew] Right, right. - You know this is fascinating. This is because it just shows again how intricate the body is and how responsive or over responsive it can be to something so little. And what you're talking about is that when you grip a bar whether it be through a curl or whether it be through- And this is mostly pulling exercises because the tendency for the bar is going to be to fall out of your hand not like with a pushing exercise where it's kind of you're pushing your hand into the bar. So on a bench press say. That bar can drift just by gravity doing its thing or fatigue of the hand grip strength. Can start to drift further away towards the distal digits. Through those last couple knuckles that we have on our hands. And though our hand can still hold it there, the muscles are not equipped to handle those types of loads. And that can start at a very, I'm not going to say light, but like it could start at dumbbell weight. 40 pounds, 30 pounds, even 25 pounds or something depending upon their overall strength levels. But then when you start to apply it to something like your body weight with a chin up, right? 'Cause that's natural for the bar to somewhat kind of float down towards your fingertips. And it actually is a little bit easier to perform the exercise with that sort of like false script little hook grip at the end because you're not going to engage the forearms into the exercise, you're not going to start pulling down. But at the same time while it could help you to perform them better by getting the back more activated, if you have weakness in these muscles. 'Cause it's not a thing that happens to every, it's not one of those upright road type things where I think this is happening to everybody. This is happening to people that have these inherent weaknesses in these muscles. You or haven't done enough of the gripping in the meat of the hand for long enough but it starts to put that stress on these muscles that are ill-equipped to do this and to handle this and it starts to it's particularly on that fourth finger, which is part of the muscle we call the FDS, a flexor digitorum that is just too much for it to handle. And that comes all the way down and meets right at the media level. Right on that spot that you can say feels like someone's knifing you right in the middle in that medial level. And medial epicondylitis or they call it golfers elbow is something that a lot of us deal with in the gym. It's one of the most common inflammatory conditions people get from the gym and it all comes from this positioning of the dumbbell or barbell or hand on a pull-up bar over time. So the easiest thing to do is just grip deeper so that what you're doing is you're using more leverage from the palm to encapsulate the bar or the dumbbell or whatever and you're not putting that pressure really distally right on that last digit because that's where that FDS muscle is most strained. So you just almost eliminating that from the equation. And it's one of those exercises that the load can exceed its capacity pretty quickly. So that like, maybe it's only capable of handling 30 pounds and then when you're doing a chin up and it goes and it drifts so far that it's now you say you're a 200 pound guy you've got let's say 100 pounds through one arm and 100 pounds, this is simplified math that obviously is offset by other muscles, but 100 pounds to one arm 100 pounds to the arm, 100 pounds off of a muscle that can handle 30 is not going to take many repetitions to strain it and you're going to feel that maybe by the time that a set's over or certainly by the time that workout's over or the next day you wake up and you've got that notable stabbing pain. Whenever someone feels that the best thing would be to determine, okay, what exercises would I do that were pulling and where the bar could have drifted deeper or further from the meat of my palm into my fingers and figure out a way to deepen that grip. When that happens though, the best thing to do with most of these inflammatory conditions is not do any of that stuff for a little while. Not ever, just for a little while. There's always things that you can do around it. I'm not saying ever do I say, like, don't go to the gym or don't find something you can do, but I'm saying that particular exercise that you feel the pain on while you're doing it, never a smart idea to do that exercise when it's inflamed. If you are doing exercise and it hurts, you probably shouldn't do the exercise because another reason for the variability of exercise is there's so many other options that you can do that will train similar muscles or even the same motion and not cause that stress. So, I mean, a cable curl would be much easier to do that on than let's say a chin up where you don't have the control over the weight like you do by moving a pin on a stack. So I think that is a common thing that people find and the best thing to do is just figure out how deep you gripping in that bar. You're going to find that, oh my God, I didn't realize that because it was just. Even though you might start a set in a good position and then it drifts away as you go. - I think that's what was happening to me and I'm very conscious of this now. Again, for me, I haven't had this elbow pain at all. - [Jeff] That's great. - Very fortunate. So again, a debt of gratitude to your never- I thought there was some wrong in my elbow, basically. And I thought maybe it was tennis elbow I don't even play tennis. There you go. Other aspects of recovery and variables for recovery. I think you and I both put out content about the use of cold and I think we can summarize it by saying, yeah, it does seem like cold water immersion immediately after hypertrophy restrains workouts might be a problem, but a cold shower is probably not a problem. What about heat? Do you personally use heat and cold saunas, hot baths, hot compresses. And by you, I mean you personally and athletes that you coach or people that you coach, what are your thoughts on the use of heat and or cold? - Well, I think it might just be an inherited practice from the days of trainers of since babe Ruth. But we in baseball we used a lot of cold following performance. Just because the idea would be there is some especially pitchers, there is some inflammation that is abnormal. The arm is not really designed to do what they do especially at the speed that they move it and everything else. So we would use ice as a pretty standard practice after that. But not a lot of heat and use a lot of heat and of course from the recovery or the healing aspect that actually becomes rather personal preference they've found now after let's say the first 12 to 24 hours where you're really trying to control inflammation of what might be an injury. But then it can kind of shift the personal preference because the heat can bring blood to the area also and then the cold has its sort of antiinflammatory effects. So like there's a balance between which one's working better for you. So there's really no standard anymore for heat or cold in that way. But from a standpoint of like post-workout healthy status, I haven't used much heat or cold in terms of what we do. We cover the topic of the cold showers and to try to dispel the myth of the, even people saying that there's giant testosterone releases and you know all kinds of stuff that. Listen, we hear all kinds of things 'cause people want- I think the idea of just turning the water cold and being in it for 30 seconds and then all of a sudden magically growing three times your size is intriguing for a lot of people and that's why they ask these questions 'cause they're like, well, that would be a hell of a lot easier than going to the gym and training hard. But like, I'm always fascinated by some of the stuff that you talked about. In fact, we started to talk about some of the stuff in terms of cooling and what it can do on performance and that was like there's some untapped territory there that I think you're finding out about. - Yeah, what would be fun would be to bring the CoolMitt technology from Stanford. This is Craig Heller, my colleague Craig Heller's lab at Stanford's done really important and amazing work in this area but then it moved on to some other things. He's also working on down syndrome and he works on a number of other really important topics that scientists often do. But I have access to this CoolMitt technology, no relationship to the company, by the way, would love to come out to your facility and we can do the blind type studies. - Like the blue blocker test. - Yeah, exactly, exactly. And see how that goes in with somebody as advanced trained as you that's probably the best thing to do. So content for the future. Yeah, I think heat and cold are kind of staples in the PT world and it does seem like people use them slightly differently but they are kind of the macro nutrients of recovery there along with sleep. I do have a question about precision of record keeping. Do you keep a training journal? Do you recommend people keep training journals? Are you neurotically fixed to cadence of movement and are you looking at the, do you have a buzzer going off when it's 90 seconds rest. Is it 90 seconds rest? I confess I have my slow workouts and my faster workouts. And they scale with whether or not I'm training heavier with longer rest. Or whether or not maybe midway through a workout, I'll shift over to doing higher repetition, lower rest. This is kind of my crude way of keeping time. But I'm not- Will be just to kind of watch the clock. But I'm not neurotically fixed to the buzzer nor am I on social media during my workouts. Which is actually a way to really improve workouts is to just not be on social media. - I can't claim that I'm not guilty of that. Sometimes I am on social media but sometimes I'm trying to post something. - Well, that's different, it's your profession. It's your profession. - But I mean, I'm not necessarily chained to some sort of protocol in terms of how I do. I think by this point I've been doing this a long time and not only is it something that I've done for a long time, but it's a passion of mine, it's something I really enjoy. So I probably inherently have the ability to stick to these guidelines in terms of rest time to know what I lifted. Even six months ago on a lift and how it felt without journaling it. But I recognize the value it has to a lot of people, it goes back to that whole my muscle connection idea that we talked about in the beginning. Like there's a lack of awareness for all aspects of training. And especially maybe it isn't like your interest level. We're talking you and I from a position of interest. Like this is what we do. We enjoy just how our bodies work and understanding how they work. Some people don't care, they just want the end result. But journaling and keeping track of that raises awareness to where like, oh my God, I have been on Instagram for the last seven minutes and I was supposed to be back at my next set in 90 seconds. Like there is a training effect of that. Like if you're training for a metabolic overload, you've blown that opportunity because you haven't, your rest time very important to that protocol, working as it should. If you were training for strength, maybe the extra few minutes doesn't matter so much when you get back under the bar you might find, you might find that it's a better response for your body to rest even longer than you've been told three, four minutes, five minutes. And so that way maybe it helps, but I think that anything you can do to increase your awareness of your performance and also give yourself some objective goal. Whenever we have an objective goal, it's a lot easier to actually obtain it. When you're just there to get a pump and you're just there to lift how you feel that day, you have to be incredibly disciplined in all other aspects of your workout in order to make that effective. And I've done that too. I've actually been able to do that too, but again, the level of repetitions I've accumulated over the course of my life in the amount that I read about this stuff. I think I'm able to get away with that, but I think more often than not what I'm doing is not journaling but journaling in my head exactly what I think people should be doing and that is getting a specific effect from what you're trying to do. It's not so haphazard. You want to get a specific effect just like any other experiment that you're doing. If you're doing an experiment on your own body with your own weight, which to me is one of the most empowering things someone can ever do. When they get bitten by the bug for exercising and in training and I like to use the word training rather than exercise 'cause there's a purpose behind it. But when they get bitten by that training bug and they start to see actual changes and results, you know how empowering that is 'cause we can't change, we can't really control that many things in our life, unfortunately. And if there's some things that happen to us that we really wish never happened. And those are not something that we can do anything about, but this is one thing that we can do our best to. We can't avoid disease entirely, we can't predict when we're going to die, we can't do those things, but we can certainly decide to show up into the gym that day and get a workout in or go for a run or do something and in by doing that, you're giving yourself I think, a better chance at a higher quality of life. So anything you could do to increase your awareness of it and keep you on track with that is like I'm endorsing fully. - Couldn't agree more, I could not agree more. There is a topic it's sort of a dreaded topic, but I think it's an important one and that's the topic of nutrition. And rather they get into specific meal programs, which would take take hours and probably wouldn't even manage to scratch the surface even with hours. We could talk about principles around nutrition. What are sort of the themes that you think people should keep in mind when thinking about how to eat generally and pre-training and post-training are two particularly sensitive times for most, or at times that people want to know a lot about. What should they eat before training or can they train fasted? What should they eat afterwards? But just in general, what do you think are some axioms of nutrition that really hold. And I ask this 'cause, not because there's a lot of debate about this, but because you've been around this space a long time and you've seen what works for you obviously but for other people too. What tends to work? What tends not to work? And how should we think about nutrition? - I mean, look, you've touched on it a bit but like, nutrition can be a touchy subject for people. And I understand where that comes from. I've talked about before that there's a dogmatic tendency to nutrition, and there's a reason for it because it's an area that people struggle with more than anything else. And the reason why people struggle with nutrition is because the commitment is extremely high. You could start a workout program and actually get to the gym three to five times a week. That's five hours based on how you and I were discussing it before. Well, what about the other 23 hours of each of those days. There's opportunity to eat incorrectly or unhealthily every one of those hours. People wake up in the middle of the night to go eat. Like there are things that you can do that can cause amazing amounts of damage to your longevity in the 23 hours not the 1 hour, the 23 hours. So when people finally figure out a way to make that work for them, it's very passionate and I understand their passion. I do like I've put out, so my approach, my approach is like, I've always been sort of a low sugar, lower fat guy. I've made the mistake of going no fat years ago and I paid for it. I was like in college and back in the day we were the same age. We read all the magazines and that was what we had. We didn't have an internet then. So we were reading magazines and the recommended path was to go low fat. It helps you to become hypo caloric very easily because the density of the calories in a gram of fat versus a gram of carbohydrates or protein is nine versus four for the carbs and protein. So if you're cutting out grams of fat on a daily basis, you're quickly cutting out calories that allows you to get leaner. Well, of course as everything, I mean, if little is good, then a lot is better. So I would cut all of them out or almost all of them and at the age of 22, 21, I'm like standing at a stop up at University of Connecticut waiting for the tram to come and bring me to campus. And I couldn't even open my eyes because the light was blinding to me. It was normal sunlight. It was blinding to me, the photosensitivity I had learning later on after a few more courses that I took there in biology how necessary fat was for the development of healthy cells. I realized what was going on and not to mention other stuff skin was bad, hair was falling out, all kinds of stuff. So I think that the approach to decreasing fat so it's not excessive, because again how calorically dense it could be in having lower sugar. I'm a firm believer in sugar is really pretty toxic and something that we would all do better getting rid of a lot of it. That is the best approach for, I believe, again, in my opinion, personally, for the overall big picture. Because though the people can take exclusionary approaches to nutrition and taking carbs out or eating only fats and proteins, or again, I'm not saying it doesn't work for you. And if it's the first thing that actually allowed you to gain control of your nutrition to the point where you actually saw results and got to a healthier weight, then I always say, then do it, then do it. But just make sure it's something you can do forever and doesn't bring upon other repercussions. But I think that non exclusionary approaches to diets are the most sustainable for the rest of your life. And all I'm interested in from a nutrition standpoint is something that's sustainable. So when I preach what I preach, I've been doing this since I was 15, 14. People say like, how's he get so ripped? How's he get? I have been doing this for four- For how many years? 30 years. - Eating clean low sugar. - Yeah, 30 years. And the beginning it was a slow shift I had to make where I was like, I went from the worst diet in the whole world. Even when I was 14 years old, my breakfast was, I talked about this so many times, but Entenmann's I would eat Entenmann's donuts and... - Those long rod- - Yeah, the long [indistinct] - They even took the hole out of the donut. - [Jeff] Exactly. Why would you delete the middle of the donut? - The crumb donut there. I would eat donuts... - I can taste it in my- I don't like sugar very much but over the years I've lost my appetite for sugar. But as you talk about the entiments I can literally smell and taste the frosting. And to me now it's disgusting but back then it might have been appetizing. - You would probably have like really good information on this, but like my ability to actually remember, they've said smell is very evoking of memories, right? - So smell is unlike the other senses because there's a direct line literally from our sense of smell to the memory centers of the brain. It doesn't have to go through any intermediate stations. - Okay, so my ability to actually recall exact taste of all the stuff that I used to love is enough to satisfy me to not engage in those things now. As crazy as that is. Like I almost get my feel through remembering 'cause of these strong senses of memory of what it was like, 'cause oh, that used to taste so good. Okay, that's good, I had it so... - Fantastic. We know the neuromodulator there, that's dopamine. Your ability to get the dopamine release from the thought of some things. Most people when they get that dopamine release, it causes a triggering of the desire for more. - [Jeff] for more. - Right, people think of dopamine as pleasure. Dopamine, there's a book, great book called, "The Molecule of More." I didn't write the book unfortunately, but someone else did and it's a great book and it's really about how dopamine we think it's about pleasure, but it establishes craving. So you're able to satisfy that and it is a very adaptive thing for you because you are indeed very lean and that's one of your kind of hallmark things as a professional who does this in the public space that's important when people are out there talking about getting lean and you look at them and you're like, maybe you need to do the protocols. It's a huge advantage but yeah, I think that, it sounds like you've cultivated practices around avoiding certain things. - Yes. But not avoiding certain things that I think are easily avoided if you realize that there, I think that we have enough science and literature out there to prove that the altered path is a better path. You know what I mean? Like I feel like if I was just doing it because I wanted to be lean, I'm not quite sure it would've held for so long. - Well and we have a guest that whose episode has been recorded for this podcast who runs an eating disorder clinic at the University of Pennsylvania. Medical school, studies binge eating disorders, anorexia, OCD and he will go on record in obesity, and he will go on record saying that these very highly palatable processed high sugar foods of the sort that we're talking about, donuts and so forth, that they are actually dangerous, right? That there are elements of the way that they engage neural circuitry. He's a neurosurgeon that reshape the brain in dangerous ways. And those are his words and... - Yeah and it's not just entiments. I mean, I think not just entiments right? Yeah, they're coming after us, with what, with donuts. - [Jeff] Exactly. - Yeah, they can't catch us. - [Jeff] True, true. - In any case. So in terms of what you do eat, how do you structure that in terms of, when you look down at a plate you've done this, described this before, but I think it's just a beautifully simple description 'cause I think a lot of people don't want to do calorie counting and all this and how should people think about what to eat? - So yeah, I have like what I call a plate method and it's just simple 'cause it works for me. And again, if you're struggling with real eating issues, these mechanisms become admittedly less effective because you're having maybe you have emotionally triggered eating and you can't stop at one plate. I mean that you could get the plate right but if the portions are out of control. - Plate has a dimensionality of height? - Or multiple plates like second and third plate. - Or fourth. - Like then all these things can be challenged but what I say is when you have your plate then you just simply look at it as like a clock. And if you just make a 9:20 on the clock, so one arm goes over to the 9 and one of the arms goes over to 20. Well, then you're basically... You're going to take the second largest portion of that 'cause you're going to make a line towards 12 o'clock too. And the largest portion is going to be your fibers carbohydrate. So that's the green vegetables, right? So whether it be broccoli or Brussels sprouts, or asparagus, or pick your favorites. Like those are the ones that give us a lot of the micronutrients we need, they're the ones that are generally accepted as more healthy and they're also going to provide the fiber that's going to be both beneficial in terms of its impact on insulin and also just through filling you up, right? And then I take the next largest portion of that and I devote that towards protein. And I think it's really important especially for anybody active, the more active you are the more you embark on trying to build muscle you're going to need to have protein in every meal. So I have that. And again, you know, here we're talking cleaner sources of protein. But like, you'll never find like boiled chicken on my plate. Like I ditched those days when I was 16 or 15 or 16, like I realized after reading those body building magazines that maybe the low fat thing stuck for too long, but the no fat thing stuck for too long, but the boiled chicken and a steam broccoli thing that ended quickly for me 'cause I really I'm not going to eat this forever. So I'll have some sort of fish or chicken but it'll be cooked in a way that's like it's got maybe some sauce on it or it's got some maybe it's tomato sauce. Anything to just make it a little bit more palatable and interesting without blowing the value of the meal. And then that last portion is where I put my starchy carbohydrates. And again, that's the part that some people will say exclude them entirely 'cause they're not healthy or they don't work for you or they're not beneficial long term. For me it's been a God sent. And I do think I'm like most people my body craves those carbohydrates. I choose things like sweet potatoes which is my favorite or I'll have rice or I'll have pasta. I'm Italian so I like pasta. And like I will have those things, I'm not excluding them, but I don't put them in the portions that you would generally find. My wife and I will go out and we'll go to the restaurant sometimes because we travel quite a bit or used to at least with baseball too. There's a cheesecake factory everywhere you went and I love cheesecake factory, but like the way they structure meals is it's all rice at the bottom, and a little bit of chicken on top. And I mean, it's a plateful of rice that you wouldn't find me make a plate that way. I'm going to just devote that portion of the plate to the starchy carbohydrate. And so it gives me a little bit more responsibility in terms of portion control 'cause those are the foods, again, probably dopamine driven that are most easily over eaten. I always ask the question, what's the last time you ate 10 chicken breasts at a meal? Like you're getting sick of it after maybe two or three, but you could eat a whole hell of a lot of carbohydrates, starchy carbohydrates because the they're just so satisfying and I think those triggers, as you said, to want more, like that's what happens, right? You just keep eating, even when you're feeling full, you want more. And that's the biggest danger to carbohydrate. So if you can develop some sort of discipline around them, then you can still enjoy them. If you can't develop that discipline for whatever reason, then maybe they do become something that you have to work yourself around or adopt a different eating style. And as I said, I'm never to the point where I'm not trying to be dogmatic in my approach. I'm always trying to say, this is how I do it and I'm a believer in it just like everyone else's believer in their method, but I'm open to the idea that something that works for you and gets you to a healthier weight and a sustainability, like that is good, that's good for me. Provided doesn't introduce other issues. - Something one can do consistently, that's something I picked up from you over the years. What can you do consistently? And for me, that also meant, when, and how can I eat? What can I eat consistently that will also allow me to be alert after lunch so I can actually get some work done. Or eat, I like to train fasted in the morning but I don't do any long term fasting. It just so happens that I'm fine doing water and caffeine in the morning and training in the morning and then I eat my first meal afterwards. But I get carbohydrates at night so my glycogen is restored. I think carbohydrates are wonderful. I just don't eat them in excess. So to me, I feel like when what you describe as a very rational literally balanced approach. And obviously there will be variations for people who are dealing with obesity or diabetes. I've got friends that are on the pure carnivore thing, I have friends that are vegan and it's always impressive to me when somebody can stick to anything consistently except when they're sticking to just poor behavior. 'Cause there's nothing impressive about that. Well, I think that's very helpful because I think there's,- For the typical listener of this podcast, the online content that people see, the battles are very confusing. They're distracting. Because people really think, oh, that there's a right way and a wrong way and it sounds like the way that one can eat consistently over time that's healthy. Certainly fewer processed and sugary foods, I think almost everybody agrees there. - Yeah, almost everyone agrees on that, right? So I think it's calorie manipulation through some other method. So even intermittent fasting, like you said, like that could be, it's for people that are grazers. Like if you are a grazer and your real problem is portion control over the course of the day, but you can respond to a rule that says, no, you're eating between here and here, that you can obey that rule. Well, you're not going to be able to graze during the times that you might be doing additional damage. So sure there's other hormonal benefits that people will talk about from that approach. But from a longevity standpoint and habit forming standpoint, if it's fixing the habit that you're breaking too often by eating throughout whenever you feel like you walk by food, it's good and it works. And again, if people can, will tell you you can probably eat whatever you want to eat as long as you're eating within that window. But I think the more responsible people who are practitioners of that will say, no, you still want to avoid processed sugar and things like that. And that's just a mechanism of eating not really a diet. But like it's I think that people- I hate to be as like as basic as it sounds with that but it's for the exact reason that if it it's that 23 hour day phenomenon that it's like, you said you're impressed, it is impressive. It's so hard to control all of our behaviors and food being one of the hardest thing. One of the biggest temptations for people. You got to learn how to control that for so long and then do it day after day after day, whatever that mechanism is that works for you is impressive and I'm a believer in it. I think that's how I feel. I just feel like the people need to be able to be given some reigns to be able to find what works for them. - Well, I love to eat and one of the beauties of weight training is I feel like I can eat plenty for my age and I'm not as lean as you are, but I'm happy with where I'm at. I could always do better. With each year actually I'm getting better probably because I'm eating cleaner. Probably 'cause I also have someone to cook for me now. And we like... I have that too. - We like healthy food and so I'm very fortunate. I don't think we have any packaged food in our home. We even started making sauerkraut at home, I don't make it. I mean she makes it. - My wife actually she turned me on to a tip that I actually shared with the whole channel which was like, you can go to, we have a Stew Leonard's around our big grocery store chain around us and they have a catering department. And they're often used for catering big parties and big tubs of grilled chicken, but like really good grilled chicken. Again, not the boiled chicken and big tubs of sweet potatoes. And we'll get a bunch of those and she'll go over and she'll get them and then she'll sort of arrange them on plates and put the plates in and like, I'm okay with repetitive eating. I think more people are probably okay with repetitive eating than they think. I think that when you actually break down how many different breakfast variations, do you have? Three, two. - Two or three maximum. - So like, I think when the people do there's more variety for dinner probably but like even there you probably eat five different types of dinners over the course of a week or a month. Well, if you have that ability to identify the things that you like, and again, no plan is going to work if you're eating stuff you don't like. It's not going to work forever, nothing will, you have to really enjoy what you're eating. As long as these variations of this meal are something that you really enjoy and there are limited versions of them, the reproducibility of that is simple. It will take some time but if you're fortunate enough in our case to have somebody who can prepare it for you, now that's even part out of the equation. And it just makes it very simple. But I do think when you tally up all the costs of medical care that are spiked by having poor nutrition and you then offset that by what it might cost you to invest in a faster strategy like this catering trick or whatever it might be, you'd be best off figuring out a way to maybe reallocate some of your money to preparing this because how important it is to your long term health and longevity. If you can figure out your nutrition issues, if everyone listening to this podcast can figure out their nutrition issues, this whole world will be different. That is like one of the largest sources of disease, and pain and discomfort because people really struggle with nutrition. - Yeah, and it's a huge problem. I mean the obesity, it is an epidemic in this country. It's a very, very serious. Also a lot of highly processed foods are more expensive than healthier foods when you really break it down. Even the better sourced high quality foods are right there on par less than the processed foods for sure. But couple other questions as it relates to training. Because I think that one thing that a lot of people wonder about and maybe we could do this in kind of a true false method just to get through some of these... - 50/50 I'll get it right at least. - Exactly. Men and women should train differently. - The science of it will say false. And again, not to generalize, but kind of the point you touched on earlier today. I do find that casually interested women in training will migrate more towards certain types of fitness, like kickboxing, like dancing, like, - Low rest circuit type. - Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think, again, whatever is that you are going to engage in regularly is what you should do. Physiologically, no. And I think if we can get more women to feel more comfortable in the gym performing the same exercises and the same, in receiving the same strength training benefits and working on progressive overload and like, we've hit the holy grail. But I think that it's a big bridge that has to be gapped still because there's just some reality to- Listen, there are very, my wife is a perfect example of this living a very complicated busy life. We have two young boys they're twins and her attention and focus is there. And it's like, she doesn't do this for a living like I do. And if she can get a decent workout and she's happy, but she's not necessarily working on her deadlift PR. And so I think that that would help her and serve her in the long term to work on increasing her PRs, and different lifts and building her strength progressively. But in her life right now is not necessarily in the cards to have the time to focus on that. So would you then discourage this other thing that she might find interesting, like some boxing. There was a little, I don't remember the brand, but like one of those punchable boxing standup things and she enjoys it. Like anything to get you moving is going be preferable but I don't think that necessarily physiologically there's a difference. - You started weight training pretty young. - Yeah. I messed around with my brother 'cause he was older, he was four years older. So I was kind of messing around with weights probably 12 or 13 with a 5 pound dumbbell. - Yeah, you hear that young kids shouldn't work out with the weights. I don't know what the going standard is. Now they say, shuts down long bone growth or growth plates this sort of thing. You've got two young boys adorable kids by the way. - [Jeff] Thanks. - One of the things that is very heartwarming is to see you're in great shape, you're clearly extremely bright, you know your craft, you loved your craft. You work with Jesse, who we'll talk about as well. - [Jeff] That's great. - Which is great. There's a camaraderie there, having great teammates as part of a business or to work out with is just makes life better. Let's just be honest. I'm grateful to have great teammates for the podcast and my lab, of course, as well. But to see your boys and your dogs and the whole picture, I'm sure it has a lot of contours and complexity that we don't know about and shouldn't know about, but it's a beautiful picture. And will they weight train? I've seen the videos of one or both of them hanging from the bar. - These kids are naturals, I'm telling you that. - I wonder where they get it from. - I don't even encourage it. I'm not going to be the dad who's sitting there saying, let's go somewhere. We got our two days. I'm not going to do that but they have a natural interest in the gym. They just sometimes like to be out with daddy. So they'll come out there. I of the two of us, my wife and I will be the one who has a little bit more of a longer leash to let them explore things 'cause I was a dummy at times too and figured out best through the mistakes I made. - Through injury, right. In neuroscience we call that one trial learning. - There you go. These guys are going to be masters in one trial learning because you know, they'll go grab the bars of my, the handles of my jamer that's there 'cause it's at a lower level to them and they're swinging around they're doing pull-ups on it naturally uncoached nothing from me. One will walk up to a deadlift bar stand over it naturally never saw me do it, stands over there and just goes, he tries to pull it. So there's a definitely an inclination to liking the gym and I will fully support that. But of course body weight will be good for quite a while. - Yeah, so what age do you think is reasonable for kids to start exploring a non body weight training? - I think around 13. I think around 13. Once puberty, I think it's okay to start to. 'Cause there's so much, I even say for people that are like later in age who are just starting out, learn with your own body weight first, there's plenty of resistance to be had by learning how to command your body in space. So if you have never trained before, you're going to get very stimulated by doing lunging and reverse lunging, even learning some of the appropriate reception around movement through space. Pull-ups, chin ups. Pull-ups and chin ups are challenging for even people that have had 20, 30 years of experience in the gym. So there's a lot of stimulus to be had by body weight and jumping straight to dumbbells or barbells is actually doing yourself a disservice. You can learn better command of your body in space so that when you go back to the bigger lifts, you're going to have an easier time sort of progressively loading them and building up that foundation of strength. I'm not saying that you have to become a master calisthenics athlete before you can touch a barbell, that's not even true. I'm just saying there's so much capacity. Kids are going to be doing this anyway. And really just, if you look at general play, they are jumping, they are lunging, they are climbing, they are pulling like, that's what they do. I don't know where the avoidance of like structured training is for younger kids. Again, provided they're using body weight and maybe less ballistic movements or something like that. Things that are, or certainly overloaded movements. I think we should encourage kids to do more. There's a lot of obesity in kids on the rise also and that is incredibly disconcerting to me. So I think and I hope it doesn't come from the advice of some that say, well, wait until you're older to start doing something like. That's a way worse trade off than engaging in something smart now. - We used to get kicked out of the house when we were kids. - [Jeff] Totally. - My mom would kick us out. I had a huge pack of boys that lived on my street but we'd get kicked outside. Like literal, you're not allowed in, no television. But there were video games, of course but we were kicked out the house. We had to go play. For us it was skateboarding, soccer and then we'd find our trouble. But so post training nutrition. We're the same age, years ago I was sort of neurotic about the idea that I had to ingest a certain amount of carbohydrates and proteins within two hours then it was 90 minutes of training. I confess I get, if I train hard, so I'm talking about the resistance training not the running. But the resistance training, 60 to 90 minutes later, I'm really hungry. But there have been days when I just skip and then the hunger passes and then later I eat more. I might eat twice as much later that's just the way sometimes schedules go. But what are your thoughts in terms of the nutrition science, the training related effects of the post-training meal? Is it something that you try to get? Is it something you think people should pay attention to? - So that science has actually probably been the one that's changed the most in my lifetime, honestly, because, again, we're at the same age and I was falling for the same trap where I would really be focused on like, I'm risking speeding tickets driving home from the gym to make you sure I got an anabolic window. Like I did all that, I really did. But thankfully that's been sort of debunked in your body isn't just rushing through these certain periods of time to utilize the nutrients in our body, but are able to partition them and use them over a long, much greater duration. Up to now, they're saying, three to four hours after training, five hours after training, you could still see the benefits of replenishment. A lot of that is just I think there's a consistency element to it that just utilizing a post workout window or a post workout meal, even if it's within two hours or one hour is just integrating the habit of saying, listen, I just did this activity and now want to replenish some of what I lost the energy that I used to perform the exercises that I did. And just getting into the routine knowing that the engine is ultimately fed by what we put in it. And the concept of replenishing the fuel lost is still a concept that I think again, different in mechanism but still important in terms of fueling the overall performance. So the pre-workout period of time gives us a chance to actually have a longer window because if those nutrients are obtained pre-workout, it's not like they're gone in that hour that you've trained, they're still there and available for your body to use. So I think it's important to get one of the two right or at least make sure you're consistently having one or the two or you might risk going through all these periods of having no nutrition to support your efforts. Not only will your workouts potentially suffer in terms of the output, but then you're also not providing your body any ability to capitalize on an opportunity to feed it and refuel and recover. So I'm not very dogmatic about what specifically to eat pre or post workout. But I do think you should have protein surrounding your training, whether that be ahead of time or after. Protein could be a little bit hard to digest for some people. So if you do that pre-workout and then you're finding your workout is slogging because you don't feel good then suddenly you put that after your meal. But this whole concept of the urgency of time has thankfully been removed and we can just learn to eat a little bit more responsibly and drive more responsibly so we're not trying to rush home from the gym and risk killing people on the way. But I think it's great because I think that that was something that it just showcases a belief that people had for so long that has since been proven to be not that important. And there's a tip of the cap towards research in a good way where it's like, all right, I think we could all agree that this isn't necessarily true anymore. And look at yourself and say, oh my God, I did that so often. I bit that one hook line and sinker but then realize, okay, we could always make a change. And the good thing about nutrition is those changes can happen the very next time you go to eat and you'll start to see the benefits of that. So I'm not a big believer in that strict approach to pre or post-workout. I mean, even as far as pre-workout supplements, a lot of people don't take them. A lot of people don't like them, they don't take them, they don't like, they're not necessarily even being used as the new nutritive side of the pre-workout. They're just more used to fuel the workout. - For me it's water and some form of caffeine. - Yeah. I mean, it is whatever, again, I think it's important. I do think it's important to maintain a high level of output. So if your pre-work attrition requires a stimulant in order to help you do that or if your pre-work nutrition is causing you to have a harder time to train because you're feeling full or stomachache or something else, then that that's not achieving what you're trying to do. The ultimate goal is to still be able to perform at the highest level. So whatever your nutrition is required to allow you to still do that, that is probably the most important factor of all of it. - Great, I love the very clear and rational approach. Don't ingest anything right before your workout or near your workout that's going to make your workout worse. Yeah, and it's so simple and yet you don't hear this because I think people will think, oh, they must have a pre-workout they must have a post-workout. - No, again, even if the benefits that are to be had from whatever's being suggested is going to be easily offset by the fact that you can't perform at an output capable of driving any change. So that would pretty much negate the fact that you're not outweighing those benefits of whatever nutritive approach you took and is struggling through your workout. - For me, the best pre-workout is a good night's sleep, hydration, caffeine, and music. - Yeah, there you go. I mean, that's a simple formula. - It works. And then post what I do I do find I get quite hungry and want to eat quite a bit more and... - Well, that's a natural response the body's going to and most people want to do that and I think it should be fed. I work out as you know, again, a lot of my postings on Instagram will happen at 10 o'clock at night, 10:30 at night, 11 at night, 'cause I am actually training there and that's where I'm taking those little breaks in between sets to actually film or post something. But like, I then go inside and eat dinner. So I'm eating at 11 o'clock at night. It's not necessarily ideal, I'm not recommending that as a tool for anybody. I think it dispels one thing, I've never been a believer in Kenny carbs after six. - That makes no sense to me. - [Jeff] Zero sense. - Based on all the new, all the signs of metabolism that I've seen makes no sense. I think as long as you can, sort of like napping. I talked to Matt Walker, one of the great sleep researchers wrote why we sleep, et cetera, and has his own podcast about sleep, tremendous researcher, public communicator about sleep and he said, naps are fine provided they don't interrupt your ability to sleep well at night. Simple. Some people can sleep from eight to 9:00 PM and then go to bed at midnight and not a problem. Other people they take a 30 minute nap after lunch and they can't sleep at night. Same thing with- Caffeine's a little different because Matt would argue the architecture of sleep can be disrupted, et cetera. But if you can eat dinner late and eat carbohydrates late, I actually need carbohydrates at night in order to be able to sleep. Whenever I've done a low carbohydrate type regimen in the evening, I have a hard time falling asleep. I'm just too alert. And so I eat carbohydrates in the evening to restore glycogen but also in order to make sure that I can fall asleep. - I actually can, again obviously it's already late at night, by the time I'm done eating, but like I can fall asleep within 5, 10 minutes of finishing my meal. Because I do think that they have that same effect on me, but I'm never, I'm not bothered by the feeling of fullness. I'm not unable to sleep because of a feeling of fullness. But I do like the fact that I feel as if I'm at least replenishing what was lost through my hard training. And I do like to back it up with a dinner. I don't need to eat smaller amounts. Some people can't have that much. I will say after a hard leg workout, I don't have the same appetite that I do after let's say, an upper body workout. It can really disrupt my whole feeling of wellbeing. - You want to eat less after you train your legs? - [Jeff] I do, yeah. - Oh, wow, I'm the opposite. - No, 'cause I could feel sick to my stomach. - You're clearly training harder. I've seen the way you train, you do train very intensely. - Yeah. I think it's important. I mean, I think that... Again, it's that trade off between, if you're not going to train for a long period of time then you're going to want to train harder. And again, I actually feel like contrary to what people might think as you age, you're better off training harder for a shorter period of time. It's always within the realm of safe training. I mean, I think that's what I like to think that's what I bring to the table. Like an approach that's smarter so I can train harder. Like not doing the dumb things I did when I was a kid. And with that trade off being a harder trainer, I think I get the results that I want because I'm able to really push it and then back off and again, the meal feels like almost a physiological reward for the hard effort I put in the gym knowing that I'm also replenishing and setting the stage for the next day to be another successful day of training or maybe not depending upon how many times a day a week I train. I think that it's, It's a lot less, I hate to say but it's a lot less scientific than we want to make it. And as it seems to be coming back oftentimes like the thing that works for you is really the most important thing because ultimately getting your ass in there and doing what you do is really the thing that provides the best benefit. - Absolutely, and there are many things that I would say are hallmarks of Jeff Cavaliere, but one of them is certainly consistency. You make it happen one way or another. - Huge. I mean, consistency really is the determinant. And I know that that is the hardest part for people that are, and why people tend to look for the shortcut, 'cause consistency is the part that becomes the biggest challenge. But if you could find, listen, if you could find the, you know through what I've been trying to encourage here is like if you could find the nutrition approach, if you could find the training approach, if you could try find the training split, if you could try all those things that encourage you to want to go to the gym. Like you're locked in at the point where you said you actually look forward to going and doing your workout. - I love it. I look forward to, I mean, it's- Actually this morning, one of our teammates for the podcast and I got to workout and halfway through I just turned him and I said, I'll never figure out why that feels so good, but it feels so good. I just, I really enjoy it and it lets, and I love to eat and it lets me eat right and I love the way it makes me feel afterward. I don't understand this concept of not enjoying the gym. Cardio's a little different, I always loathe the first 10 or 20 minutes of a jog. I mildly loathe the middle third and by the end, I think this is the greatest thing ever, why don't want to do it all the time. And then that feeling evaporates before the next time I do it. - Yeah, of course I don't even remember it either, after we get on, then do it again. - [Andrew] Exactly. - I think if people could, if we had one gift we could give to everybody it would be the love of fitness. If they could be bestowed the love of fitness it would change the entire world. But I think when you hear things like this, that like, hey, that will work and that will work too and that this will work too. Rather than the dogmatic one way only approach, which could become discouraging for people. Then I think it becomes a little bit uplifting like, well, I've never tried that. I've actually never tried a total body split or I've never tried that style of eating. Like it becomes encouraging that you might want to explore and then you might finally get locked in and say, I really like this and then you're off and running. - Some of what I so enjoy about your content. We would be remiss if we didn't briefly discuss Jesse. One of the great pleasures for me in watching her content and learning from it over the years is that you took on a, you decided to mentor somebody, Jesse. And there's some poking fun back and forth between the two of you which is very amusing. But I have to say it inspired me to do something early on in developing this podcast as I have a young intern who has helped me with some of the research and he's a buddy, he's interested in science, he's about to go off to college, but he also got really into fitness. So we would watch the videos of you guys. He was helping me get the Instagram content out early on. And one thing that was just, it's such a pleasure to be able to pass along knowledge and of course I'm learning from him. This is always the way it works. We learn from teaching and we learn from students. But it's been great to see Jesse's progress, it's amazing. I've gotten to meet him in person just now and he has grown, he's changed physically. And I think that you mentioned a love of fitness. I think that one of the best ways to be consistent is to take on the responsibility of teaching others. Once one has proficiency in something. So maybe you just tell us a little bit about how that's going. How is Jesse doing and where does he need a little more work, where is he thriving? I'm impressed by the progress. - Well we have a, I mean, physically, we can obviously see the changes, the list of things to work on or is immense it's so long for him to continue to improve. But no actually, in reality, Jesse, the story of Jesse was that I knew Jesse prior to starting even Athlean-X. And a matter of fact, I think the funny thing is the very first video that was ever posted on my channel was a video that he shot as I don't know, a 13 year old or something. And I said, can you just film this for a second. I was over there training members of the family. So he then off went off to college, went into film, realized he had much greener pastures at Athlean-X instead of becoming the next [indistinct] or something and he decided to come work with me. And the expectations in the beginning were just to edit videos or just to help with various aspects of like my day to day that I don't think I was equipped to really handle and grow the business anymore. So then look at by virtue of being in that environment, there's an interest. I think if I worked in a gym, I might become interested in working out. And though that mine was not a commercial gym it's sitting right behind my office window, there became an interest in wanting to work out a little bit. And it wasn't even an intentional experiment to put Jesse there. I just thought that he's a very likable person. He has a very funny personality and he's also the, every man. In some ways as I'm sure maybe you experience sometimes like I'm the guy that this comes naturally for me is what people will say. Like, this is what you do for a living. Like this is what you- Like there's an element of disconnect in terms of the relatability because I do do this for a living. I can't deny that I do work with professional athletes. So like there's a level of interest in this above and beyond. But for him, he's just the kid who wants to train. Maybe if he rolls out of bed before 11:00 AM and doesn't have a date on Friday night, but that's the guy everybody could relate to. And watching him transform and I love the fact that even the interest level was up and down. Like it wasn't consistent for him because he was like, part interested and then maybe not interested for three months and then interested or not. And I never pushed it on him. This is again, this was no orchestrated experiment for me. It was just like, if you want to do this, then do this. And also from a standpoint of like lending my help or expertise to him, like I said, with my son, I'm not going to force it on anybody, I don't want to do that to anybody. I don't think that that's ever going to spark that desire for long term adoption. So he got more interested, he started to learn more about it, he watched just the videos that we're filming. He films the videos that we're filming and he's learning through what I'm saying he's becoming more of a student of the field. And I have to say his knowledge in the field has grown with the growth of his physique. And he's put into practice some of the things that I say, he's put in practice some things he hears other places and he winds up improving as he goes and he winds up starting to love this like he never thought he would. But it's great to see anybody grow and whether that be physically or that be emotionally or whether that be just in their career, it's great to see somebody grow. And I like to tease him. Funny admission here, there are times when the jabs that I will throw at him are something that we might know ahead of time of what I'm going to say to him. People will say you're so mean to him. I can't believe it you're that's so abusive. Like, dude, honestly, we laugh after it's over. It's good, we're good. So of course, but like... - He's tougher than he looks is what you're saying. - [Jeff] He's tougher than he looks, believe me. - And he looks tough, he's got the big beard. - He looks more manly than I do. I can't grow a beard, I don't, I mean, believe me, he's totally alpha and I'm like quickly becoming the second star of this show, but like he's definitely contributed and people enjoy his presence for sure. - Yeah, I certainly do. And I think that as you pointed out, he's a kind of a proxy and a template for everybody. We can relate to him because even though I've trained for many years, it's been a struggle through graduate school, post, made it happen one way or another, but with more or less attention and admittedly through waxing waning levels of motivation although I'm fortunate that I do enjoy it. - What I think is nice about it too is that it's a realistic expectation that we set. 'Cause you're showcasing what the journey actually looks like. And he's been on the journey for again devotedly for let's say the last year and a half but on the journey for five years. If I could make the gains that he did starting when I started training at 14, 15, and you're saying, hey, by 20, you're going to have the strength levels he does, the physique that he does, the knowledge that you've gained. Like that seems like a blink of an eye now looking back. At 46 years old, I'm like, holy cow. Like I think it took me 20 years, 15, 20 years to just even start to get into a groove. For him to do in a period of five years, it doesn't seem long whereas there's people that will criticize his journey like, oh, it's just taking so long and so like there's such an instant gratification that people seek, luckily that's the minority. Most people are like, this is amazing, but I think that it becomes very uplifting because not only is it relatable but the journey is real and people can appreciate that. Like, this is what will happen if you actually put in consistent hard work and you'll watch him transform and go back and watch the videos like you look at. We like to oftentimes throw back to videos where he appeared as smaller Jesse but also shy Jesse. Arms crossed, head down, not making eye contact with the camera to where now he's got his own skits and intros. It's like it's funny because the confidence with the growth of physique came confidence too, which is great. - Absolutely. Pretty soon it'll be his world and we'll all be living in it as they say. Well, on behalf of myself and all the listeners, I really want to thank you. First of all, for the discussion today, I learned an immense amount even though I thought I knew your content well, I still learned an immense amount, many things we could deploy from when to stretch, how to stretch, the skipping rope. We talked about nutrition, we talked about heat cold training regimens. And what I love about all of this now that you've given us is that there's a backbone of logic and some consistent themes indeed about consistency. But the logical backbone, I think is what will enable people to really show up to the table and stay there for training consistently over time. And as you said, the gift of fitness is an immense gift. I can't thank you enough. I know you're an incredibly busy human being with kids and dogs and a marriage and... - It's my pleasure. I'm happy I was able to make it work 'cause I really I've been watching your stuff for a while. And I really love the science of it, I like the way you think. And it's just, I'm just really fortunate that I was able to do it. - Oh well, I feel very gratified in hearing that and honored to have you here. So thank you so much. - Thank you. - Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Jeff Cavaliere. I hope you found it as interesting and as actionable as I did. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's the best zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and on Apple, that's also a terrific way to support us. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have comments and feedback, the best place to leave that is at the comment section on the YouTube channel. There if you have suggestions about specific episodes or you have specific questions or you have suggestions about guests that you'd like us to interview on the Huberman Lab Podcast, we read those comments, and indeed we take them to heart when developing future content. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, that's the best way to support this podcast. And for those of you that are interested in supplements discussed today or on previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, again, we partnered with Momentous Supplements. You can find the supplements related to this podcast at livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following us on social media, please do so we are @hubermanlab on both Twitter and Instagram. There I cover science and science based tools some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast and other of which is distinct from the information covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So again, it's @hubermanlab on Instagram and also @hubermanlab on Twitter. If you're not already subscribed to our so-called Neural Network Newsletter, please do so. You can do that by going to hubermanlab.com go to the menu and click on newsletter. It costs nothing to sign up or to receive the newsletters they come out about once a month and they contain summaries of actionable protocols, links to relevant scientific research. We do not share your email with anybody and our privacy policy is made clear at that site. In fact, if you'd like to see some previous newsletters or download those, you can download those as PDFs without having to sign up at all simply by going to hubermanlab.com, go again into the newsletter tab under the menu and there you'll see, for instance, a toolkit for sleep that lists out all the things you can do to enhance your sleep. It lists out the so-called neuroplasticity super protocol for enhancing learning and teaching and so on. Again, that's the Neural Network Newsletter at hubermanlab.com. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [bouncy music]

========================================

--- Video 269 ---
Video ID: OadokY8fcAA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OadokY8fcAA
Title: The Science & Treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) | Huberman Lab Podcast #78
Published: 2022-06-27 12:00:17 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the biology and psychology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)—a prevalent and debilitating condition. I also discuss the efficacy and mechanisms behind OCD treatments—both behavioral and pharmacologic as well as holistic and combination treatments and new emerging treatments, including directed brain stimulation. I explain the neural circuitry underlying repetitive “thought-action loops” and why in OCD, the compulsive actions merely make the obsessions even stronger. I review cognitive-behavioral therapies like exposure therapy and SSRIs, holistic approaches, and nutraceuticals, detailing the efficacy of each approach and what science says about how to combine and sequence treatments. I describe an often effective approach for treating OCD where clinicians use cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to deliberately bring patients into states of high anxiety while encouraging them to suppress compulsive actions in order to help them learn to overcome repetitious thought/action cycles. This episode should interest anyone with OCD, anyone who knows someone with OCD or OCPD, and more generally, those interested in how the brain works to control thoughts and actions, whether those thoughts are intrusive or not.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Full show notes & links to peer-reviewed articles: https://hubermanlab.com/the-science-and-treatment-of-obsessive-compulsive-disorder

Timestamps
00:00:00 Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) 
00:03:01 Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, Eight Sleep 
00:08:28 What is OCD and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder?
00:11:18 OCD: Major Incidence & Severity 
00:15:10 Categories of OCD
00:21:33 Anxiety: Linking Obsessions & Compulsions
00:27:33 OCD & Familial Heredity 
00:29:10 Biological Mechanisms of OCD, Cortico-Striatal-Thalamic Loops
00:39:36 Cortico-Striatal-Thalamic Loop & OCD 
00:46:39 Clinical OCD Diagnosis, Y-BOCS Index 
00:51:38 OCD & Fear, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) & Exposure Therapy 
01:01:56 Unique Characteristics of CBT/Exposure Therapy in OCD Treatment 
01:10:18 CBT/Exposure Therapy & Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) 
01:22:30 Considerations with SSRIs & Prescription Drug Treatments
01:25:17 Serotonin & Cognitive Flexibility, Psilocybin Studies
01:31:50 Neuroleptics & Neuromodulators 
01:36:09 OCD & Cannabis, THC & CBD 
01:39:29 Ketamine Treatment 
01:41:43 Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) 
01:46:22 Cannabis CBD & Focus 
01:47:50 Thoughts Are Not Actions 
01:51:27 Hormones, Cortisol, DHEA, Testosterone & GABA 
02:00:55 Holistic Treatments: Mindfulness Meditation & OCD
02:03:28 Nutraceuticals & Supplements: Myo-Inositol, Glycine 
02:09:45 OCD vs. Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder 
02:20:53 Superstitions, Compulsions & Obsessions 
02:31:00 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat guitar music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking about obsessive-compulsive disorder or OCD. We are also going to talk about obsessive-compulsive personality disorder which, as you will soon learn, is distinct from obsessive-compulsive disorder. In fact, many people that refer to themselves or others as obsessive or compulsive or quote-unquote, having OCD or OCD about this or OCD about that do not have clinically diagnosable OCD, rather, many people have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. However, there are many people in the world that have actual OCD, and for those people, there's a tremendous amount of suffering. In fact, OCD turns out to be number seven on the list of most debilitating illnesses, not just psychiatric illnesses, but of all illnesses which is remarkable and somewhat frightening. The good news is thanks to the fields of psychiatry, psychology, and science in general, there are now excellent treatments for OCD. We're going to talk about those treatments today. Those treatments range from behavioral therapies, to drug therapies, and brain stimulation, and even some of the more holistic or natural therapies. As you'll soon learn, for certain people, they may want to focus more on the behavioral therapies, whereas for others, more on the drug-based therapies and so on and so forth. One extremely interesting and important thing I learned from this episode is that the particular sequence that behavioral and/or drug and/or holistic therapies are applied is extremely important. In fact, the outcomes of studies often depend on whether not people start on drug treatment and then follow with cognitive behavioral treatment or vice versa. We're going to go into all those details and how they relate to different types of OCD, because it turns out there are indeed different types of obsessions and compulsions, and the age of onset for OCD, and so on and so forth. What I can assure you is by the end of this episode, you'll have a much greater understanding of what OCD is and what it isn't and what obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is and what it is not. And you'll have a rich array of different therapy options to explore in yourself or in others that are suffering from OCD. And if neither you or others that you know suffer from OCD or obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the information covered in today's episode will also provide insight into how the brain and nervous system translate thought into action generally. And also, you're going to learn a lot about goal-directed behavior generally. My hope is that by the end of the episode you'll both understand a lot about this disease state that we call OCD, you will have access to information that will allow you to direct treatments to yourself or others in better ways, and that you will gain greater insight into how you function and how human beings function in general. The Huberman Lab Podcast is proud to announce that we've partnered with Momentous Supplements. We've done that for several reasons. First of all, the quality of their supplements is exceedingly high. Second of all, we wanted to have a location where you could find all of the supplements discussed on The Huberman Lab Podcast in one easy-defined place. You can now find that place at livemomentous.com/huberman. In addition, Momentous Supplements ship internationally, something that a lot of other supplement companies simply do not do. So that's terrific whether or not you live in the US or you live abroad. Right now, not all of the supplements that we'd discuss on The Huberman Lab Podcast are listed, but that catalog of supplements is being expanded very rapidly and a good number of them that we've talked about, some of the more prominent ones for sleep and focus and other aspects of mental and physical health are already there. Again, you can find them at livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin-mineral probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012 and I've taken it every day since so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it covers all of my foundational nutritional needs. In fact, when people ask me, "what's the one supplement I should take?" I always say Athletic Greens because by taking Athletic Greens, you give support to your immune system, to your endocrine system, to your nervous system and to the so-called gut-brain axis and the gut microbiome. As many of you've probably heard, our gut, meaning everywhere from our mouth down all the way through our intestine, is populated by trillions of little microbacteria that support the different systems of our body. Athletic Greens has the probiotics that support the microbiome, and in turn, support things like mood, endocrine function, immune system, and so on. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim their special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Many people are deficient in vitamin D3 and in general, vitamin D3 and K2 support a huge number of factors in your brain and body that support your immediate and long-term health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim their special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics, and frankly, I'm not a big fan of the word nootropics. I've said that on various podcasts and on social media posts and the reason I'm not a fan of the word nootropics is it means smart drugs. But as a neuroscientist, I know that we don't have circuits in the brain or chemicals in the brain for being smart, we have circuits in the brain for focus and for task switching and for creativity, and oftentimes those circuits differ from one another although they collaborate to create things that we think of as intelligence or focus or creativity, et cetera. Thesis understands this and for that reason, has developed custom nootropics that match your particular goals and to your particular biology. They give you the opportunity to try several different blends over the course of a month and discover which ones work best for you and which ones don't. In addition to that personalization, they take it a step further by offering free consultations with a coach to help you optimize your experience and dial in your perfect formulas. I've been using Thesis for about eight months now and I can confidently say that their nootropics are the best that I've ever used. My go-to formula is the Clarity Formula or the Motivation Formula when I'm going to work or work out, meaning when I'm going to do focus cognitive work, or I'm going to exercise. I also like their Energy Formula prior to exercise. To get your own personalized nootropics starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman. You can take a three minute quiz that will help match you to the best custom nootropics to start with. And Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in that first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers that have cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've talked many times on this podcast and another podcast and on social media about the critical relationship between temperature and sleep. Generally speaking, your body temperature has to drop by about one to three degrees in order to get into and to stay in deep sleep. And waking up has a lot to do with an increase in body temperature of about one to three degrees. So for many people like myself who run warm during the night, I find myself waking up in the middle of the night. However, recently I started using an Eight Sleep mattress cover and by programming in the specific temperatures that work for me across the night, I'm staying asleep through the whole night and as a consequence, I'm feeling far better during the day, much more focus, alertness, et cetera, all the great things that come from getting excellent sleep consistently. The Pro Pod Cover by Eight Sleep is their most advanced solution on the market for thermal regulation during sleep, that's the one I use. It pairs dynamic cooling and heating with biometric tracking. It also has this really nice feature where your mattress basically vibrates a little bit right upon waking, I like that as well. You can cover any mattress with it. You can start sleeping as cool as 55 degrees Fahrenheit, or as warm as 110 degrees Fahrenheit, And that range is available to you simply because Eight Sleep understands that people have a tremendous range in natural body temperatures and sleeping environments. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out their Pro Pod Cover and save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships within the USA, Canada, and in the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Let's talk about OCD or obsessive-compulsive disorder. First of all, as the name suggests, OCD includes thoughts or obsessions and compulsions which are actions. The obsessions and the compulsions are often linked. In fact, most of the time, the obsessions and the compulsions are linked such that the compulsion, the behavior, is designed to relieve the obsession. However, one of the hallmark themes of obsessive-compulsive disorder is that the obsessions are intrusive. People don't want to have them. They don't enjoy having them. They just seem to pop into people's minds and they seem to pop into their mind recurrently. And the compulsions, unlike other sorts of behaviors, provide brief relief to the obsession, but then very quickly reinforce or strengthen the obsession. This is a very key theme to realize about obsessive-compulsive disorder so I'm just going to repeat it again. These two features, first, the fact that the obsessions are intrusive and recurrent, as well as the fact that the compulsions, the behaviors, provide, if anything, only brief relief for the obsessions, but in most cases simply serve to make the obsessions stronger are the hallmark features of obsessive-compulsive disorder. And it turns out to be very important to keep these in mind as we go forward, not just because they define obsessive-compulsive disorder, but they also define the sorts of treatments that will and will not work for obsessive-compulsive disorder. And then once you understand a little bit about the neural circuitry underlying obsessive-compulsive disorder, which we'll talk about in a few moments, then you will clearly understand why being a quote-unquote, obsessive person or having obsessive-compulsive personality is not the same as OCD. In fact, we can leap ahead a little bit and compare and contrast OCD with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder along one very particular set of features. Again, I'll go into this in more detail later, but it's fair to say that OCD is characterized by these recurrent and intrusive obsessions. And as I mentioned before, the fact that those obsessions get stronger as a function of people performing certain behaviors. So unlike an itch that you feel, and then you scratch it and it feels better, OCD is more like an itch that you feel, you scratch it, and the itch intensifies. That contour or that pattern of behaviors and thoughts interacting is very different than obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, which mainly involves a sense of delayed gratification that people want and somewhat enjoy because it allows them to function better or more in line with how they would like to show up in the world. So again, OCD has mainly to do with obsessions that are intrusive and recurrent, whereas obsessive-compulsive personality disorder does not have that intrusive feature to it. People do not mind, or in fact, often invite or like the particular patterns of thought that lead them to be compulsive along certain dimensions. So leaving aside obsessive-compulsive personality disorder for the moment, let's focus a bit more on OCD and define how it tends to show up in the world. First of all, OCD is extremely common. In fact, current estimates are that anywhere from 2.5% to as high as 3 or even 4% of people suffer from true OCD, that is an astonishingly high number. Now, the reason the range is so big, 2.5% all the way up to 3, or maybe even 4%, is that a lot of the features of OCD go unnoticed both in the clinician's office and simply because people don't report it and don't talk about it. In fact, it is possible to have recurrent and intrusive obsessions and not engage in the sorts of behaviors that would ever allow people to notice that somebody has OCD. That can be because some of the intrusive thoughts don't actually lead to overt behaviors like hand washing or checking that other people would notice. It can also be because people learn to disguise or hide their obsessions and their compulsions out of shame or fear of looking strange or whatever it might be such that they have these obsessive and intrusive thoughts, and they do little micro-behaviors like they might tap their fingers on their thigh as a way to avoid, at least in their own mind, something catastrophic happening. That might seem crazy to you, it might seem bizarre, but this is the sort of thing that operates in a lot of people. And I really want to emphasize this because the clinical literature that are out there really point to the fact that many people have OCD, full blown OCD, and never report it because of the kind of shame and hiding associated with it. Another thing to point out is that OCD is extremely debilitating. I mentioned this a few minutes ago, but OCD is currently listed as number seven in terms of the most debilitating illnesses, not just mental illnesses or disorders, but all types of illnesses including things like asthma and cancer, et cetera. So you can imagine with that standing at number seven, that it is both extremely common and extremely debilitating. And as a consequence, it's now realized that many hours, days, weeks, months, or even years of work performance or showing up at work of relational interactions really suffer as a consequence of people having OCD. So this is a vital problem that the scientific and psychiatric and psychological communities understand. And it's one of the reasons that I'm doing this podcast. And of course, I received a ton of interest in OCD because of this incredibly high incidence of OCD and how debilitating it is. We could go really deep into why it's so debilitating. I don't want to spend too much time on that because I think most of that is pretty obvious, but some of it is not. For instance, one of the things that makes OCD so debilitating is, of course, the shame that we talked about before. But it's also the fact that when people are focusing on their obsessions and their compulsions, they're not able to focus on other things. That's simply the way that the brain works. We're not able to focus on too many things at once. The other thing is that OCD takes a lot of time out of people's lives. With recurrent intrusive thoughts happening at very high frequency, or even at moderate frequency, people are spending a lot of time thinking about this stuff and they're thinking about the behaviors they need to engage in, and then engaging in the behaviors, which as I mentioned before, just serve to strengthen the compulsions and so they're not actually doing the other things that make us functional human beings like commuting to work or doing homework or doing work or listening when people are talking or interacting or sports or working out, all the things that make for a rich quality life are taken over by OCD in many cases. So while that might be obvious to some, I'm not sure that it's obvious to everybody just how much time OCD can occupy. Another thing you'll soon learn is that sadly, a lot of the obsessions and compulsions in OCD often relate to taboo topics. And that's because the general categories of OCD fall into three different bins, checking obsessions and compulsions, repetition obsessions and compulsions, and order obsessions and compulsions. The checking ones are somewhat obvious, checking the stove or checking the locks, which I think we all tend to do. I'm somebody typically I'll head off to the car to commute to work and I'll think, did I lock the front door, and I'll go back once, but I won't go back twice or 50 times. People with OCD will often go back 20 or 30 times before they'll actually allow themselves to drive off. And then it's a real challenge for them to continue to drive off and discard with the idea that they didn't check the stove or they didn't check the locks or they didn't check something else critical. Repetition obsessions and compulsions, obviously can dovetail with the the checking ones, but those tend to be things like counting off of a certain number of numbers, like one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. People perform that repeatedly, repeatedly, repeatedly, or feel that they have to. I remember years ago watching a documentary about the band, The Ramones, right? Most people heard of The Ramones, right? Jeans, T-shirts, aviator glasses, everyone had to change their last name to Ramone. They weren't actually all related to one another, by the way. You had to change your last name to Ramone. The Ramones had one band member who was admittedly and known to others as having OCD. And during that documentary, which I forget the name, I think it was called, can't remember, anyway, can't remember, hippocampal lapse there, but in this documentary, the band members describe Joey Ramone as leaving hotels, walking down the stairs to the parking lot, but then having to walk up and down them seven or eight times, and sometimes getting out of the van again and walking up and down them seven or eight times and it always had to be a certain number of times, given a certain number of stairs. This appears, quote-unquote, crazy, but of course, we don't want to think of this as crazy. This is somebody who very likely had full blown OCD. Now that particular example, believe it or not, is not all that uncommon. It just so happens that that example entailed certain compulsions and behaviors that were overt and that other people could see. And you can imagine how that would prevent somebody from moving about their daily life easily. A lot of people, as I mentioned before, have obsessions and compulsions that they hide and they do these little micro behaviors, or they'll just count off in their head as opposed to generating some sort of walking up and downstairs or tapping or things of that sort. So we have checking, we have repetition, and then there's order. Order oftentimes is thought of as putting cleanliness or making sure everything is aligned and perfect and orderly. And oftentimes that is the case, but there are other forms of order that people with OCD can focus on in a obsessive and compulsive way. Things like incompleteness, the idea that one can't walk away from something or stop doing something because something's not right or complete in that picture. It could be the way the table is set. It could be the way that something's written on a page. It could be an email. Again, now we're still talking about OCD, the disorder. We're not talking about obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. I'm aware of, well, I'll just be direct, several colleagues of mine and it's just remarkable, the order in their emails. Every email is perfect, punctuated, perfect, grammar, perfect, everything's spaced perfect. Do they have OCD? Well, they might, they might not. How would I know unless they disclose that to me. But they might have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, or they just might be able to generate a lot of order and they have a lot of discipline around the way they write, and the way they present any communication with anybody at all. So if somebody has a OCD that's in the domain of order, it could be incompleteness and the constant feeling of something not being completed and a need to complete it. It can also be in terms of symmetry, that everything be aligned in symmetric in some way. This could be seen perhaps in young kids. This is one example that I read in the literature of children that need to arrange their stuffed animals in exact same order every day and in a particular order to the point where if you were to move the little stuffed frog over next to the stuffed rabbit, that the child would have an anxiety reaction to that and feel literally compelled, driven to fix that maybe even multiple times over and over again. We'll talk about OCD in children versus adults in a little bit. And then the other aspect of order, which is a little bit less than intuitive, is this notion of disgust, this idea that something is contaminated. So we often think about OCD and hand washing behavior in response to people feeling that something is contaminated, a space, a towel, et cetera, or even simply somebody else's hand and so they're unwilling to shake somebody's hand. You can imagine how these different bins of obsessions and compulsions, checking repetition and order be extremely debilitating depending on how severe they are and how many different domains of life they show up in. Because oftentimes in movies and even the way I'm describing it now it sounds as if, okay, well somebody has to check the locks but they don't have to also check the stove, or somebody has the need to count to seven back and forth up to seven and down to seven seven times seven times a day or something of that sort where they need symmetry in very specific domains of life. But it turns out that this recurrent and intrusive aspect of obsessions leads people with OCD to have checking repetition and/or order compulsions everywhere. So whether or not somebody is at work or in school or trying to engage in sport or trying to engage in relationship or just something simple like walking down the street, the obsessions are so intrusive that they show up and they compel people to do things in that domain independent of whether or not they happen to be in one location or another. In other words, the thought patterns and the behaviors take over the environment as opposed to the environment driving the thought patterns and behaviors. So it therefore becomes impossible to ever find a room that's clean enough, to find a bed that's made well enough, to find anything that's done well enough to remove the obsession. And I know I've said it multiple times now, but I'm going to say it many times throughout this episode in a somewhat obsessive, but I believe justified way that every time that one engages in the compulsion related to the obsession, the obsession simply becomes stronger. So you can imagine what a powerful and debilitating loop that really is. So let's drill a little bit deeper into how the obsessions and compulsions relate to one another. If we were to draw a line between the obsessions and the compulsions, that line could be described as anxiety. Now, we need to define what anxiety is and to be quite honest, most of psychology and science can't agree on exactly what anxiety is. Typically the way we think about fear is that it's a heightened state of autonomic arousal, so increased heart rate, increased breathing, sweating, et cetera, in response to an immediate and present threat or perceived threat. Whereas anxiety, generally speaking in the scientific literature, relates to the same sorts of thought patterns and somatic bodily responses, heart rate, breathing, et cetera, but without a clear and present danger being in the environment or right there. So that's the way that we're going to talk about anxiety now. And anxiety is really what binds the obsessions and compulsions such that someone will have an intrusive thought. So for instance, someone will have the thought that if they turn left on any street, that something bad will happen. Okay, that's an obsession. It's actually not all that uncommon. Now, how bad and what the specificity of that bad thing really is will vary. Some people will think, if I turn left, something generally bad will happen, it just makes me feel anxious, So they always insist on going right. Whereas other people will think if I turn left, so and so will die, or I will die, or something terrible will happen, I'll get a disease or someone else will get a disease or I'll be cursing myself or somebody else in some very specific way. This is unfortunately quite common in people with OCD. So they have this feeling and the feeling can be generally or specifically related to a particular outcome. But beneath that is a feeling of anxiety, a quickening of the heartbeat, a quickening of breathing, a narrowing of one's visual focus. I've talked about this before in another podcast, the Master Stress, another podcast but if you haven't heard those, let me just briefly describe that when we are in a state of increased so-called autonomic arousal, alertness, stress, et cetera, our visual field literally narrows, the aperture of our visual field gets smaller and that's because of the relationship between the autonomic nervous system and your visual system, so you start seeing the world through sort of soda straw view or through binocular-like view, as opposed to seeing the big picture. Why is that important? Well, it literally sharpens and narrows your focus toward the very thing that the obsessions and the compulsions are focused on. So the person walking down the street who sees the opportunity to go left or right will only see the bad decision, their visual field narrows very tightly along that possibility of taking a left turn. And I know as I describe this seems totally irrational, but I want to emphasize that the person with OCD knows it's irrational. They might feel crazy because they're having these thoughts, but they know it makes no sense whatsoever that left somehow would be different than right in terms of outcomes in this particular case, and yet it feels as if it would. In fact, in some cases it feels as if they went left, they would have a full blown panic attack. So the idea here is that the obsessions and compulsions are bound by anxiety, but then by taking a right-hand turn, again, in this one particular example, by taking a right-hand turn, there's a very brief, I should mention, very brief relief of that anxiety at the time of the decision to go right, not left and there's an additional drop in anxiety while one takes the right-hand turn as opposed to the left-hand turn. And then as I alluded to before, there's a reinforcement of the compulsion. In other words, by going right, it doesn't create a situation in the brain and psychology of the person that, oh, you know what, I'm not anxious anymore, left would've probably been okay. It reinforces the idea that right made me feel better, or turning right made me feel better, and going left would've been that much worse. Again, it reinforces the obsession even further. And again, we could swap out right turns and left turns with something like hand washing, the feeling that something is contaminated and the need to wash one's hands even though one already washed their hands 20, 30, 50 times prior. And we're actually going to go back to that example a little bit later when we talk about one particular category of therapies that are very effective in many people for OCD which are the cognitive behavioral and exposure therapies. I think some of you have heard of cognitive behavioral and exposure therapies, but the way they're used to treat OCD is very much different than the way they're used to treat other sorts of anxiety disorders and other sorts of disorders generally. So it's fair to say that up to 70% of people with OCD have some sort of anxiety or elevated anxiety, either directly related to the OCD or indirectly related to the OCD and it's really hard to tease those apart because OCD can create its own anxiety, as I mentioned before, it can even increase its own anxiety. And there's also an issue of depression. Having OCD can be very depressing, especially if some of these OCD thoughts and behaviors start to really impede people's ability to function in life. At work, and school, and relationship, they can start feeling less optimistic about life. And in fact, some people can become suicidally depressed. That's how bad OCD can be for us. So we have to be careful when saying that 70% of people with OCD also have anxiety or X number of people with OCD are also depressed because we don't know whether or not the depression led the OCD or the other way around or whether or not they're operating, as we say in science, in parallel. Some of the drug treatments for OCD and depression and anxiety can tease some of that apart and we'll talk about that, but I think it's fair to say that what binds the obsessions and compulsions is anxiety, that there's a feeling of, or I should say an urgent feeling of a need to get rid of the obsession. And the person feels as if the only way they can do that is to engage in a particular compulsive behavior. Some people are probably wondering if there's a genetic component to OCD and indeed there is, although the nature of it isn't exactly clear. And oftentimes when people hear that something has a genetic component, they think it's always directly inherited from a parent, and that's not always the case. There can be genes that surface in siblings or genes that surface in children that are not readily apparent in terms of what we call a phenotype. So you have a genotype, the gene, and then you have a phenotype, the way it shows up as a body form or like eye color or how it shows up in terms of a behavior or behavioral pattern. Based on twin studies where researchers have examined identical twins, fraternal twins, even identical twins that share the same sack in utero, the what we call monochorionic, so sitting in the same little bag during pregnancy or in different little bags, you can see different levels of what's called genetic concordance. But if we were to just sort of cut a broad swath through all of the genetic data, it's fair to say that about 40 to 50% of OCD cases have some genetic component, some mutation or some inherited aspect that's genetic and that one could point to if they got their genome mapped. Now, while that's interesting, I don't think it's terribly useful for most people. First of all, you can't really control your genes, at least at this point in history, even though there are things like epigenetic control and people are very excited about technologies like CRISPR for modifying the genome in humans at some point, most people can't control their genetics, right? You can't pick who your parents were as they say. So just know that there is a genetic component in about half of people with OCD, but not always. Now as is typical for this podcast, I want to focus on some of the neural mechanisms and chemical systems in the brain and body that generate obsessive-compulsive disorder. In fact, if you've watched this podcast before, listen to this podcast before, this is always how I structure things. First, we introduce a topic and we explore that topic in detail and really define what it is and what it isn't. And then it's very important that we focus on what is known and what is not known about the biological mechanisms that generate whatever that thing happens to be, in this case, OCD and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Now I want to emphasize that even if you don't have a background in biology, I will make this information accessible to you. And I also want to emphasize that for those of you that are interested in treatments and are anxiously awaiting the description of things that can help with OCD, I encourage you, if you will, to please try and digest some of the material about the underlying mechanisms because understanding even just a little bit of those biological mechanisms can really help shed light on why particular drug and behavioral treatments and other sorts of treatments work and don't work. This is especially important in the case of OCD where it turns out that the order and type of treatment can really vary according to individual, and that's something really special and important about OCD that we really can't say for a number of the other sorts of disorders that we've described on previous podcasts. So let's take a step back and look at the neural circuitry. What's going on in the brain and body of people with OCD? Why the intrusive recurrent thoughts? Why the compulsions? Why is that whole system bound by anxiety? And in some ways in thinking about that, I want you to keep in mind that the brain has two main functions. The brain's main functions are to take care of all the housekeeping stuff, make sure digestion works, make sure the heart beats, make sure you keep breathing no matter what, make sure that you can see, you can hear, you can smell, et cetera, the basic stuff, and then there's an enormous amount of brain real estate that's designed to allow you to predict what's going to happen next, either in the immediate future or in the long-term future. And largely that's done based on your knowledge of the past. So you also have memory systems. And of course you have systems in the brain and body that are designed to bind what's happening at the housekeeping level, like your heart rate, to your anticipation of what's going to happen next. So if you're thinking about something very fearful, your body will have one type of reaction. If you're thinking about something very pleasant and relaxing, your body will have another type of reaction. So whenever I hear about the brain-body distinction, I have to just remind everybody that there really is no distinction between brain and body when you think about it through the nervous system. The nervous system is the brain, the eyes, the spinal cord, but of course all their connections with all the organs of the body and the connections of all the organs of the body with the brain, the spinal cord, et cetera. So as I describe these neural circuits, I don't want you to think of them as just things happening in the head, they are certainly happening in the head, in fact, the circuits all described most in detail do exist within the confines of your cranial vault, that's nerd speak for skull, but those circuits are driving particular predictions and therefore particular biases towards particular actions in your body. They're creating a state of readiness or a state of desire to check or desire to count or desire to avoid et cetera, et cetera. So what are these circuits? Well, there's been a lot of wonderful research exploring the neural circuit's underlying obsessive-compulsive disorder and that's mainly been accomplished through a couple of methods. Most of those methods when applied in humans involve getting some look into which brain areas are active when people are having obsessions and when people are engaging in compulsions. Now that might seem simple to do, but of course your brain is housed inside the cranial vault. And in order to look inside it, you have to use things like magnetic resonance imaging, which is just fancy technology for looking at blood flow, which relates to activation of neurons, nerve cells, or things lik PET, P-E-T, imaging, which has nothing to do with the verb pet and has nothing to do with your house pet, has everything to do with positron emission tomography, which is just another way of seeing which brain areas are active and then you can also use PET to figure out what sorts of neurochemicals are active, like dopamine, et cetera. Many studies, we can fairly say dozens if not hundreds of studies, have now identified a particular circuit or loop of brain areas that are interconnected and very active in obsessive-compulsive disorder. That loop includes the cortex, which is kind of the outer shell of the human brain. The lumpy stuff, as it's sometimes appears, if the skull is removed. And it involves an area called the striatum which is involved in action selection and holding back action. The striatum is involved in what's commonly called go and no-go types of behaviors. So every type of behavior like picking up a pen or a mug of coffee involves a go type function. It involves generating an action. But every time I resist an action, my nervous system is also doing that using this brain structure, the striatum, which includes, among other things, the basal ganglia. We've talked about that before. I'm not trying to overload you with terminology here, but I know some people are interested in terminology. So you have go behaviors and you have no-go, resisting of behaviors, not going toward behavior. The cortex and the striatum are in this intricate back and forth talk. It's really loops of connections. The cortex doesn't tell the striatum what to do, the striatum doesn't tell the cortex what to do. They're in a crosstalk. Like any good relationship, there's a lot of back and forth communication. There's a third element in this cortico-striatal loop as it's called, and that's the thalamus. Now, the thalamus is not a structure I've talked a lot about before on this podcast, but it's one of my favorite structures to think about and teach about in neuroanatomy, which I teach back at Stanford and I've taught for many years elsewhere because the thalamus is this incredible egg-like structure in the center of your brain that has different channels through it. Channels for relaying visual information or auditory information or touch information from your environment up into your cortex, and as a consequence, making certain things that are happening to you and around you apparent to you, making you aware of them, making you perceive them and suppressing others. So for instance, right now, if you're hearing me say this, your thalamus has what are called auditory nuclei, there's collections of neurons that respond to sound waves that are of course coming in through your ears, and your thalamus is active in a way that those particular regions of your thalamus are allowed, literally permitted to pass the information coming from your ears through some other steps but then to your thalamus, your auditory thalamus, then up to your cortex and you can hear what I'm saying right now. At the same time, your thalamus is surrounded by a kind of a shell, something called the thalamic reticular nucleus. Again, you don't have to remember the names, but this thalamic reticular nucleus, also sometimes called the reticular thalamic nucleus, this is, believe it or not, a subject of debate in science. There are people that literally hated each other, probably still hate each other, even though one of them is dead for decades, because they would argue it was thalamic reticular nucleus, the other was reticular thalamic nucleus. Anyway, these are scientists, they're people, they tend to debate. but the thalamic reticular nucleus, as I'm going to call it, serves as a sort of gate as to which information is allowed to pass through up to your conscious experience, and which is not. And that gating mechanism is strongly regulated by the chemical GABA. GABA is a neurotransmitter that is inhibitory, as we say, it serves to shut down or suppress the activity of other neurons. So the thalamic reticular nucleus is really saying, no, touch information cannot come in right now. You should not be thinking about the contact of the back of your legs with the chair that you're sitting on, Andrew, you should be thinking about what you're trying to say and what you're hearing and how your voice sounds and what you see in front of you, et cetera. Whereas if I'm about to get an injection from a doctor or I'm in pain, or I'm in pleasure, I'm going to think about my somatic sensation at the level of touch and I'm probably going to think less about smells in the room, although I might also think about smells in the room or what I'm seeing and what I'm hearing. We can combine all these different sensory modalities, but the thalamic reticular nucleus really allows us to funnel, to direct particular categories of sensory experience into our conscious awareness and suppress other categories of sensory experience. In addition, the thalamic reticular nucleus plays a critical role in which thoughts are allowed to pass up to our conscious perception and which ones are not, so much so that some neuroscientists and indeed some neurophilosophers, if you want call them that, have theorized or philosophized that the thalamic reticular nucleus is actually involved in our consciousness. Now, consciousness isn't a topic that I really want to talk about this episode and it's a very kind of mushy-murky, as we say in science, it's a shmooey term because it doesn't really have clear definitions so arguments about it often get lost in the fact that people are arguing about different things. But when I say consciousness, what I mean is conscious awareness. So let's zoom out and take a look at the circuit that we've got and that we now know based on neuroimaging studies is intimately involved in generating obsessions and compulsions in OCD. We have a cortex or neocortex, which is involved in perception and understanding of what's happening. We have the striatum and basal ganglia, which are involved in generating behaviors, go, and suppressing behaviors, no-go. And we have the thalamus which collects all of our sensory experience in parallel, hearing, touch, smell, et cetera, not so much smell through the thalamus, I should mention, but the other senses that is. And then that thalamus is encased by the thalamic reticular nucleus, which serves as a kind of a guard saying you can pass through and you can pass through, but you, you, you can't pass through up to conscious understanding and perception. So that loop, this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop, cortico-striatal-thalamic loop is the circuit thought to underlie OCD, and dysfunction in that circuit is what's thought to underlie OCD. Now, again, this circuit exists in all of us and it can operate in healthy ways, or it can operate in ways that make us feel unhealthy or even suffer from full blown OCD. How do we know that this circuit is involved in OCD? Well there, we can look to some really interesting studies that involve bringing human subjects into the laboratory and generating their obsessions and compulsions and then imaging their brain using any variety of techniques that we talked about before. What would such an experiment look like? Well, in order to do that sort of experiment, first of all, you need people who have OCD and of course you need control subjects that don't, and you need to be able to reliably evoke the obsessions and the compulsions. Now, it turns out this is most easily, or I should say most simply done, 'cause it can't be easy for the people with OCD, but this is most straightforward, that's the word I was looking for, most straightforward when looking at the category of obsessions and compulsions that relate to order and cleanliness. So what they do typically is bring subjects into the laboratory who have a obsession about germs and contamination and a compulsion to hand wash, and they give these people, believe it or not, a sweaty towel that contains the sweat and the odor and the liquid, basically, from somebody else's hands. In fact, they'll sometimes have someone wipe their own sweat off the back of their neck and put it on the towel and then they'll put it in front of the person, which as you can imagine for someone with OCD is incredibly anxiety-provoking and almost always evokes these obsessions about, ugh, this is really, this is really bad. This is really bad, I need to clean, I need to clean. I need to clean. Now they're doing all this while someone is in a brain scanner or while they're being imaged for positron emission tomography. And then they can also look at the patterns of activation in the brain while the person is doing hand washing. Although sometimes the apparati associated with these imaging studies make it hard to do a lot of movement, they can do these sorts of studies. They have done these sorts of studies in many subjects using different variations of what I just described. And low and behold what lights up? And when I say lights up, what sorts of brain regions are more metabolically active, more blood flow, more neural activity? Well, it's this particular cortico-striatal-thalamic loop. In addition to that, some of the drug treatments that are effective in some, and I want to emphasize some individuals, at suppressing obsessions and or compulsions such as the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or SSRIs, which we'll talk about in a little bit, when people take those drugs, they see not just a suppression of the obsession and compulsion, but also a suppression of these particular neural circuits. They become less active. Now I want to emphasize and telegraph a little bit of what's coming later, these drugs like SSRIs do not work for everybody with OCD. And as many of you know, they carry other certain problems and side effects for many but not all individuals. But nonetheless, what we have now is an observation that this circuit, the cortico-striatal-thalamic loop, is active in OCD. We have a manipulation that when people take a drug that at least in those individuals is effective in suppressing or eliminating the obsessions and compulsions, there's less activity in this loop. And thanks to some very good animal model studies, that at least at this point in time, you really couldn't do in humans, although soon that may change, we now know in a causal way that the equivalent circuitry exists in other animals, such as mice, such as cats, such as monkeys, and that activation of those particular cortico-striatal-thalamic circuits in animal models can indeed evoke OCD in an individual that prior to that did not have OCD. So I'm just going to briefly describe one study. This is a now classic study published in the journal Science, one of the three apex journals in 2013. The first author on this paper is Susanne Ahmari, A-H-M-A-R-I. I will provide a link to this in the show notes. It's a truly landmark paper done in Rene Hen's lab at Columbia University. And the title of the paper is repeated cortico-striatal stimulation generates, that's the key word here, generates persistent OCD-like behavior. What they did is they took mice, mice do mouse things. They move around, they play with toys, they eat, they pee, they mate, they do various things in their cage, but they also groom. Humans groom, animals with fur groom, Well, you hope most people groom, some people over-groom, some people under-groom, but most people groom. They'll comb their hair, they'll clean, et cetera. Those are normal behaviors that humans engage in. I'm not aware that mice comb their hair, but mice adjust their hair. So they'll kind of pet their hair and they'll do this. They'll sometimes even do it to each other. We used to have mice in the lab, now we only do human studies, but the mice will groom themselves, and typical, what we call wild type mice, not because they're wild, but because they're typical, will groom themselves at a particular frequency, but not to the point where their hair is falling out. Not constantly, they are grooming some of the time and they're doing other mouse things other mouse times. So in this particular study, what they did is they used some technology, which it actually was discussed on a previous episode of The Huberman Lab Podcast, this is technology that was developed by a psychiatrist and bioengineer by the name of Karl Deisseroth, one of my colleagues at Stanford School of Medicine. This is technology that allows researchers to use the presentation of light to control neural activity in particular brain areas in a very high fidelity way. You control the activity in the cortex of the striatum or the thalamus when you want and how you want. It's really a beautiful technology. In any event, what they did in this study is, or I should say what Susan Ahmari and colleagues did in this study was to stimulate the cortico-striatal circuitry in animals that did not have any OCD-like behavior. And when they did that, those animals started grooming incessantly to the point where their hair was falling out or they even, they didn't take the experiments this far, fortunately, but the animals would have a tendency to almost rub themselves raw in the same way that somebody who has a compulsion to hand wash would, sadly, people will hand wash to the point where their hands are actually bleeding and raw. It's really that bad. I know that's tough imagery to imagine, and you can't even imagine why someone would self harm in that way, but again, that's that incredible anxiety relationship between the compulsion, excuse me, the obsession and the compulsion, and the fact that engaging in the compulsion simply strengthens the obsession and therefore the anxiety. So that collection of studies, of data, FMRI, PET scanning in humans, the treatment with SSRIs, and these experiments where researchers have actively triggered these particular circuits in animal models that previously did not have too much activity in these circuits and then they observe OCD emerging really points squarely to the fact that the cortico-striatal-thalamic loop is likely to be the basis of OCD. Now, of course, other circuits could also be involved, but the cortico-striatal-thalamic circuit seems to be the main circuit generating OCD-like behavior. That's a lot of mechanism. Hopefully it was described in a way that you can digest and understand. And some of you might be thinking, well, so what? Why does that help me? I mean, I can't reach into my brain and turn off my cortex. I can't reach into my brain and turn off my thalamus. And indeed, on the one hand, that's true. But as you'll next learn when thinking about the various behavioral treatments and drug treatments and holistic treatments for OCD, what you'll notice is that each one taps into a different component of this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop. And by understanding that, you can start to see why certain treatments might work at one stage of the illness versus others. You will also start to understand why obsessive-compulsive personality disorder does not have the same sorts of engagements of these neural loops, and yet relies on other aspects of brain and body and therefore responds best to other sorts of treatments. Or in some cases, people with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are not even seeking treatment as I alluded to before. The point here is that by understanding the underlying mechanism why certain drugs and behavioral treatments work and don't work will become immediately apparent and in thinking about that, in knowing that, you'll be able to make excellent choices, I believe, in terms of what sorts of treatments you pursue, what sorts of treatments you abandon, and most importantly, the order, the sequence that you pursue and apply those treatments. Before we go any further, I'd like to give people a little bit of a window into what a diagnosis for OCD would look like. Give you a sense of the sorts of questions that a clinician would ask to determine whether or not somebody has OCD or not. Now, I want to be clear, I'm not going to do this in an exhaustive way. I wouldn't want anyone to self-diagnose. Although I'm hoping that by sharing some of this, that some of you might get insight into whether or not you do have obsessions and compulsions that might qualify for OCD, and perhaps even to seek out help. The most commonly used test of OCD, or for OCD, I should say, is called the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale. And this is, scientists love acronyms as do the military, and it's the Y-BOCS, the Y-B-O-C-S, the Y-BOCS. So typically someone will go into the clinic either because a family member encouraged them to or because they feel that they're suffering from obsessions and compulsions, and before the clinician would proceed with any kind of direct questions, they would very clearly define what obsessions and compulsions are. And here I'm actually reading from the Y-BOCS. So quote, "obsessions are unwelcome and distressing ideas, thoughts, images or impulses that repeatedly enter your mind. They may seem to occur against your will. They may be repugnant to you, you may recognize them as senseless and they may not fit your personality." Then there are compulsions. Quote, "Compulsions, on the other hand, are behaviors or acts that you feel driven to perform although you may recognize them as senseless or excessive. At times, you may try to resist doing them but this may prove difficult. You may experience anxiety that does not diminish until the behavior is completed." And as I mentioned before in many cases, immediately after the behavior has completed, the anxiety doesn't just return, it indeed can strengthen. Now, there are a tremendous number of questions on the Y-BOCS. So I'm just going to highlight a few of the general categories. Typically, the person will fill out a checklist, so they will designate whether or not currently or in the past they have, for instance, aggressive obsessions, fear that one might harm themselves, fear that one might harm others, fear that they'll steal things, fear that they will act on unwanted impulses, currently or in the past or both, that's one category. The other one are contamination obsessions. So concern with dirt or germs, bothered by sticky substances or residues, et cetera, et cetera. So there are a bunch of different categories that include, for instance, sexual obsessions, what are called saving obsessions, even moral obsessions, excess concern with right or wrong or morality, concerned with sacrilege and blasphemy, obsession with need for symmetry and exactness. Again, all of these questions being answered as either present in the past or not present in the past, present currently or not present currently. And then the test generally transitions over to questions about target symptoms. They really try and get people to identify if they have obsessions, what are their exact obsessions? Now, this turns out to be really important because as we talk about some of the therapies that really work, I'll just give away a little bit of why they work best in certain cases and why they don't work as well in other cases, it turns out that it becomes very important for the clinician and the patient to not just identify the obsessions and the compulsions generally in a kind of a generic or top contour way, but to really encourage or even force the patient to define very precisely what the biggest, most catastrophic fear is, what the obsession really relates to. That turns out to be very important in disrupting this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop and getting relief from symptoms one way or the other. So the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale, this Y-BOCS, again, is very extensive, it goes on for dozens of pages actually, and has all these different categories, not so much designed to just pinpoint what people obsess about or what they feel compelled to do, but to also try and identify what is the fear that's driving all this. In the way that we've set this up thus far, we've been talking about obsessions and compulsions is kind of existing in a vacuum. You're obsessed about germs and you're compelled to wash your hands, obsessed about germs, compelled to wash your hands. Or obsessed about symmetry, compelled to put right angles on everything. Or obsessed about counting and therefore counting, et cetera. But beneath that is a cognitive component that is not at all apparent from someone describing their obsession and from someone describing or displaying their compulsion. The deeper layer to all that is what is the fear, exactly, if one were to not perform the compulsion, meaning what is the fear that's driving the obsession? So that brings us to a very powerful category of treatments that I should say does not work in everybody with OCD but works in many people with OCD and really speaks to the underlying neural circuitry that generates OCD and how to interrupt it. And that is the treatment of cognitive behavioral therapy and in particular, exposure-based cognitive behavioral therapy. So we're going to talk about cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy now, but right at the outset, I want to distinguish the kinds of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapies that are done for obsessive-compulsive disorder, for the sorts of cognitive behavioral therapies that are done for other types of mental challenges and disorders because cognitive behavioral therapy for OCD really has everything to do with identifying the utmost fear. In some sense, we can think of fears as kind of along a hierarchy. An the example earlier of somebody being afraid to turn left and therefore feeling compelled to turn right, you would want to take that person and really understand what do they fear most about turning left? Now they might not be aware of it. They might not be conscious to what that really is, but if you were to probe them in a clinical setting, you would eventually get to an answer. That answer could be at first, I don't know, just, it's just bad. I don't know why it's bad, it makes no sense, but it's just bad. I do not want to go left. I don't know why, I don't know why. But if you were to push that person a little bit in a respectful and kind and caring way aimed at their treatment, if you were to push 'em and say, well, what do you mean by bad? If you turn left, you think the world would end? They might say, no, the world's not going to end, but you know, someone is going to die suddenly. I know that sounds crazy, but somebody's going to die suddenly. This almost sounds like superstition, we'll talk about superstitions later, but indeed it is somewhat superstitious. So for instance, you would say, who's going to die? And they'd say, I don't know. And you'd say, no, really who's going to die? If you think about this, are you going to die? Is so and so going to die? And very often, very often what you find is that people will start to reveal the underlying obsession at a level of detail that both to the clinician and to them can be somewhat astonishing even though they've been living with that detail in their mind for a very long time. Now, how could somebody start to reveal detail about something that's existed in their mind for a very long time, but not known about it, right? Not been aware of it. Now, some of you might think, oh, it's repressed or something. That's not at all what's happening. If you think about the architecture of OCD, typically, people will have an obsession and then they'll engage in the compulsion as quickly as they can to relieve that obsession. So in many ways, the disease itself prevents people from ever getting to the bottom of that trough, ever getting to the point where they really clearly articulate to themselves exactly what it is that they fear. But it becomes so essential to articulate exactly what it is that they fear for a somewhat counterintuitive reason. You might think, oh, the moment they realize exactly what they fear, everything lifts, the circuit turns off and they just feel better because they realized it. I wish I could tell you that's the case, but it turns out it's the opposite. What the clinician is actually trying to do is get people to feel more anxiety, not less. What they're trying to get them to do is to short circuit, no pun intended, to intervene in their own neural circuit, I should say, with that relief of anxiety, however brief, brought on by engaging in the compulsion related to the obsession. So, whereas typically someone would feel the obsession with, ugh, I don't want to turn left 'cause something bad's going to happen, someone's going to die, and then they turn right, they never get the option or the opportunity to really explore what would happen were they to turn left or to not be able to turn right. By forcing them down the path of inquiry, that leads them to the place where they very clearly identify the fear, the anxiety, it raises the anxiety in them, and that's actually what the clinician is after. Cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy in the context of OCD, most often involves trying to get people to tolerate, not relieve their anxiety. This is extremely important. And I realize there's variation to this depending on the style of cognitive behavioral therapy, the style of exposure therapy, but almost across the board, The goal, again, is to get people to feel the anxiety that normally they are able to at least partially relieve, however briefly, by engaging in the compulsion. So if we think back to that circuit of cortico-striatal-thalamic, what's going on here? Where is CBT intervening? What part of the circuit is getting interrupted? Well, as you recall, the cortex is involved in conscious perception. The thalamus and that thalamic reticular nucleus are involved in the passage of certain types of experience up to our conscious perception, not others. And the striatum is involved in this go, no-go type behavior. When OCD is really expressing itself in its fullness, people feel an anxiety around a particular thought and they either have a go, for instance, wash hands, or a no-go, do not turn left type reaction. By having people progressively, in a kind of hierarchical way, reveal their precise source of anxiety, their utmost fear in this context, what happens is they feel enormous amounts of autonomic arousal. Now in the context of anxiety treatment or other types of treatments, the goal would be to teach people to dampen, to lessen their anxiety through breathing techniques or through visualization techniques or through self-talk or through social support, any of the number of things that are well-known to help people self regulate their own anxiety. Here, it's the opposite. What they're trying to get the patient to do is to really feel the anxiety at its maximum, but then do the exact opposite of whatever the normal compulsion is. So if normally the compulsion is to wash one's hands, then the idea is to suppress hand washing while being in the experience of the utmost anxiety. Or in the case of not turning left, the person is expected to or would hopefully be able to actually turn left, and as you can imagine, that would evoke tremendous anxiety and yet to tolerate that anxiety. Now I want to be very clear, this is not the sort of thing you want to do on your own. This is not the sort of thing you want to do for a friend. This is done by trained licensed psychologists and psychiatrists. But nonetheless, it really points to the fact that as a anxiety-related disorder, OCD is distinct from other types of anxiety and anxiety-related disorders, things like PTSD and panic disorder, et cetera, because the goal again is to bring the person right up close to the thing that they fear the most and then to interrupt the circuit. And now you should be able to know, just intuitively, 'cause you understand the mechanisms, that the circuit you're trying to disrupt is the pattern of information flow from the thinking part of the brain, the perception part of the brain, which is the cortex, to the striatum. The striatum has these neurons which are active that essentially are, I know it sounds a little bit like a discussion about free will, but they're trying to get some, the person to generate a certain behavior, suppress a certain behavior. And as anxiety ramps up, it's sort of a hydraulic pressure to do that very thing that they've done for so long and they suffer from so much. We talked about hydraulic pressure in the context of aggression in the aggression episode, this is very similar. There's a kind of a, now when I say hydraulic pressure, it's not actual hydraulic pressure, it's the confluence of a lot of different systems. It's neurochemicals, we'll soon learn, it's hormonal, it's electrical, it's a lot of different things operating in parallel so we can't point to one chemical or transmitter. What's happening is the person is feeling compelled to act, act, act to relieve the anxiety and through a progressive type of exposure, you don't throw people in the deep end in this kind of therapy right off the bat, you gradually ratchet them toward or move them toward the discussion of exactly what they fear the most and then eventually move them toward the interruption of the compulsion as they're feeling this extremely elevated anxiety, of course, within the context of a supportive clinical setting. But in doing that, what you are teaching people is that the anxiety can exist without the need to engage in the compulsion. Now some of this might sound to people like, oh, this is a lot of kind of fancy psychological neuroscience speak around something that's kind of intuitive. But I think for most people, this is not intuitive. And for people with OCD, there's no really other way to put it, the impulse, the compulsion to avoid anxiety is such a powerful driving force that it should now make sense to you as to why being able to tolerate anxiety and really sit with it and do the exact opposite of what you're normally compelled to do is going to be the path to treatment. And indeed CBT has been shown to be enormously effective, again for a large number of people with OCD, but not all of them. And oftentimes it requires that it also be used in concert with certain drug treatments, which we're going to talk about in a moment. Next, let's talk about some of the really unique features of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy in the context of OCD that you often don't see in the use of CBT, that is cognitive behavioral therapy, for other types of psychiatric challenges and disorders. The first element is one of stair casing. And I already mentioned this before, but this gradual and progressive increase in the anxiety that you're trying to evoke from the patient, from the person suffering from OCD. That's done in the context of the office or the laboratory, again, by a trained and licensed clinician. But then the person leaves, right? They leave the office, they leave the laboratory. And a very vital component of CBT and exposure therapy for people with OCD is that they have and perform what's called homework, is literally what they call. This might be seen in other sorts of treatments but for OCD, homework is extremely important, because within the context of a laboratory experiment or the clinic, patients often feel so much support that they can tolerate those heightened levels of anxiety and interrupt their compulsions. Whereas when they get home, oftentimes the familiarity of the environment brings 'em to a place where all of a sudden those obsessions and compulsions start interacting the same way and they have a very hard time suppressing the behaviors. Why would that be? Well in neuroscience, we have a phrase, it's called conditioned place preference and conditioned place avoidance. There's some other phrases too but basically it all has to do with a simple thing which is, when you feel something repeatedly in a given environment, or sometimes even once within a given environment, you tend to feel that same thing again when you return to that or similar environments. Okay, So conditioned place blank, or conditioned place that is simply fancy nerd speak for the fact that when you're in a place and something good happens, you tend to feel good if you return to that place or a place like it, or if something bad happens in a given place, you tend to feel bad when you return to that place or a place like it. I think that most salient example that leaps to mind is in, unfortunately, the category of bad, but I had some friends years ago visit San Francisco. There's been a ongoing, it seems like it's been happening forever, but this is really in the last decade of daytime break-ins and nighttime break-ins into cars to steal anything from computers to what seems to be like a box of tissues. And there are numerous reasons for this, I don't want to get into, it's not the topic of today's podcast, but I will use this as an opportunity to say if you're visiting anywhere in the Bay Area, do not leave anything in your car because the window will get broken into, sometimes in broad daylight. Some good friends of mine were visiting the Bay Area and I texted them and said, hey, by the way, when you're headed to dinner, guys, make sure you bring in all your luggage and computers however inconvenient that might be. They wrote back, too late, everything got stolen. So some years ago now, I think five, six years ago this happened, sadly, everything got stolen. Most of it could be replaced, but some of it was very sentimental to them. Every time we talk, every time we consider having a meeting in a particular city, this comes up as I don't want to be there, I don't like that city anymore, et cetera. And of course, San Francisco has some wonderful redeeming features, but it only takes one bad incident in one location to kind of color the whole picture dark, so to speak. The brain works that way. The brain generalizes, it's not a very specific organ, again, it's a prediction machine in addition to other things. So in the case of CBT therapy, the reason there's homework is that when people go home, oftentimes that's when they relapse, if you want to call it that, back into their obsessions and compulsions. And that location, that conditioned place is where it becomes most important to challenge the anxiety and to deal with the anxiety, to not try and suppress the anxiety through compulsions or other means. And when I say other means, I want to highlight something, it will come up again a little bit later in the podcast, that substance abuse is very common in people with OCD because of the anxiety component and also because of people's feelings that they just can't escape from the thoughts or behavioral patterns that are so characteristic of OCD. So alcohol abuse or cannabis abuse, or other forms of narcotics abuse are very common in OCD. Later, we'll talk about whether or not cannabis can or cannot help with OCD. But needless to say, suppressing anxiety is exactly the wrong direction that one should take if the goal is to ultimately relieve or eliminate the OCD. So we now have two characteristics of CBT exposure therapy that are extremely important for OCD and somewhat unique to the treatment of OCD and that's the staircasing up towards the really bad fear, the really severe and specific articulation and understanding and feeling of how bad things really would be if someone engaged in a particular behavior or avoided a particular behavior. Then there's the component of homework given by the clinician for the person to be able to create a broader set of context in which they can deal with the anxiety, not engage in the compulsions. And then a very unique feature of treatment of OCD that you don't see in many other psychiatric disorders are home visits. And I find this fascinating. I think that the field of psychiatry and psychology traditionally doesn't allow for or invite home visits, but this component of context, location and context being so vital to the treatment and relief of OCD has inspired many psychiatrists and psychologists to get permission to do home visits where they actually go visit their patients in their native setting, in their home cages, right? They're not mice, but in their home-home cages, I'm being facetious here, but people, mice live in cages, at least in the laboratory, and humans generally live in houses or elsewhere, so they visit them in their home in order to see how they're interacting and the particular locations that evoke the most anxiety and the least anxiety. Some of the, I don't want to call them crutches, but some of the tools that people are using to confront and deal with the obsessions and compulsions and in particular to try and identify some of the tools and tricks that people are using to try and avoid that heightened anxiety, because, once again, and I know I'm repeating myself, but I think this is just so vital and so unique about OCD and the treatment of OCD, the critical need for the patient to be able to tolerate extremely elevated levels of anxiety is so crucial. So if people are avoiding certain rooms in the house, or if people are avoiding certain foods or certain locations in the kitchen, the clinician can start to identify that by mere observation. And I should mention here that patients are not always aware of how they're interacting with their home environment. Some of these patterns are so deeply ingrained in people that they don't even realize that they're constantly turning to the left, or they don't even realize that they're only washing their hands on one side of the sink. And so the clinician, by visiting the home, can start to interrogate a bit in a polite way, in a friendly, in a supportive way as to, do you ever think about why you always flip the faucet to the left or flip the faucet to the right, et cetera. Now, we all do a lot of things that are habitual. We all do things that are somewhat regular from day to day. In fact, I would invite you to ask yourself, do you always put your toothbrush in the same location? Do you always cap the toothbrush before or after you use it? What sorts of things do you- You wipe the little threading on the toothpaste or not? I'm somebody, I confess that I have, well, I have about 3,500 pet peeves, but one of my pet peeves is toothpaste kind of on the thread of the toothpaste. It really bothers me, I don't know why, almost as much as trying to wipe it off bothers me, which creates a certain challenge. And if I talk about this any further, then I think I would qualify for obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. But I have to say, I don't experience a ton of anxiety about it. It doesn't govern my life. In fact, I realize that right now there are tubes of toothpaste that have toothpaste along the thread everywhere in the world and it doesn't really bother me. I can still sit here and provide some information about OCD to you. It's not intrusive, at least not to my awareness. So by the home visit, the therapist can really start to explore through direct questioning and can allow the patient to explore through direct questioning of themselves the things that they might be conscious of and the things that they might not be conscious of that would qualify for OCD. So I'd like to just briefly summarize the key elements of cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy and how they can be combined with drug treatments that are very effective. Much of what I'm going to talk about next relates to the data and indeed the practice of an incredible research scientist and clinician. So this is Helen Blair Simpson, or I should say Dr. Helen Blair Simpson, because she is indeed an MD medical doctor and a PhD research scientist at Columbia University School of Medicine. And one of the world's foremost experts, if not the expert, I would put her in a category of maybe just one to three people who is most knowledgeable about the mechanisms of OCD, is actively researching OCD in humans, trying to find new treatments, trying to unveil new mechanisms and expand on our current understanding and who also treats OCD quite actively in her own clinic. Dr. Simpson gave a beautiful presentation which she summarized some of the core elements of CBT and exposure therapy for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorders. She describes that the key procedures are exposures, of course, done in person and with the actual thing that evokes the obsessions and compulsions. So this could be the sweaty towel as described earlier, or could be any number of different triggers done with the patient in real time, so in vivo, as we say. And it could also be things that are imaginal, sitting somebody down in a chair, in an office and saying, okay, I want you to imagine the thing that triggers the intrusive thought, or let's just focus on the intrusive thought as it arises, and then to explore and expose the patient to their obsessions and compulsions that way. So it can be real, or it can be imaginal. And the goal, of course, then is to gradually and progressively increase the level of anxiety, but then to intervene in so-called ritual prevention to prevent the person from engaging in the compulsion. The goals, again I'm paraphrasing here, are to, as she states, disconfirm fears and challenge the beliefs about the obsessions and compulsions, to intervene in the thoughts and the behaviors, and to break the habit of ritualizing and avoiding. Now, how is this typically done? What are the nuts and bolts of this procedure? Typically, this is done through two planning sessions with the patient. So describing to the patient what will happen and when it will happen and how long it will happen so that they're not just thrown into this out of the blue. And then 15 exposure sessions done twice a week or more. So the one thing to really understand about cognitive behavioral therapy is that it can take some period of time, several or more weeks, as many as 10 or 12 weeks. However, as you'll soon learn, many of the drug treatments that are effective in treating OCD either alone or in combination with behavioral therapies also can take 8, 10, 12 weeks or longer, and many of those never work at all. So even though 10 to 12 weeks seems like a long period of time, it's actually a pretty standard. If you'd like to see more complete description of the protocols for cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure therapy for OCD, I'll provide links to two papers, Kozak and Foa, F-O-A, which is published in 1997, which might seem like a long time ago, but nonetheless, that the protocols are still very useful. And then the second paper is by that last author, FOA et al in 2012 and we'll provide links to both of those. In addition, Dr. Blair Simpson and others have explored what are the best treatments for patients with OCD by comparing cognitive behavioral therapy alone, placebo, so essentially no intervention or something that takes an equivalent amount of time but is not thought to be effective in treatment. As well as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. So what is an SSRI? An SSRI is a drug that prevents the re-uptake of serotonin at the synapse. What are synapses? They're the little spaces between neurons where neurons communicate with one another by vomiting little bits of chemical into the space, the synapse, and then those chemicals either evoke or suppress the electrical activity of the next neuron across the synapse. And in this case, the neurotransmitter, the chemical that we're referring to is serotonin. SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors prevent the reuptake of the chemical that's left, in this case, the serotonin that's left in the synapse. After that, I call it vomiting to be dramatic, but it's not actually vomiting, the extrusion of the chemical into the synapse. And as a consequence, there's more serotonin around to have more of an effect over time, the net effect being more serotonergic transmission, more serotonin overall. So not more serotonin being made, more serotonin being available for use, that's what an SSRI does. So they compared cognitive behavioral therapy, SSRIs, they also had the placebo group and they had cognitive behavioral therapy plus the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. This was a 12-week study done as described before, two times a week over the course of 12 weeks. First of all, the most important thing, of course, placebo did nothing. It did not relieve the OCD to any significant degree. How did they know that? They gave them the Y-BOCS test that we talked about before, the Yale-Brown test with all those questions of which I read a few. So the OCD severity that one has to have on the Y-BOCS is measured in terms of an index that goes from here from 8 all the way up to 28, that shouldn't mean anything. So that number eight is kind of meaningless here. It's in terms of an index that's only meaningful for the Y-BOCS, but if somebody has a threshold of 16 or higher, it means that they're still having somewhat debilitating symptoms or very debilitating symptoms. Placebo did not reduce the obsessions or compulsions to any significant degree. However, and I think quite excitingly, cognitive behavioral therapy had a dramatic effect in reducing the obsessions and compulsions such that by four weeks, that score that, in this case, ranged from 8 to 28, dropped all the way from 25 down to about 11. So it's a huge drop in the severity of the symptoms. Now, what's really interesting is that when you look at the effects of SSRIs in the treatment of OCD symptoms, they had a significant effect in reducing the symptoms of OCD that showed up first at four weeks, and then continued to eight weeks. In fact, there was a progressive and further reduction in OCD symptoms from the four to eight week period. Again, these are the people just taking the SSRI, and then it sort of flattened out a little bit, such that by 12 weeks, there was still a significant reduction in OCD symptoms for people taking SSRIs as compared to placebo. But the severity of their symptoms was still much greater than those receiving cognitive behavioral therapy alone. So at least in this study, and I should tell you which study it is, this is Foa, Liebowitz et al 2005 in the American Journal of Psychiatry, we'll also provide a link to this so you can peruse the data if you like. But at least in this study, cognitive behavioral therapy was the most effective, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, less effective. So what happens when you combine them? Well, they explored that as well, and the combination of cognitive behavioral therapy and the SSRIs together did not lead to any further decrease in OCD symptoms. This points to the idea that cognitive behavioral therapy is the most effective treatment. And again, when I say cognitive behavioral therapy, now I'm still referring to cognitive behavioral, slash, exposure therapy done in the way that I detailed before, twice a week for 12 weeks or more. So all of the data, at least in this study, point to the fact that cognitive behavioral therapy is really effective and the most effective. Does it alleviate OCD symptoms for everybody? No. Is it very time consuming? Yes. Twice a week for two sessions or more of 15 minutes, sometimes in the office, plus there's homework, plus, in an ideal case, there's also home visits from the psychiatrist or psychologist, that's a lot of investment, a lot of time investment, to say nothing of the potential financial investment. Now, Dr. Blair Simpson has given some beautiful talks where she describes these data and also emphasizes the fact that despite the demonstrated power of cognitive behavioral therapy for the treatment of OCD, most people are given drug treatments simply because of the availability of those drug treatments. Now, when I say most people, I want to emphasize that I'm referring to most people who actually go seek treatment because a really important thing to realize is that most people with OCD do not actually go seek evidence-based treatment. I want to repeat that, most people with OCD do not seek evidence-based treatment, which is a tragic thing. One of the motivations for doing this podcast episode is to try and encourage people who think they may have persistent obsessions and compulsions to seek treatment, but most people don't for a variety of reasons we spelled out earlier, shame, et cetera. Of those that do, the first line of attack is typically a prescription, most often an SSRI, although not always just SSRIs because soon we'll talk about the somewhat common use of also prescribing a low dose of a neuroleptic or an antipsychotic, not always but often. So the important thing to understand here is that excellent researchers like Dr. Simpson understand that while there are treatments that we could say are best or are ideal based on the data, that doesn't necessarily mean that's what's being deployed most often in the general public. As a consequence, Dr. Simpson and others have explored in a very practical way whether or not it matters if somebody is getting SSRI treatment and is experiencing that reduction in OCD symptoms that as you may recall, is more than what they would experience with placebo alone, but not as dramatic a reduction in OCD symptoms as they would get with cognitive behavioral therapy. And as I mentioned before, there was this exploration of combining drug treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy from the outset, but they also quite impressively explored what happens when people who are already taking SSRIs initiate cognitive behavioral therapy. This is a really wonderful thing that they've done this because in doing that, first of all, they're acknowledging that there are many people out there who have sought treatment and are getting some relief from those SSRIs, but it perhaps is not as much relief as they could get. And they are actively acknowledging that many people are getting these drug treatments first. In fact, most often people are getting these drug treatments first. So what happens when you add in cognitive behavioral therapy? Well, the good news is when you add cognitive behavioral therapy to someone who's already taking SSRIs, that further improves their symptoms. Now that's different than the results that I described before from the same laboratory in fact, that if you combine cognitive behavioral therapy with SSRIs from the outset, there's no additional benefit of SSRI. However, as I just described, if someone is already taking an SSRI and they're experiencing a reduction in their OCD symptoms, by adding in cognitive behavioral therapy, there is a further reduction in the symptoms of OCD. This is very important. So for those of you that have sought treatment and you're taking a SSRI, or if you're thinking about treatment and you're prescribed an SSRI, the ideal scenario really would be to combine the drug treatment with cognitive behavioral therapy, or in some cases, maybe cognitive behavioral therapy alone, although that's a decision that you really have to make with the close advice and oversight of a licensed physician, because, of course, these are prescription drugs. And anytime you're going to add or remove a prescription drug or change dosage, you really want to do that in close discussion with and on the advice of your physician. I don't just say that to protect me, I say that to protect you 'cause it's just the right thing to do. So again, cognitive behavioral therapy is extremely powerful. Drug treatments seem less powerful though. If you're already on a drug treatment, adding cognitive behavioral therapy can really help. So I've been talking about SSRIs and described a little bit about how they work at a kind of superficial level of keeping more serotonin in the synapse so that more serotonin can be in action as opposed to gobbled back up by those neurons. I should just mention what some of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are. So things like clomipramine, which is not entirely selective, I should say that that one generally falls into a category of less selective. So it can impair or can enhance some of the other neurotransmitter or neuromodulator systems like epinephrine, et cetera. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are, at least the classic ones are, fluoxetine, Prozac, fluvoxamine, Luvox, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, et cetera, et cetera. There are about six or classic SSRIs, some of them like citalopram are used in children and are available in pediatric doses. Some like Prozac may or may not be used in children. The details of which SSRIs, et cetera, is a very extensive literature and discussion. And I think it's safe to say that which drugs to use and which dosage and whether or not to continue, excuse me, the same dosage over time depends a lot on the individual variation that people express and the responses that they have. All of these drugs, in fact, I think we can say all drugs have side effects. The question is how detrimental those side effects are to daily life. The SSRIs are well known to have effects on appetite. In some cases, they abolish appetite. In some cases, they just reduce it a little bit. In some cases, they increase appetite. Really is highly individual. They can have effects on libido. For instance, they can reduce sex drive, sometimes in a dose dependent way, sometimes in a way that's more like a step function where people are fine at say 5 or 10 milligrams, but then they get to 15 milligrams and there's a cliff for their libido. That can happen, it really depends. Please don't take those dosages as exact values 'cause this is going to depend on what they're being used for, depression or anxiety or OCD, and it's also going to depend on the drug, et cetera. I just threw out those numbers as a way to illustrate what a kind of a step function would look like. It's not gradual, it's immediate at a given dose is what that means. The other thing is that some of these drugs will have transient effects. So side effects that show up and then disappear or sadly people will sometimes take these drugs for a while and then side effects will surface later that weren't there previously depending on life factors, nutrition factors. So it's a very complicated landscape overall. And that's why it's really important to explore any kind of drug treatment, SSRI or otherwise, really in close communication with a psychiatrist who really understands the pharmacokinetics and has a lot of patient history and experience with them. So what I'm about to tell you next is most certainly going to come as a big surprise, which is that despite the fact that the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors can be effective in reducing the symptoms of OCD, at least somewhat, and certainly more than placebo, there is very little, if any evidence, that the serotonin system is disrupted in OCD. And I have to point out that this is a somewhat consistent theme in the field of psychiatry, that is a given drug can be very effective or even partially effective in reducing symptoms or in changing the overall landscape of a psychiatric disorder or illness, and yet there is very little, if any evidence, that that particular system is what's causal for OCD, or anxiety, or depression, et cetera. This is just the landscape that we're living in in terms of our understanding of the brain and psychiatry and the ways of treating brain disorders. So as a consequence, there are a huge number of academic reviews that clinicians and research scientists have generated and read and share. One of the more, I think, thorough ones in recent years was published in 2021. I'll provide a link to this. This is by an excellent, truly excellent researcher from Yale university School of Medicine, I should say not just a researcher but a clinician scientist, again, an MD-PhD. This is Christopher Pittenger And the title of the review is Pharmacotherapeutic Strategies and New Targets in OCD. And again, we'll provide a link to it. This is a just gorgeous review describing, as I just told you, that the serotonin system isn't really disrupted in OCD and yet SSRIs can be very effective. The review goes on to explore even what sorts of receptors for serotonin might be involved. If it's in fact the case that serotonin is a culprit in the creation of OCD symptoms. Talk about the serotonin 2A receptor and the serotonin 1A receptor. Why am I mentioning all that detail? If in fact it's not clear, serotonin is involved because I'll just tell you right now, there is currently a lot of interest in whether or not some of the psychedelics, in particular psilocybin, can be effective in the treatment of OCD. Psilocybin has been shown in various clinical trials in particular the clinical trials done at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine by Matthew Johnson and others. Matthew was on The Huberman Lab Podcast. He's been on the Tim Ferris podcast. He's been on the Lex Fridman podcast. He's a world class researcher on the use of psychedelics for depression and other psychiatric challenges. And their psilocybin treatment has been seen, at least in those trials, to be very effective in the treatment of certain kinds of major depression. Currently the exploration of psilocybin for the treatment of OCD has not yielded similar results, although the studies are ongoing. Again, has not yielded similar effectiveness, but the studies are ongoing And the serotonin 2A receptor and the serotonin 1A receptors are primary targets for the drug psilocybin. So I figured there were going to be some questions about whether or not psychedelics help with OCD, thus far it's inconclusive. If any of you have been part of clinical trials or have knowledge or intuition about this relationship or potential relationship, I should say, between psilocybin and other psychedelics in OCD, please put them in the comment section. We'd love to love to hear from you. One thing I should point out is that even though serotonin has not been directly implicated in OCD, serotonin and the general systems of serotonin, the circuits in the brain that carry serotonin and depend on it have been shown to impact cognitive flexibility and inflexibility, which are kind of hallmark themes of OCD. So in animals that have their serotonin depleted or in humans that have very low levels of serotonin, you can see evidence of cognitive inflexibility, challenges in tasks, switching challenges and switching the rules by which one performs a game, challenges in any kind of cognitive domain switching. And so that does indirectly implicate serotonin in some of the aspects of OCD. Again, when one starts to explore the different transmitter systems that have been explored in animal models and in humans, it's a vast, vast landscape, but serotonergic drugs do seem to be the most effective drugs in treating OCD despite the fact, again, despite the fact that there's no direct evidence that serotonin systems are the problem in OCD. If you recall the cortico-striatal-thalamic loop that is so central to the etiology, the presence and the patterns of symptoms in OCD, of course, serotonin is impacting that system. Serotonin is impacting just about every system in the brain, but there's no evidence that tinkering with serotonin levels, specifically in that network, is what's leading to the improvements in OCD. However, if people go into a FMRI scanner and those people have OCD and they evoke the obsessions and compulsions, you see activity in that cortico-striatal-thalamic loop. Treatments like SSRIs that reduce the symptoms of OCD equate to a situation where there is less activity in that loop. And I should point out cognitive behavioral therapy, which we have no reason to believe only taps into the serotonin system, I think it would be extreme stretch, it would be false actually to say that that cognitive behavioral therapy taps only into the serotonin system, clearly it's going to affect a huge number of circuits in neurochemical systems. Well, people who do cognitive behavioral therapy and find some relief for OCD, they also show reductions in those cortico-striatal-thalamic loops. So basically we have a situation where we have a behavioral therapy that works, in many people, not all, and we have a pretty good understanding of about why it works. It increases anxiety tolerance, and interference with pattern execution, getting people to not engage in the same sorts of behaviors that are detrimental to them. And we have drug treatments that work at least to some degree, but we don't know how they work or where they work in the brain. One of the things that really unifies the behavioral treatments and the drug treatments is that they take some period of time. Some relief from symptoms seems to show up around four weeks and certainly by eight weeks for both cognitive behavioral therapy and the SSRIs, but it's really at the 10 to 12 week stage when someone's been doing these twice a week, cognitive behavioral sessions, where they've been taking a SSRI for 10 to 12 weeks, that the really significant reduction in OCD symptoms starts to really show up. Now, up until now, I've been talking about the fact that people are getting relief from these treatments, but sadly, in the case of OCD, there is a significant population that simply does not respond to CBT or to SSRIs, or to their combination, which is why psychiatrists also explore the combination of SSRIs and neuroleptics or drugs that tap into the so-called dopamine system or the glutamate system. These are other neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that impact different circuits in the brain. And just to really remind you what neurotransmitters and neuromodulators do, because this is important to contextualize all this, neurotransmitters are typically involved in the rapid communication between neurons. And the two most common neurotransmitters for that are the neurotransmitter glutamate, which we say is excitatory, meaning when it's released into the synapse, it causes the next neuron to be more active, or active, and GABA which is a neurotransmitter that is inhibitory, meaning when it's released into the synapse, typically, not always, but typically, that GABA is going to encourage the next neuron to be less electrically active or even silence its activity. The neuromodulators, by contrast, So not neurotransmitters, but neuromodulators like dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, and acetylcholine and others operate a little bit differently. They tend to act a little bit more broadly. They can act within the synapse, but they can also change the general patterns of activity in the brain, making certain circuits more likely to be active and other circuits less likely to be active. So when we say dopamine does X or dopamine does Y, or serotonin does X or serotonin does Y, they don't really do one thing, they change the sort of overall tonality. They make it more likely or less likely that certain circuits will be active. You can think of them as kind of activating playlists or genres of activity in the brain, rather than being involved in the specific communication or specific songs, if you will, in this analogy, or discussions between particular neurons. So when we hear that SSRIs increase serotonin and reduce the symptoms of OCD, or a neuroleptic reduces the amount of dopamine and makes people feel calmer for instance, or can remove some stereotype, repetitive motor behavior, which they can either generate or reduce motor behavior it turns out. So when I say that, what I'm referring to is the fact that these neuromodulators are kind of turning up the volume on certain circuits and turning down the volume on other circuits. I say that because if you are going to explore drug treatments again with a licensed physician, if you're going to explore drug treatments for OCD, and in particular, if you are not getting results from SSRIs, or you're not getting results from cognitive behavioral therapy or the side effect profiles of the drugs that you're taking for OCD are causing problems that you don't want to take them, well, then it's important to understand that anytime you take one of these drugs, they're not acting specifically on the cortico-striatal-thalamic circuit. That would be wonderful. That's the future of psychiatry, but as now, when you take a drug, it acts systemically. So it's impacting serotonin in your gut. It's also impacting serotonin in other areas of the brain, hence the effects on things like digestion or libido or any number of different things that serotonin is involved in. Likewise, if you take a neuroleptic like haloperidol or something that reduces dopamine transmission, well, then it's going to have some motor effects 'cause dopamine is involved in the generation of motor sequences and smooth limb movement. That's why people with Parkinson's who don't have much dopamine will get a resting tremor, have a hard time generating smooth movement. And so the side effects start to make sense, given the huge number of different neural circuits that these different neuromodulators are involved in. I don't say that to be discouraging, I say that to encourage patients and careful systematic exploration of different drug treatments for OCD always again with the careful and close guidance and oversight of a psychiatrist because psychiatrists really understand which side effect profiles make it likely that you can or cannot or will never, or maybe someday will be able to take a given drug at a given dose. They're the ones that really have that knowledge. This is not the sort of thing that you want to cowboy and go try and figure out yourself. Now, I also want to acknowledge that there are other forms of drug treatments. We touched on psilocybin briefly, but there are other forms of drug treatments that have been explored for OCD. Earlier, we talked a little bit about cannabis. Why would cannabis be a place of exploration at all? Well, first of all, a number of people try and self medicate for OCD. There is some clinical evidence, I'm not talking about recreational use, I'm talking about clinical evidence that cannabis can reduce anxiety. Now earlier we were talking about not reducing anxiety, but learning anxiety tolerance in order to deal with and treat OCD in the context of cognitive behavioral therapies. That doesn't necessarily rule out cannabis as a candidate for the treatment of OCD. And in fact, this has been explored. A study from Dr. Blair Simpson herself looked at this. This was a fairly small scale study. So first of all, I'll give you the title. And again, we'll provide a link. This is entitled, Acute effects of cannabinoids on symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A human laboratory study. very briefly, this was 14 adults with OCD. They had prior experience with cannabis. This was randomized, placebo-controlled. The cannabis was smoked, they had different varietals, as they're called. They had a placebo. So this is basically a condition in which certain subjects consumed a cigarette that had 0% THC, others had 7% THC, other groups that is, or some had 0.4% CBD and THC. So they looked at CBD. I know a lot of people out there are interested in CBD. This is one of the few studies I could find where they explored different percentages of THC and CBD in these cannabis or marijuana cigarettes basically. The total amount that they consumed, I believe, was 800 milligrams. These, again, are not suggestions. These are just simply reporting what's in this study. You can, again, I'll provide a link. They looked at OCD symptoms, ratings. They looked at cardiovascular effects. They had a large number of different things that they explored. And I should say this study was done in 2020, and it was the first placebo-controlled investigation of cannabis in adults with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Pretty interesting. And I'm just reading from their conclusions here. The data suggests that smoked cannabis, whether containing primarily THC or CBD, remember they looked at different concentrations of those, has little acute impact, meaning immediate impact on OCD symptoms and yield smaller reductions in anxiety compared to placebo. So they did not see a, when I say a positive effect, I mean a ameliorative effect, an effect in reducing symptoms of OCD from cannabis or CBD, which, it's unfortunate. I think it's unfortunate anytime a treatment doesn't work. But nonetheless, those are the data, I'm sure there are going to be other studies. I'm sure there are also going to be people in the YouTube comments section saying that cannabis and CBD helps their OCD symptoms, at least I anticipate there probably will. Almost everything I say here, somebody will contradict it with something from their experience, which I encourage, by the way. I want to hear about your experience with certain things even if it's not from randomized placebo-controlled studies, I still find it very interesting to know what people are doing and what they're experiencing. I think that's one of the better uses of social media comment sections, is to be able to share some of that, not in an advice-giving way or prescriptive way, but simply as a way to share and encourage different types of exploration. There are other sorts of drug treatments that are gaining popularity for OCD, at least in the research realm. One treatment that is a legal, L-E-G-A-L. Sometimes when I say legal, sometimes people think I say illegal, but that is legal, at least by prescription in the United States, is ketamine. The actions of ketamine are somewhat complex although we know, for instance, that ketamine acts on the glutamate system, it tends to disrupt the transmission or the relationship, I should say, between glutamate, not glutamine, not the amino acid, but glutamate, the neurotransmitter, and the so-called NMDA, the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, which is a receptor that's very special in the nervous system because when glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor, it tends to offer the opportunity for that particular synapse to get stronger, so-called neuroplasticity and ketamine is a, essentially, an antagonist, although it works through a complicated mechanism, it tends to block that binding of glutamate to the NMDA receptor or the effectiveness of that. Ketamine therapy is now being used quite extensively for the treatment of trauma and for depression. It leads to a dissociative state. It's a so-called dissociative analgesic in the variety of ways in which that happens. We did an episode on depression. We're going to do another entire episode all about ketamine describing the networks that ketamine impacts, et cetera. Ketamine therapies are being explored for OCD. As of now, the data look somewhat promising, but there's still a lot more work that needs to be done. My read of the data are that the more extensive clinical trials have not happened yet. The smaller studies that have happened revealed that some patients do get some relief from ketamine therapy for OCD, but there was nothing overwhelmingly pointing to the fact that ketamine is a magic bullet for OCD treatment. So cannabis, CBD, at least now, even though it's one smaller study, there's no real evidence that it can alleviate OCD symptoms. If there are new studies published soon, I'll be sure to update you. And if you see those studies, please send them to me. Ketamine therapy, the jury is still out, psilocybin, The jury is still out. These are early days. Another treatment that's becoming somewhat common, or at least people are commonly excited about is transcranial magnetic stimulation. So this is the use of a magnetic coil. This is completely noninvasive, placed on one portion of the skull, and one can direct magnetic energy toward particular areas of the brain to either suppress, or nowadays, you can also activate particular brain regions. There are some interesting data showing that if TMS is applied to areas of the brain involved in the generation of motor action, so the so-called motor areas, or supplementary motor areas as they're called, while people think about or have intrusive thoughts, we know that the TMS coil can interrupt the motor behaviors, the compulsive behaviors, and at least in a small cohort of studies and a small number of patients within those studies, this has been shown to be effective, not just while the coil is on the head, of course, but after the study has been performed or the treatment's been performed in reducing OCD symptoms by disrupting the tendency for the compulsive behavior to be so automatic. One of the key features of obsessive-compulsive disorder is that, especially if it's been around for a while, the person's been dealing with it for a while, there isn't a pattern in which the person thinks, oh, I have this contamination fear, or I need symmetry, or I'm kind of obsessed to count to the number seven. And then they pause and they go, ooh, and then they do it. No, typically there's a very close pairing of the obsession and the compulsion in time so that somebody's walking down the street, thinking one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, one, two, three, four, five, six seven, seven... and then they're doing this in such rapid succession because the obsessions are coming up so quickly. Thoughts can be generated very quickly. And then they're generating the compulsions as a way to beat down or to try and suppress that anxiety and then it comes right back up again at even stronger as I described earlier. So transcranial magnetic stimulation seems to intervene in these various fast processes. Right now, I don't think it's fair to say that TMS is a magic bullet either. I think there's a lot of excitement about TMS and in particular, I really want to nail this point home, in particular, there's excitement about the combination of TMS with drug treatments, or the combination of TMS with cognitive behavioral therapy. And this is a really important point, not just for sake of discussion about obsessive-compulsive disorder, but also depression, ADHD, schizophrenia, any number of different psychiatric challenges and disorders in most cases are going to respond best to a combination of behavioral treatment that's ongoing that occurs in the laboratory and clinical setting, but also in the home setting where there's homework, maybe even home visits. Drug treatments, often, not always, are a terrific augment to those cognitive behavioral therapies or other behavioral therapies. And then now we are living in the age of brain-machine interface. You have companies like Neuralink that I think it's fair to say are going to enter the brain machine-interface world first through the treatment of certain syndromes, movement syndromes or psychiatric syndromes probably before they start putting electrodes into the brain to stimulate enhanced memory or enhanced cognition, who knows, I don't know exactly what they're doing behind the walls of Neuralink. But I have to imagine, in fact, I would wager maybe not both arms, but I'll wager my left arm that the first set of FDA approved technologies to come out of companies like Neuralink are going to be those for the treatment of things like Parkinson's and movement disorders and cognitive disorders, rather than, shall we say, kind of recreational cognitive enhancement or things of that sort. So transcranial magnetic stimulation is noninvasive. It doesn't involve going down below the skull, can have some effect, but most laboratories that I'm aware of at Stanford and elsewhere that are exploring TMS for things like OCD and other types of psychiatric challenges are using TMS in combination with drug therapies, are using, in some cases, for instance, a laboratory at Stanford, hope to get 'em on the podcast, a psychiatrist, Nolan Williams, is exploring TMS in combination with psychedelic therapies, not necessarily at the same time, but nonetheless combining them or exploring how they impact brain circuitry. So if you have OCD, should you run out and get TMS, or should you try ketamine therapy, of course, with a licensed physician? I think it's too early to say yes. I think the answer is we need to wait and see. I think cognitive behavioral therapy, the SSRIs, and some other drug treatments like neuroleptics combined with SSRIs and cognitive behavioral therapy are where the real bulk of the data are. I want to make one additional point about cannabis CBD as it relates to obsessive-compulsive disorder. To me, it's not at all surprising that cannabis CBD did not improve symptoms of OCD. Because in my discussion with Dr. Paul Conti a few weeks ago, and I should mention, Dr. Conti is indeed a medical doctor, a psychiatrist, we were talking about cannabis and its various uses, because it does have some clinical applications. And he mentioned that one of the main effects of cannabis is to tighten focus and to enhance concentration on and thoughts about one particular thing. And in some cases that can be clinically beneficial, and in other cases that can be clinically detrimental. If you accept the idea that cannabis increases focus, and you think about OCD and the networks involved, and you think about the anxiety and the relationship between the obsession and compulsion, well, then it shouldn't come as any surprise that cannabis did not improve the symptoms of OCD because if anything, it would increase focus on the obsessions and the compulsions. Now that's not what they observed. They did not see an exacerbation or a worsening of the symptoms of OCD with cannabis, at least that's not my read of the data, but they did not see an improvement in OCD symptoms with cannabis or CBD. And to me, that's not surprising given that cannabis CBD seems to increase focus. Next, I'd like to talk about some of the research on and the roles of hormones in OCD, because it turns out to be a very interesting relationship there. But before I do, I want to point out something that I realize I probably should have said earlier, which is one of the key things for someone with OCD to come to understand if they're going to experience any relief of their symptoms, whether or not they're doing drug treatments or behavioral treatments or otherwise, is that thoughts are not as bad as actions. Thoughts are not as bad as actions. One of the kind of rules that people with OCD seem to adopt for themselves is that thoughts are really, truly the equivalent of actions. So they'll have an intrusive thought and, we haven't spent too much time on this today, but earlier I touched on the fact that some of the intrusive thoughts that people have in OCD are really disturbing. They can be really gross, or at least gross to that person. They can evoke imagery that is toxic or infectious, or is highly sexualized in a way that is disturbing to them, it can be very taboo. This is not uncommon when you start talking to people with OCD and you start pulling on the thread. Again, this would be a psychiatrist who was trained to ask the right questions and gain the comfort and trust of a patient. And they start to reveal that these thoughts are really intrusive and kind of disturbing, which is why they feel so compelled to try and suppress them with behaviors. One of the powerful elements of treatment for OCD is to really support the patient and make them realize that thoughts are just thoughts and that everyone has disturbing thoughts. And that oftentimes those disturbing thoughts arise at the most inconvenient, and sometimes, what seems like the most inappropriate circumstances. And this relates to a whole larger discussion that we could have about what are thoughts and why do they surface, and how come when you stand at the edge of a bridge, even if you do not want to jump off, you think about jumping off. And this has to do with the fact that your nervous system, as a prediction machine, is oftentimes testing possibilities. And sometimes that testing goes way off into the Netherlands of the thought patterns and emotional patterns that we all have inside of us. The big difference between a thought and an action is that, of course, the nervous system is, in one case, not translating those patterns of thinking into motor sequences. That nerdy way of saying thoughts aren't actions, believe it or not, can be helpful for people if they really think about that and use it as an opportunity to realize that, first of all, they're not crazy. They're not thinking and feeling this stuff because they're bad or evil. And of course, sometimes this can cross over with other elements of life where we place moral judgment on people for certain behaviors. I think that's part of a healthy society, of course, that's why we have laws and punishments and rewards for that matter for certain types of behaviors. But this idea that thoughts are not as bad as actions and that thoughts can be tolerated and the anxiety around thoughts can be tolerated and over time can diminish, that's a very powerful hallmark theme of the treatment of OCD so I'd be remiss if I didn't mention it. Thoughts are not actions. Actions can harm us, they can harm other people, they can soak up enormous amounts of time. Thoughts can soak up enormous amounts of time. They can be very troubling. They can be very detrimental. We of course want to be sensitive to that, but when it really comes down to it, the first step in treatment for OCD is this realization where the approach to the realization that thoughts are not as bad as actions. So what about hormones in OCD? Well, this has been explored, albeit not as extensively as I would've liked to find, but when I went into the literature, I found one particularly interesting study, entitled, Neurosteroid Levels in Patients with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. First author, Erbay And as always, we'll provide a link to the study. The objective of this study was to explore serum within blood, neurosteroid levels in people with OCD. Why? Well, because of the relationship between OCD and anxiety and the fact that in stress-related disorders such as anxiety and depression, the hormones have been extensively explored, but not so much in OCD, at least until this study. So they compared serum levels of a number of different hormones, progesterone, pregnenolone, DHEA, cortisol, and testosterone. This was done in 30 patients with OCD and 30 healthy controls. So it's not a huge study, but it's enough to draw some pretty nice conclusions. These subjects were 18 to 49 years old, and the controls were age and sex matched healthy volunteers. Again, no OCD. What was the basic takeaway from the study? The basic takeaway from the study was that in females with OCD, there was evidence for significantly elevated cortisol and DHEA. Now that's interesting because cortisol is well known to be associated with the stress system. Although every day, should mention, we all, male or female, everybody experiences an increase in cortisol shortly after awakening. That's a healthy increase in cortisol. Late shift, I mean, late in the day peaks in cortisol where a shift in that cortisol peak to later in the day is a known correlate of depression and anxiety disorders. So the fact that cortisol is elevated and DHEA are elevated in female patients with OCD suggests that cortisol is either reflective of or causal for the increase in anxiety. We don't know the direction of that effect. Now in male patients with OCD, there was evidence for increased cortisol. Again, not surprising given the role of anxiety in cortisol, or I should say, given the role of cortisol in anxiety and the increasing anxiety seen in OCD, but there are also significant reductions in testosterone, which should also not surprise us because cortisol and testosterone more or less compete in some fashion for their own production, both are derived from the molecule cholesterol. And there are certain biochemical pathways that can either direct that cholesterol molecule toward cortisol synthesis or testosterone synthesis, but not both. So they compete. So when cortisol goes up in general, not always, but in general, testosterone goes down and vice versa. If you want to learn more about the relationship between cortisol and testosterone, and there are even some tools to try and optimize those ratios in both males and females, you can find that in our episode on optimizing testosterone and estrogen, that's at hubermanlab.com. Now, I would say the most interesting aspect of this study is not that DHEA and cortisol are elevated in females with OCD or that cortisol and testosterone have this opposite effect, cortisol up and testosterone down in males with OCD, but rather the relationship between all of those, DHEA, cortisol, and testosterone. In terms of GABA, GABA again being this inhibitory neurotransmitter that tends to quiet certain neuronal pathways, it does different things at different synapses, but in general, the more GABA that's present, the more inhibition that's present, and therefore the more suppression of neural activity. And DHEA is known to be a potent antagonist of the GABA system. So here we have elevated DHEA in females. And I should also mention that testosterone is also known to tap into the GABA system. Typically, when testosterone is elevated, GABA transmission, at least is slightly elevated. So here we have a situation in which the pattern of hormones in females and males with OCD are different from those in people without OCD such that GABA transmission is altered and the net effect would be an overall reduction in GABA. Now GABA, as an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and broadly speaking is associated with lower levels of anxiety, and it tends to create balance within various neural circuits. Now, that's a very broad statement, but we know for instance, in epilepsy, that GABA levels are reduced and therefore you get runaway excitation of certain circuits in the brain, and therefore seizures, either petite mal, mini seizures, or grand mal, massive seizures, or even drop seizures where people completely collapse to the floor in seizure. You may have seen this before. I certainly have, it's very dramatic and it actually is quite debilitating for people because obviously they don't know when these seizures are coming on most often, and then they can fall into a stove or while driving, et cetera. So the situation with OCD is one in which, for whatever reason, we don't know the direction of effect. Certain hormones are elevated in females and certain hormones are elevated in males and those hormones differ between males and females, and yet they both funnel into a system where GABAergic or GABA transmission in the brain is reduced because of this ability for those particular hormones to be antagonists to GABA, and as a consequence, there's likely to be overall levels of increased excitation in certain networks in the brain and that brings us back to this cortico-striatal-thalamic loop, this repetitive loop that seems to reinforce, we can say reinforces obsession, leads to anxiety, leads to compulsion, leads to transient relief of anxiety, but then increase in anxiety, increased obsession, anxiety, compulsion, anxiety, compulsion, anxiety, compulsion, and so on and so forth. So I have not found studies that have explored adjusting testosterone levels through exogenous administration, cream or injection or otherwise, or that have focused on reducing DHEA in females. If anyone is aware of such studies, please put them in the comment section on YouTube or send them to us. We have a contact site on the website at hubermanlab.com, but the comment section on YouTube would be best. But because we know that hormones impact neuromodulators and neurotransmitters, as I just described, and that those neuromodulators and neurotransmitters play an intimate role in the generation and the treatment of things like OCD, it stands to reason that manipulations of those hormone systems, however subtle or dramatic might, I want to highlight, might prove useful in adjusting the symptoms of OCD and I hope that this is an area that researchers are going to pursue in the very near future because many of the treatments for reducing DHEA or increasing testosterone or reducing cortisol have already made it through FDA approval. They're out there, they're readily prescribed. Many of them are already in generic form which means that the patents have already lapsed on the first versions of those drugs. So when they're available as generic drugs, very often, they're available at significantly lower cost. There's a whole discussion we had there about patent laws and prescription drugs. But because these drugs are largely available in prescription yet generic form, I think there's a great opportunity to explore how hormones, not just cortisol, testosterone, and DHA, but the huge category of hormones might impact the symptoms of OCD, especially since many of the symptoms of OCD show up right around the time of puberty. We haven't talked a lot about childhood OCD, 'cause we're going to do an entire series on childhood psychiatric disorders and challenges but many children develop OCD early as young as three or four, believe it or not, or even 6 or 7 and 10 and in adolescence, and certainly around puberty. and in young adulthood. It is rare, although it does happen, that people will develop OCD very late in life around 40 or older, just kind of spontaneously. Most often when you look at their clinical history, you find that either they were hiding it or is being suppressed in some way, or if it does spontaneously show up late in life like mid-thirties or in one's forties, typically there's a traumatic brain injury, could be due to stroke or physical injury to the head or something of that sort. Nonetheless, there is a interesting correlation between the onset of puberty in certain forms of OCD. There's certain forms of, or I should say, there's certain aspects of menopause that can relate to OCD. You can find all these things in the literature. All this to say that hormones impact neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, which clearly impact the kinds of circuits that are involved in OCD and it makes sense that, and I would hope that there would be an exploration of how these hormones impact OCD in the not too distant future. Now there is an extensive literature exploring how testosterone therapy, both in males and females, can be effective in some cases in the treatment of anxiety-related disorders, but not, at least to my knowledge, in OCD in particular. So this whole area of the use of testosterone and estrogen therapies, DHEA, cortisol suppression, or maybe even enhancement for the treatment of OCD is essentially a big black box that very soon, I believe, will be lit. I realize that a number of listeners of this podcast are probably interested in the non-typical or holistic treatments for OCD. Dr. Blair Simpson's lab has at least one study exploring the role of mindfulness meditation for the treatment of OCD. There, the data are a little bit complicated and I should mention that good things are happening, at least in the United States, probably elsewhere as well, but good things are happening in terms of the exploration of things like meditation and other, let's call them non-traditional or holistic forms of treatment for psychiatric disorders because of the division of complimentary health that's now been launched by the National Institutes of Health. So, whereas before people would think about meditation or yoga nidra, or even CBD supplementation for that matter, as kind of fringe maybe, or kind of woo or non-traditional at the very least, the National Institutes of Health in the United States has now devoted an entire division, an entire Institute, purely for the exploration of things like breathing practices, meditation, et cetera. So there's a cancer institute, there's a hearing and deafness institute, there's a vision institute, and now there's this complimentary health Institute, which I think is a wonderful addition to the more traditional aspects of medicine. I think no possible useful treatment should be overlooked or unresearched in my opinion, provided that can be done safely. And as I mentioned, Dr. Blair Simpson's lab has looked at the role of mindfulness meditation and the treatment of OCD. Now we should all keep in mind, no pun intended, that most of the data on mindfulness meditation shows that it increases the ability to focus. Now, this brings us back to a kind of repeating theme today, which is that increased focus may not be the best thing for somebody with OCD because it might increase focus on the obsession and/or compulsion. Turns out that mindfulness meditation can be useful in the treatment of OCD, but mainly by way of how it impacts the focus on and the ability to engage in cognitive behavioral therapies. So it's very unlikely, at least by my read of the data, to be a direct effect of meditation on relieving the symptoms, rather it seems that meditation is increasing focus on things like cognitive behavioral therapy homework and to not focus on other things and therefore indirectly improving the symptoms of OCD. Now somewhat surprisingly, at least to me, there have also been a fairly large number of studies exploring how nutraceuticals, as they're sometimes called, supplements that are available over the counter can impact the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Now there's such an extensive number of different compounds and supplements that fall under the category of nutraceuticals and that have been explored in the treatment of OCD that I'd like to point you to a review that is entitled, Nutraceuticals in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review, excuse me, of mechanistic and clinical evidence. So it's published in 2011, so it's over 10-years-old. And so by now, I have to imagine that there are an enormous number of additional substances that could be explored, but there are just one or two here that I want to focus on. Here in this review, they describe effects of 5-HTP and tryptophan, so things that are in the serotonin pathway, which would make sense given what we know about the SSRIs that people would explore how different supplements that increase serotonergic transmission might impact OCD. What you find is that they do have significant effects in improving or reducing the symptoms of OCD in somewhat similar way to some of the SSRIs. But you of course have to be careful. Anything that's going to tap into a given neurochemical system to the same degree may very likely have the same sorts of side effects that a prescription drug would. One compound that I like to focus on in a little more depth, however, because it's exciting and interesting to me is inositol. Inositol is a compound that we are going to talk about in several future podcasts, because, well, first of all, it seems that it can have impressive effects on reducing anxiety. It also can have pretty impressive effects in improving fertility and particular in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. And here I'm referring specifically to myo-inositol because it comes in several forms. And it does appear that 900 milligrams of inositol can improve sleep and can reduce anxiety perhaps when taken at that dosage or higher dosages. I will just confess, first of all, I don't have OCD, although I will also confess that when I was a child, I had a transient tick. I've talked about this on podcast before. It was a grunting tick. So when I was about six or seven, I recall a trip to Washington DC with my family, where I was feeling a strong desire or need even as I recall, to grunt in order to clear something in my throat, but I didn't have anything in my throat. I didn't have a cold or any postnasal drip, it was really just the feeling that I needed to do that, to release some sort of tension. And I remember my dad at the time telling me don't do that. Don't do that, it's not good to grunt or something like that. I think he saw that it was a kind of compulsive behavior. And so I would actually hide in the back seat of the rental car and do it, or I'd hide in my room. Fortunately for me, it was transient, I think about six months or a year later, it disappeared. Although I did notice, actually an ex-girlfriend of mine point out that when I get very tired and I've been working very long hours, sometimes that grunting tick will reappear. What does that mean? Do I have Tourette's? I don't know, maybe. I was never diagnosed with Tourette's. Do I have OCD? Maybe. I certainly could be accused of having obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, which we'll talk about still in a few minutes. But the point here is that many children transiently express ticks or low level Tourette's or OCD, and again, transiently and it disappears over time. So inositol has been explored in a bunch of different contexts, including for ticks in OCD, et cetera. Going back to inositol and its current use, or I should say my current use, I've been taking 900 milligrams of inositol as in addition to my existing toolkit for sleep, which I've talked about many times on this podcast and other podcasts, consists of magnesium threonate, apigenin, and theanine. If you want to know more about that kit, you can go to our newsletter, Neural Network Newsletter at hubermanlab.com. The toolkit for sleep is there. You don't even have to sign up for the newsletter but it'll give you a flavor of the sorts of things that are in the newsletter. In any case, I've been experimenting a bit with taking 900 milligrams of myo-inositol either alone or combination with that sleep kit. And I must say the sleep I've been getting on inositol is extremely deep and does seem to lead to enhanced levels of focus and alertness during the day. And perhaps you're noticing that 'cause I'm talking more quickly on this podcast than in previous podcast. No, I'm just kidding. I don't think the two things relate in any kind of causal way. The point here is that inositol is known to be pretty effective in reducing anxiety, but when taken at very high dosages. Can it do the same at low dosages? We don't know. I would consider 900 milligrams a low dose. Most of this, given the fact that most of the studies of inositol have explored very high dosages, like even 10 or 12 grams per day, which I must say seems exceedingly high and they do report that some of the subjects in those experiments actually stop taking the inositol because of gastric discomfort or gastric distress as it's called. So I've reported my results with sleep in a kind of anecdotal way. They certainly aren't peer-reviewed studies that I described about my own experience in an anecdotal way. But nonetheless, it's been explored that things like glycine, which is another, which is an amino acid, which also acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, taken at very high dosages, 60 grams per day, that is a absolutely astonishingly high amount of glycine. I would not recommend taking that much glycine unless you're part of a study where they tell you to and you know it's safe. 18 grams, excuse me, of an inositol, these are very, very high dosages used in these studies. Nonetheless, there's some interesting data about inositol leading to some alleviation of OCD symptoms or partial alleviation of OCD symptoms in as little as two weeks after initiating the supplement protocol. So I think there's a great future for these nutraceuticals, meaning I think more systematic exploration in particular of lower dosages in the context of OCD treatment. And as we saw before for the SSRIs and other prescription drug treatments, I think there really needs to be an exploration of these nutraceuticals in combination with behavioral therapies. And who knows, maybe with brain machine interface like cranial magnetic stimulation as well. Now way back at the beginning of the episode, I alluded to the fact that OCD is one thing, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and it's truly a disorder and it's truly debilitating and it's extremely common, and then there's this other thing called obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, which is distinct from that does not have the intrusive component so people don't feel overwhelmed or overtaken by these thoughts, rather, they find that the obsessions can sometimes serve them or they even welcome them. And I think many of us know people like this, I perhaps even could be accused or who knows, maybe have been accused of having an obsessive-compulsive personality at times. Why do I draw this distinction? Well, first of all, we've come to a point in human history, I think in large part because of social media but also in large part because there are a number of discussions being held about mental health that have brought terms like trauma, depression, OCD, et cetera, into the common vernacular so that people will say, ah, you're so OCD, or someone will say I was traumatized by that, or I was traumatized by this. We should be very careful, right? I'm certainly not the word police, but we should be very careful in the use of certain types of language, especially language that has real psychiatric and psychological definitions because it can really draw us off course in providing relief for some of these syndromes. For instance, the word trauma is thrown around left and right nowadays. I was traumatized by this, or that caused trauma, you're giving me trauma. Listen, I realize that many people are traumatized by certain events including things that are said to them, I absolutely acknowledge that, hence our episodes on trauma and trauma treatment, several of them, in fact. Dr. Conti, Dr. David Spiegel, and then dedicated solo episodes with just me blabbing about trauma and trauma treatment. But as Dr. Conti so appropriately pointed out, trauma is really something that changes our neural circuitry and therefore our thoughts and our behaviors in a very persistent way that is detrimental to us. Not every bad event is traumatizing, not everything that we dislike or even that we hate or that feels terrible to us is traumatizing. For something to reach the level of trauma, it really needs to change our neural circuitry and therefore our thoughts and our behaviors in a persistent way that is maladaptive for us. Similarly, just calling someone obsessive is one thing, saying that someone has OCD or assuming one has OCD simply because they have a personality or a phenotype, as we say, where they need things in perfect order, like I find myself correcting these pens making sure that the caps are facing in the same direction for instance right now, that is not the same as OCD. If, for instance, I can tolerate these pens being at different orientation or even throw the cap on the floor or something, it doesn't create a lot of anxiety for me. I confess, I agree it's a little bit in the moment, but then I can forget about it and move on. That's one of the key distinctions between obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder in its strictest form. Now, once one hears that OCD is different than obsessive-compulsive personality disorder because of this difference in how intrusive the thoughts are or not, then that's useful, but it really doesn't tell us anything about what is happening mechanistically in one situation or another. Fortunately, there are beautiful data again from Dr. Blair Simpson's lab. And you can tell based on the number of studies that I've referred to from her laboratory, she's truly one of the luminaries in this field, that there really are some fundamental wiring differences and behavioral differences and psychological differences between people who have obsessive-compulsive disorder and those who have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. So this is a study, first author, Pinto, P-I-N-T-O entitled, Capacity to delay reward differentiates obsessive-compulsive disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. And the methods in this study were to take 25 people with OCD and 25 people with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and 25 people who have both, because it is possible to have both and that's important to point out, and 25 so-called healthy controls, people that don't have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder. They take clinical assessments and then they took a number of tests that probed their ability to defer gratification, something called, in the laboratory, we call it delayed discounting. So their ability to defer gratification through a task where they can either accept reward right away or accept reward later. Some of you may have heard of the two marshmallow task. This is based on a study that was performed years ago on young children at Stanford and elsewhere where they take young children into a room, they offer them a marshmallow, kids like marshmallows generally, and you say, you can eat the marshmallow right now or you can wait some period of time, and if you are able to wait and not eat the marshmallow, you can have two marshmallows. And in general, children want two marshmallows more than they want one marshmallow. So really what you're probing is their ability to access delayed gratification. And they're very entertaining, even truly amusing videos of this on the internet. So if you just do two marshmallow task video and you go into YouTube, what you'll find is that the children will use all sorts of strategies to delay gratification. Some of the kids will cover the marshmallow. Others will talk to the marshmallow and say, I know you're not that delicious. You look delicious, but no, you're not delicious. They'll engage with the marshmallow in all sorts of cute ways. They'll turn around and try to, you know, avoidance, which actually speaks to a whole category of behaviors that people with OCD also use. I'm not saying these kids had OCD, but avoidance behaviors are very much a component of OCD. People really trying to avoid the thing that evokes the obsession. Well some kids are able to delay gratification, some aren't and it's debatable as to whether or not the kids that are able to delay gratification go on to have more successful lives or not. Initially, that was the conclusion of those studies. There's still a lot of debate about it, we'll bring an expert on to give us the final conclusion on this 'cause there is one and it's very interesting and not intuitive. Nonetheless, adults are also faced with decisions every day, all day as to whether or not they can delay gratification. And this study used a, not a two marshmallow task, but a game that involved rewards where people could delay in order to get greater rewards later. What is the conclusion? Well, first of all, obsessive-compulsive and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder subjects both showed impairments in their psychosocial functioning and quality of life. They had compulsive behavior. So these are people that are suffering in their life because their compulsions are really strong. So it's not just being really nit-picky or really orderly in one case and having full blown OCD in the other, both sets of subjects are challenged in life because they're having relationship issues or job-related issues, et cetera, because they are that compulsive. However, the individuals with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, they discounted the value of delayed gratification significantly less than those with obsessive-compulsive disorder. What do I mean? They are both impairing disorders that are marked by compulsive behaviors, here I'm paraphrasing, but they can be differentiated by the presence of obsessions in OCD. So obsessions in OCD. People with OCD are absolutely fixated on certain ideas and those ideas are intrusive. Again, that's the hallmark theme. And by an excessive capacity to delay reward in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. That is people who have obsessive-compulsive personality disorder are really good at delaying gratification. So they are able to concentrate very intensely and perform very intensely in ways that allow them to instill order such that they can delay reward. Now you can see why this contour of symptoms, meaning that the people with OCD are experiencing intrusive thoughts, whereas the people with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder show an enhanced ability to defer gratification. You could see how that would lead to very different outcomes. People with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder can actually leverage that personality disorder to perform better in certain domains of life, not all domains of life, because remember, again, these people are in this study and they're showing up as experiencing challenges in life because of their obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Nonetheless, people with obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, you could imagine, would be very good at say architecture or anything that involves instilling a ton of order. Maybe sushi chef, for instance, maybe a chef in general. I know chefs that just kind of throw things around like the chef on the Muppets and just like throw things everywhere and still produce amazing food. And then there's some people there incredibly exacting, they're just incredibly precise. I think that movie, what is it? Jiro Dreams of Sushi? That movie is incredible. Certainly not saying he has obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, but I think it's fair to say that he is obsessive or extremely meticulous and orderly about everything from start to finish. You can imagine a huge array of different occupations and life endeavors where this would be beneficial, science being one of them where data collection and analysis is exceedingly important that one be precise, or mathematics or physics or engineering, anything where precision has a payoff and gaining precision takes time and delay of immediate gratification, you can imagine that obsessive-compulsive personality disorder would synergize well with those sorts of activities and professions. Whereas obsessive-compulsive disorder is really intrusive. It's preventing functionality in many different domains of life. So the key takeaway here is that when we use the words obsessive-compulsive, or we call someone obsessive-compulsive, or we are trying to evaluate whether or not we are obsessive compulsive, it's very important that we highlight that obsessive compulsive disorder is very intrusive. It involves intrusive thoughts and it interrupts with normal functioning in life. Whereas obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, while it can interrupt normal functioning in life, it also can be productive. It can enhance functioning in life, not just in work, but perhaps at home as well. If you are somebody and you have family members that really place enormous value on having a beautiful and highly organized home, well, then it could lend itself well to that. it's going to be a matter of degrees, of course. None of these things is an absolute, it's going to be on a continuum, but I think it is fair to say that obsessive-compulsive disorder, whether or not in mild, moderate, or severe form is impairing normal functioning, whereas obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, there's a range of expressions of that, some of which can be adaptive, some of which can be maladaptive, and again, it's all going to depend on context. Before we conclude, I do want to touch on something that I think a lot of people experience and that's superstitions. Superstitions are fascinating, and there's some fascinating research on superstitions. One particular study that I'm a big fan of is the work of Bence Olveczky at Harvard. He studies motor sequences and motor learning, and he has beautiful data on how people learn, for instance, a tennis swing and the patterns that they engage in early on and then the patterns of swinging that they, swinging the racket that is, that they engage in later as they acquire more skill. And basically the takeaway is that the amount of error or variation from swing to swing is dramatically reduced as they acquire skill. That's all fine and good, and there's some beautiful mechanistic data that he and others have discovered to support how that comes to be, but they also explore animal models, in particular, rats pressing sequences of buttons and levers to obtain a reward. Believe it or not, rats are pretty smart. I've seen this with my own eyes. You can teach a rat to press a lever for a pellet of food. Rats can also learn to press levers in a particular sequence in order to gain a piece of food. And they can actually learn to press an enormous number of levers in very particular sequences in order to obtain pellets of food. You can also give them little buttons to press or even a paddle to, or I should say a pedal, excuse me, to stomp on with their foot in order to obtain a pellet of food. Basically rats can learn exactly what they need to do in order to obtain a piece of food, especially if they're made a little bit hungry first. Bence's lab has published beautiful data showing that as animals and humans come to learn a particular motor sequence, very often they will introduce motor patterns in that sequence that are irrelevant to the outcome and yet that persist. If you've ever watched a game of baseball, you've seen this before. Oftentimes the pitcher up on the mound will bring the ball to their chin. They'll look over their shoulder, they'll look back over the other shoulder, and then they will, of course, reel back and pitch the ball. But if you watch closely, oftentimes there are components in the motor sequence, which are completely unrelated to the pitch. They're not looking necessarily to see if someone's stealing a base. They're not necessarily looking down at home plate where the batter is. They're also doing things like touching the back of their ear before they bring the ball to their chin or adjusting their hat. And if you watch individual pictures, what you'll find is that they'll do the same sequence of completely irrelevant motor patterns before each and every single pitch. Similarly, rats that have been trained to, for instance, hit two levers and step on a pedal with their left hind foot, and then tap a button up above that is the red button, will do that to gain a piece of food. But sometimes they'll also introduce a pattern into that motor sequence where they will shake their tail a little bit, or they'll turn their head a little bit, or they'll move their ears a little bit, et cetera. Motor patterns that have nothing to do with obtaining the particular outcome in mind. In other words, you could eliminate certain components of the motor sequence and it would not matter, the rat would still get the pellet, the pitcher would still be able to pitch, and yet that get introduced because somehow because they were performed again and again prior to successful trials, the rat or the human baseball pitcher comes to believe in some way that it was involved in generating the outcome, hence superstition, right? I confess I have a few superstitions. I occasionally will knock on wood. I'll say something that I want to happen, and I'll say, oh, knock on wood, and I'll just do it. And occasionally I'll challenge myself and think, ah, I don't want to knock, don't knock on wood, Andrew, don't do that. I don't think anyone wants to be superstitious, I certainly don't. And so every once in a while, I'll just challenge it, and I won't actually knock on wood. I'm admitting this to you to kind of I guess normalize some of this. Some people have superstitions that border on or even become compulsions. They really come to believe that if they don't knock on wood, that something terrible is going to happen, maybe something in particular. Or in the case of the baseball pitcher, they come to believe that if they don't touch their right ear before they reel back on the pitch, that the pitch won't be any good or that they're going to lose the game. Well, I don't know what their thought process is. Now, I also don't know what the rat is thinking, but the rat is clearly doing something or thinking something is related to the final outcome. I don't know of any studies where they've intervened with the particular superstition-like behaviors of the rat to see whether or not the rat somehow doesn't continue to do the motor sequence to get the pellet. We don't know the rats, they're rats. I don't speak rat, most people don't, or if you speak to a rat, if it speaks back, it's not in English. Anyway, the point is that superstitions are beliefs that we, on an individual scale, come to believe are linked to the probability of an outcome when in fact we know, we actually know in our rational minds, they have no real relationship to the outcome. Superstitions can become full-blown compulsions and obsessions when we repeat them often enough that they become automatic. And I think this is what we observe most of the time when we see a pitcher touching their ear, or for instance, in tennis, you see this a lot, you'll see someone they'll slap their shoes. Often, I see this, they'll like slap the undersides of their soles. They may tell themselves that this is, I don't know, maybe moving out some of the dust or something in the bottoms of their soles, that gives them more traction and they want that to be ready for the serve or something like that. And maybe there's some truth to that, but here, what we're referring to are behaviors that really have no rational relationship to the outcome, and yet we perform in a compulsive way. People with OCD, yes, tend to have more superstitions. People with more superstitions, yes, tend to have a tendency towards OCD and I should mention, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. If you think way back to the first part of this episode, when I was just describing what the brain does, right? What does your brain do? Housekeeping functions to keep you alive and it's a prediction machine. Your neural circuits, you, have an enormous amount of biological investment of real estate, literally, cells and chemicals that are there to try and make your world predictable and to try and give you control, or at least the sense of control over that world and that's a normal process. Low-level superstitions, moderate superstitions represent a kind of a healthy range, I would say, of behaviors that are aimed at generating predictability that don't disrupt normal function. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, provided is not too severe, would I think represent the next level along that continuum. And then obsessive-compulsive disorder, as I pointed out earlier, is really a case of highly debilitating, highly intrusive, really overtake of neural circuitry over our thoughts and behaviors that requires very dedicated, very persistent, and very effective treatments in order to stop those obsessions and compulsions and the anxiety that links them somewhat counterintuitively by teaching people to tolerate that level of increased anxiety and interrupt those patterns. And fortunately, as we described earlier, such treatments exist, cognitive behavioral therapy, drug treatments like SSRIs, also drug treatments that tap into the glutamate system and into perhaps also the dopamine system, the so-called neuroleptics. And then, as we described, there's now an extensive exploration of things like ketamine, psilocybin, cannabis, the initial studies don't seem to hold much promise for cannabis and CBD and the treatment of OCD, but who knows, maybe more studies will come along that will change that story. And then of course, brain machine interface like transcranial magnetic stimulation. And then just to remind you what I already told you before combinations of behavioral and drug treatments and brain machine interface, I think, is really where the future lies. Fortunately, good treatments exist. We cannot say that any one individual treatment works for everybody. There are fairly large percentages of people that won't respond to one set of treatments or another, and therefore one has to try different ones. And then there are the so-called supplementation-based or more holistic therapies. Today, I've tried to cover each and all of these in a fairly substantial amount of detail. I realize this is a fairly long episode, that is intentional. Much like our episode on ADHD, on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, I received an enormous number of requests to talk about OCD, and my decision to make this a very long and detailed episode about OCD really doesn't stem from any desire to subject you to too much information or to avoid the opportunity to just list things off, but what I've tried to provide is an opportunity to really drill deep into the neural circuitry and an understanding of where OCD comes from, how OCD is different from things like the personality disorders that I described. And also to give you a sense of how the individual behavioral and drug treatments work and perhaps don't work so that you can really make the best informed choices, again, highlighting the fact that OCD is an extremely common, extremely common, and yet extremely debilitating condition and one that I hope that if any of you have, or that you know people that have it that you'll both gain sympathy and understanding for what they're dealing with, perhaps as a consequence of some of the information presented today, and maybe help them direct their treatment, find better treatment, and of course, apply those treatments for some relief. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can also leave us up to a five star review and give us feedback. The best place to give us written feedback, however, is on the YouTube channel within the comment section. There you can leave us feedback or suggestions about topics you'd like us to cover or guests you'd like us to interview here on the Huberman Lab Podcast. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, that's the best way to support us. During today's podcast and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and focus and anxiety and so on. The Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements because Momentous Supplements are of the very highest quality, they ship everywhere in the world, not just in the US, and we wanted to have one location where people could go in order to access the supplements that we described and detail the various roles of here on The Huberman Lab Podcast. If you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you can find those supplements. the catalog of supplements available there is going to be expanding quite a bit in the weeks and months to come. But right now, already, there are a number of different supplements for enhancing focus, enhancing sleep, and so on that are available. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and some of which is distinct from the content on The Huberman Lab Podcast. So again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab also on Twitter. If you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network Newsletter, this is a monthly newsletter. It's completely zero cost. You go to hubermanlab.com. You go into the menu, you click on newsletter, you can see some example newsletters, for instance, a toolkit for sleep. You can download that right away. You don't even have to sign up for the newsletter. You can get the toolkit for neuroplasticity, for the use of cold, for the use of heat in health and et cetera. All of that's there. And if you sign up for the newsletter, you'll get the monthly newsletter sent to you. We don't share your email information with every anybody, and we have a very clear privacy policy there. So again, it's the Neural Network Newsletter available within the newsletter tab under the menu at hubermanlab.com. In closing, I'd like to thank you for this in-depth discussion about the mechanisms and various treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder and some of the related disorders. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat guitar music]

========================================

