--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:43:10
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 270th in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 270 ---
Video ID: a9yFKPmPZ90
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9yFKPmPZ90
Title: Ido Portal: The Science & Practice of Movement | Huberman Lab Podcast #77
Published: 2022-06-20 12:00:00 UTC
Description:
My guest is Ido Portal, the world’s foremost expert on human movement. Ido has spent a lifetime studying, combining and evolving elements from an enormous range of martial arts, dance genres, athletic endeavors, and science, to develop a unified theory and practice of movement called “The Ido Portal Method.” Here we discuss all things movement, including the role of the nervous system, reflexive versus deliberate movement patterns, and the link between emotions and awareness in movement. We also discuss learning and neuroplasticity, the mind-body connection and how movement itself can be leveraged toward expanding other types of skills- cognitive, creative and otherwise. As one of the most sought out teachers of movement alive today, the knowledge Ido shares in this conversation can benefit everyone—children, adults, athletes, dancers, clinicians and trainers and the everyday person.

#HubermanLab #IdoPortal #Movement 

Watch Ido Portal lead Andrew through his movement practice: https://youtu.be/JMzThWHk4CQ

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Ido Portal Links
Website: https://www.idoportal.com 
Blog: https://www.idoportal.com/blog 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/portal.ido 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/portaldo 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/portal.ido 

Article Links
The Role of Variability in Motor Learning: https://bit.ly/3zOafQp

Timestamps
00:00:00 Ido Portal, Movement & Movement Practice 
00:03:30 AG1 (Athletic Greens), ROKA, Helix Sleep 
00:07:49 What is Movement? 
00:10:56 Movement & the Body-Mind Connection
00:14:47 Entry Points to Movement
00:18:08 Early Education in Movement: Awareness, Play & Examination 
00:21:19 Stillness, Movement & the Environment, Playfulness  
00:31:34 Unique Postures, Types of Movement, Contents vs. Containers 
00:40:50 Discomfort: Marker of Movement, Failures & Learning 
00:47:05 Movement Diversity, Squat Challenge, Injury, Movement Evolution  
00:56:36 Animal & Human Movements, Gain & Change 
01:02:04 Core Movement, Emotion & Memory, Spinal Waves, Evolution  
01:12:39 Song, Dance & Complex Language, Movement as Language, Consilience 
01:21:39 Movement Culture, Community, Collective Knowledge, Wild & Wise  
01:26:36 Potential for Movement, “Humming” 
01:32:18 Instructiveness vs Permissiveness, Degrees of Freedom 
01:35:50 Variety, Diversity & Virtuosity 
01:38:06 Vision & Movement, Focus & Awareness, Panoramic Awareness  
01:48:28 Hearing & Movement
01:52:43 Walking Gaits
01:56:55 Playful Variability & Evolution, Improvisation & Openness 
02:03:05 Reactivity & Personal Space, Touch & Proximity to Others, Play & Discomfort 
02:18:13 Visualization & Experience, Feedback 
02:20:14 Linear Movement & Movement Investigation, Examination 
02:31:45 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Ido Portal. Ido Portal is somebody who truly defies formal definition. He is, however, accredited by many to be the world expert in all things movement. Movement is one of the more fascinating and important aspects of our nervous system. In fact, it was the great Nobel Prize winner Sherrington that said, "Movement is the final common path." And what he was referring to is the fact that so much of our nervous system is dedicated to movement and, in particular, that the human nervous system can generate the greatest variety of forms of movement. We can run, we can jump, we can crawl, we can move at different speeds. Far more variation in movement and different types and speeds of movement than any other animal in the animal kingdom can perform. My interest in bringing Ido Portal onto this podcast stemmed from a discussion about just that, about Sherrington and the enormous range of movements that humans can engage in. Ido is both a practitioner and an intellectual. We all know what a practitioner is, it's somebody who walks the walk, who actually performs the thing that they are knowledgeable about. And indeed, Ido has studied capoeira, a number of other martial arts, dance, gymnastics, various forms of sport, he's trained top athletes like Conor McGregor, and he has many, many other credits to his name as a practitioner and teacher. However, he is also a true intellectual of movement. I define an intellectual as somebody who can both think about and talk about a subject at multiple levels of granularity that is with exquisite detail and with exquisite simplicity depending on their audience and depending on the topic at hand. And as you'll soon hear from my discussion with Ido, he is both a practitioner and a true intellectual of all things movement. Today, through our discussion, you will learn how the nervous system generates movement, and the different forms of movement, the different speeds of movement. You're also going to get an incredible insight through Ido's mind and eyes of how movement can serve us in the various context of life. Not just in sport, not just in exercise, but in every aspect of our lives from the time we get up in the morning until the time we go to sleep at night, how we engage with others, how we engage with ourselves, indeed, how movement even informs relationships of different kinds. I found our discussion to be one of the most enlightening and interesting discussions that I've ever had, not just about movement, but about the nervous system. I can assure you that by the end of this episode, you will not only learn a tremendous amount about movement through the eyes and mind of the one and only Ido Portal, but you also will learn a tremendous amount of neuroscience about how the cells, and circuits, and hormones, and neurotransmitters of your body assist in creating the various forms of movement that you can generate, that you're trying to learn and generate, and that perhaps you should think about trying to learn and generate. And indeed, you'll learn some protocols and tools for how to do that. In science, we have a phrase, actually it's a title, that's reserved for only the rarest of individuals, we say that somebody is an n-of-1, meaning a sample size of one. And as you'll soon learn, Ido Portal is truly an n-of-1. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink that also has adaptogens and digestive enzymes. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. In fact, when people ask me, "What's the one supplement they should take?" I always say, "Athletic Greens because it covers all of those essential nutritional bases and the probiotics, adaptogens, and digestive enzymes are vital for things like the gut microbiome." Your gut microbiome is trillions of little microbacteria that live in your gut, and that support your immune system, your endocrine system, and the so-called gut-brain axis, which is important for mood and neurotransmitter production, a huge number of biological systems in your brain and body. Athletic Greens also taste great. I mix mine with water and I like a little bit of lemon juice or lime juice in there. As I mentioned, I drink it twice a day, usually once in the morning, during the phase of the day in which typically I'm fasting or around breakfast time, and then again in the afternoon or even in the evening. If you like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3, K2. Vitamin D3 and K2 are important for endocrine health, for cardiovascular health, for calcium regulation, and so on. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim this special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses, they're the absolute highest quality and practicality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges. For instance, when you move from a shady area to a bright area, your eyes have to adapt to that. ROKA understands the various challenges that the visual system has to face and they've developed sunglasses and eyeglasses with all of that biology in mind. Their glasses were developed by two All-American swimmers from Stanford. And initially, ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses were for athletes. They designed eyeglasses that then and still now will stay on your face if you get sweaty. You can wear them running, you can wear them cycling, et cetera. They're very lightweight, so lightweight in fact that most of the time you don't even remember that they're on your face. But ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses also come in a terrific aesthetic so you can wear them anywhere. So, unlike a lot of so-called performance glasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, you can wear ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses when exercising, to dinner, to work. Again, the aesthetics are really terrific and really adaptable to all those different environments. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com, and enter the code HUBERMAN to get 20% off your first order. Again, that's roka.com, enter the code HUBERMAN at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are customized to your sleep needs. I've talked a lot on this podcast, and on another podcast, and on social media about the essential need for sleep. Put simply, sleep is the foundation of all mental health, physical health, and performance. Just a few nights or even one night's poor sleep can really hinder your mental health, physical health, and performance in all aspects of life. Helix has customized sleep products, that is mattresses and pillows that are designed to your sleep needs. And you can figure out what those sleep needs are very easily by going to the helix website, they have a quiz, it takes just about two minutes, and ask you questions like do you sleep on your back, your side, or your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold during sleep, et cetera? Or maybe you don't even know the answers to those questions, that's fine too, that's an option that you can answer as well. You take the brief two-minute quiz and then Helix will match you to the ideal mattress and pillow for you. I matched to the so-called Dusk Mattress. I started sleeping on that well over a year ago now, and it's the best sleep I've ever had. I'm sleeping much longer and much better through the entire night. And as a consequence, I'm feeling much better, more clear, more physically alert, et cetera, throughout the day. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman. You can take that two-minute quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you, and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. And now, for my discussion with Ido Portal. Ido, thank you for coming here today. I've been looking forward to sitting down with you to talk for a very long time. I was first exposed to your work from my post or a podcast I believe of you had a group of people walking down handrails, literally the handrails along stairwells. And as a, I don't want to say former skateboarder, once a skateboarder, always a skateboarder. As a skateboarder, handrails have a particular meaning, but I was really struck by, first of all, the incredible range of skill that people had and yet their willingness to do this. Right, I think of handrails and walking on handrails or skateboarding on handrails as a potential hazard, and yet some of the incredible proficiency that some of the people there including yourself had. So, like many people, I was drawn to your practice and your work initially through a wide-eyed, "Wow." You know, they're doing some incredible stuff on natural objects, much as skateboarders or parkour folks do. But over the years, we've been in communication and I've come to realize that you're a true intellectual of the topic of movement. And I define it intellectual as somebody who can understand a topic at multiple levels of granularity, detail, general, specific, connections, et cetera. So, to start off, could you share with us your conception of this idea of movement? You know, obviously movement involves translation through space, but when you talk about a movement practice, what are you really thinking about? What are we talking about when we talk about a movement practice? - It's a big question. I somehow left the definition, the very tight definition of it out for myself because I felt it was starting to constrict me and be around me and I let the practice itself really define it. But I think part of our sense of everything is actually a sense of movement and then the stillness in the background of that. So, for me, this is the entity that I refer to as movement, and using that perspective for self-evolution development, of course, the physical side, but also movement of emotions, movement of thoughts, and any other movement streams. And by switching these layers and examining it from different places, you get a better and better sense of it. I think the visuals nowadays and media are what defines for people in the beginning things. And then little by little with experience, they can dive deeper, which is good. There is some aspect, sexy aspect or not so sexy aspect, and then you pull on it and you start to examine and dive deeper, and then you receive the gift of it, finding out more. - I heard you say once that we are not just a brain with a body, but we are a body with a brain, which I absolutely love because as a student and a researcher of the nervous system, I never think about the brain as its own isolated thing, I think about the nervous system and the fact that the brain and the spinal cord are connected to the body, and the body is connected to this, to the brain. And in every direction, it's everything truly is connected at the physical level, physiological level. Could you just share for a moment how you think about this body-brain relationship in terms of you mentioned movement of emotions, movement of the body, that you can't really separate the two. And for the typical person who's listening to this, they might not immediately understand what that means. Maybe it's something that has to be experienced, but when we think about the body and the brain and the whole thing working as one cohesive whole, what does that mean to you? Or put simply, when you do a movement practice what are you focusing on? Are you focusing on the movement of your limbs? I have to imagine that's true, but are you also focusing on how that makes you feel or how your feelings make you move? - Okay, okay, so some thoughts, I will try not to answer any of your questions during this interview, but I will definitely give some thoughts and then we can play with it. I think these definitions and, in general, the limitation of words ends up creating some kind of a corruptive process. You know, words corrupt us and corrupt our understanding. So, I think the brain-body, this Cartesian state of mind and thinking brought a lot of good, but also brought a lot of problems. And movement, for me, is the entity that ties everything together. It's the magic, it's the thoughts anima, it's when the coin spins and you see both sides appear at the same time. It's a beautiful analogy from a friend of mine, Dr. Rasmus Olme. So, the mind and body are one of those pairs, and I call it the movement/body/mind system, so it's when it's integrated, it's in motion. There is also a stillness that appears there, of course, and without it there can be no motion, but maybe that is a very good way to start to think of things. There is no really pure mental processes, cognitive processes. There is no pure physical processes, everything touches everything, there is a wholeness, and that wholeness is in motion. Yeah, the movement practice takes these beats and examined them. And here is a pragmatic thing, the scientist, the cerebral thinking about movement, this is important. The emotional side coloring, feeling the colors and the textures of motion. A lot of people who are involved with a movement practice never end up feeling motions, really focusing on how it makes you feel or how it feels itself. And then the actual movement, the action, so, it's action, emotion, and thought. And those are three streams of movement and they interlay together into this kind of a braided experience and whole experience. And I try to bring all these aspects into my practice and the way that I live my life. - I think most people who embark on a movement practice will first want to know which movements to do, right? Squats, planks, push-ups, pirouettes, right? Pick your movement, it could be any movement. Are there any sort of just basic entry points that you believe everybody should walk through as they embrace a movement practice the first time and maybe even every time they do a movement practice? I mean, earlier today I had the great privilege of being guided through a long series of movement practices, and yet, the first practice we did involve, at first anyway, stillness not movement. So, if you would, could you inform us how people should think about approaching a movement practice? What is the first layer of any good movement practice? - So, you touched the word movement, and it's important for me to separate it from the word Movement with a capital M. Movements are the containers and movement is the content, and the content cannot be carried in any way without containers. So, the first entry point is to choose containers, and then the second thing to make sure is to put specific content into those containers and then enjoy them. I tell people that it's like a cup of water and you're being handed that cup of water. And nowadays very often people will start to chew on the cup instead of drinking the water, making it yours and discard the cup. And then, maybe later you want to have bone broth or soup so you use a different container, a bowl. So, a movement practice to start can start from anywhere, it's a rhizome, it's an open system, it has no center, it's decentralized, and it can be approached from anywhere, and that's its magic and that's the benefit of it. Some people find the body a good entry point, some people don't even enter from the body. Sometimes you can enter from other perspectives and then inside the body, for example, where should we enter? If we decided to take the body approach, the spine can be a nice decision, but some will choose just the pelvis. Any one of those points are valid. And then, playfulness can be an entry point, an attribute, and this is so open. So, I don't want to limit people and limit their minds in the way that they engage with the practice, but I also want to encourage the self-inquiry. Am I doing movements practice, or am I doing a movement practice? - So, could you help me distinguish the two a little bit further? I think I understand the difference between a sort of the noun versus the verbs. And in some ways here we are dealing with the challenge of the barriers that language present to something that's physical, right? I mean, indeed, there may not be a... I have to assume there is no perfect verbal language for movement. There are certain movements that defy language. I could say somebody jumped at a particular trajectory at a particular speed and moved this limb and that limb, but by fractionating it something is most definitely lost. So, if someone wanted to, let's say, get in better touch with their body, in quotes, in order to explore the infinite space that is movement, how might they begin to approach that? Is it does it begin with an awareness, with practice, or both? - It begins with education. You know, that's probably the most stable point of entry, awareness to some something as a concept that it is a concept, that there is validity, or because sometimes people look for that to looking at this entity, this open entity. And that's part of the reason why answering questions is not something I can do or even attempt to do. I believe in the power of the non-complete process, like making this table, but living something undone, not perfecting the product, why? Because it offers some kind of a dynamic nature of evolution that naturally unravels from it. Almost like sometimes I do it, I count reps and I'll only count to nine 'cause it tends to leave people in the count and it keeps going instead of giving them the 10. - Everyone wants to end on 10. [laughs] - Yeah, which is because of the decimal system, et cetera. So, all kinds of things like that is also important with the movement idea is to discuss, to examine, to look, to taste, to try, but then also not to try to capture because if you like the invisible loop of Hoffstadt. If you look at it too closely, it's gone, but if you look away, it functions and exists just like us very powerfully and obviously gives us the experiences that we have. So, when people enter movement practice, it is about education, bringing some awareness to the fact that they are living in a body, that they are living in motion, that their mind is a type of movement, that their life is a type of movement. Bringing attention to the movement of the emotions as well. Bringing just attention to the fact that things are in motion. The Heraclitus panta rhei, all in flux, nothing stops besides something that is the background of it and allows it to express, and this is the beauty of things. And this for me is the movement practice is this examination and bringing this awareness into things. As we sit now here, I'm also aware of my body, I'm also aware of the way that things make me feel, the way that your face is communicating to me. And I'm not just in some limited and very verbal, overly verbal state because it misses a lot of the beautiful flux. - I'm going to inject some or project some ideas, and perhaps you would tell me if they're ridiculous, potentially useful, or useful. As I understand what we're talking about now and what we've discussed earlier is that movement can and should be incorporated into one's entire life. I've even heard you say that even before getting out of bed in the morning, one can experience movement, and it doesn't necessarily have to be of the intimate kind with somebody else, it's it can be paying attention to the rhythm of one's breath, or how you get out of the bed. Or actually, in anticipation of you arriving here today, I noticed that as I was going up and down the stairs in this house, that I was injecting a little bit of playfulness in the way that I might have many, many decades ago, but haven't for a very long time. And I asked myself whether or not that's what Ido is referring to when he talks about threading this body awareness throughout the day. As opposed to, but of course not exclusive from just saying I have 45 minutes, I'm going to do movement practice before I shower and have some dinner. Right, I have to imagine both are helpful, but in terms of moving through the day and having bodily awareness, clearly there are an infinite number of ways one could do that, maybe you could just share a few. You mentioned, I mean, one could pay attention to their breath, could pay attention to posture. And this notion of play is a very attractive or as we say in science, it's a sticky concept, a concept that kind of draws one in. Maybe if you would, could you share with us just some ideas to get people thinking about or maybe even incorporating movement practice into their day, and maybe even touch on the potential role of play or playfulness? - Okay. Yeah, those are some good directions. I think one thing is this what you call wordlessness. I have been recommending to people non-verbal experiences and the awareness of the body, which is not really the awareness of the body, as you know, not purely or not fully. The awareness of motion is a very good way to start to bring awareness to that layer. And that layer will start to get clarified more and more and more, the more you practice. And then, it will enable for most people, a safe haven away from many states and difficulties, and will unlock a lot of potential attributes, and strength, and freshness, and a lot of beautiful things. Really one of the really perspectives about who we are comes from a person who influenced my thinking a lot, Moshe Feldenkrais, the late Moshe Feldenkrais. And he talks about the body as the core three elements, the core nervous system, two is the mechanical system of muscle, skeleton, et cetera, and the third is the environment, which is a unique way to look at it. And he talks about how the nervous system is both receiving information from the outside and from the inside. And in the first years of life, you work a lot on differentiating those, what is me and what is not me? And I think movement, when you feel movement, you feel the movement of the outside that is, of course, arriving to you and receiving this, and also your own internal movement. And the same can be said for stillness. So, bringing the attention into those layers, it's a tricky thing. It's one of those elusive things to look at, but it's definitely of huge benefit to start to train it, start to practice it, to feel not our thoughts, not necessarily our body, but to start to recognize the dynamic nature, the flux, the motion, and it occurs in all these layers. So, you will need to find it in multiple locations before you start to more and more make it your own, make it really yours. How, for example, simple, pragmatic things I used to do this, I spent some time in Hong Kong, I would need to get my practice in, but I'm really turned off from commercial gyms and there is not a lot of nature accessible there so I would just strap on my bag and I would walk the streets of Hong Kong, which are very crowded and then I would try to avoid touching anyone. And it would be like two hours of just like moving, involved, fully involved, fully in my body, and experiencing beautiful things, and enjoying and developing myself as well in all kinds of scenarios, up and down in the escalators and off. So, this is an example of a way to practice. And then, the way that we are sitting like these chairs, for example, our chairs are not very dynamic, but there is rocking chairs, right? And this is something I recommend for a lot of kids like in schools, I used to rock on the chair, which is very common. I'm sure- - I used to put my skateboard underneath my chair and roll it back and forth, and the teacher would tell me to stop. And I would just slowly little by little trying to get the most subtle movement I could without them telling me they were going to take it away, or try. - Which is probably horrible, horrible advice and instruction just like sit up straight and chew with your mouth closed because they remove a lot of the self-education and a lot of the self-development and the practical discoveries that are necessary and even will damage focus and thinking processes in some ways. So, for example, I would make the chairs even more mobile and I would support more motion, and then I would be able to bring attention there, but I would also be able to bring attention away from it into other things. And it keeps refreshing me so I don't become stale, the water doesn't stand, this is the beauty of movement. So, you can focus for long periods of time and do incredible things with the mind, with focus, with awareness, attention. And it's like we're skin in the game, so I'm not talking as some meditator and he's describing the act of being very focused, but then I put a stick on the edge of his fingers and I tell him, "Balance it." And everyone can do it for 10 seconds and I tell him, "Okay, now hold it 10 minutes." And you see that the skill has, he has no skin in the game. It wasn't developed in various scenarios, but so there is a delusion that start to develop and that's how movement keeps me very honest and humble in the way that I view humility and in a way that protects me and keeps me, yeah, it keeps me fresh. - I loved the example of moving through the crowded street with a backpack because of the way in which it's completely adaptive to the situation you happened to be in and highlights the fact that one doesn't need a gym or any specific scenario, although we will certainly touch on ideal learning circumstances for movement and some of the work that you're doing, of course. - The less of your own personal practice, and understanding, and knowledge you've done, the more toys you need. The more you've really worked on yourself, the more high-tech you are. The more low-tech are your tools, the more high-tech you are. And this is the most advanced technology by far on this planet. With all the advancement, it doesn't even start to scratch, and you know it, from the way that we understand the eyes all the way to with all the respect to the Boston Robotics, a 5-year-old motion- - Yeah, yeah. - Movements. Or animal motion with very underdeveloped, still relatively to us as systems. So, important to remind ourselves. - A lot can be done with the body and gravity as I- - Floor, a piece of floor, a piece of wall, a corner of a room is a beautiful scenario, which you can become discover in and play in. And, but we are not so developed so we don't see those options. And this is something that I try to stimulate, and that's why I made it a point to avoid any of the big sponsorship and high-tech tools. And I on point brought a stick into big conventions and/or sometimes I use a shirt with holes in it that just like a used shirt as a point to make when I'm addressing a crowd to keep things where it's important and it's important, we are important, and our experience is important. And we have to be very careful, these habits and these directions, they come from many times good intention, but they are the devil many times, they turn into the devil, just like our technology nowadays and what is happening with people and with depression, with meaning, meaninglessness, also with the body in various perspectives, or even I will also flip it into high performance sports and their price. Because for me, this is not a movement practice, it erases the person in the center of it. And then came places like skateboarding or break dancing where somebody with a disability becomes the best in the world, turns it into the biggest advantage, but you would never be accepted into gymnastics class, and I love that. And that change to place change in the center, it's important. - You touched on mention of a few sports, maybe it was Charles Poliquin, or maybe it was another trainer that I heard once say that, "For kids, one of the worst things they can do is overspecialize in a particular sport." The idea being that it leads to improvements in performance in a very narrow domain, but they raised the idea that it could perhaps also constrains the development of the nervous system, such that certain emotional states, certain intellectual abilities will forever be shut off because of the intense plasticity that occurs early in life. The more I learn from you, the more I'm thinking that that statement really should be extended to all of life. And I love to remind people because I started off as a developmental neurobiologist, that development doesn't start and end, you don't have childhood and adulthood. Our life is one long developmental arc from birth until death, however long that might be. So, if one is going to be anti-specialist, maybe even we call that a generalist, what does that look like? What are the different domains of movement practice? And as I asked this, I realized I am in serious danger of fractionating movement into a list of words like strength, and speed, and explosiveness, and suppleness, a word that I've heard you use before. And yet, I think for most people because we think in words, often, some of those categories can be useful. So, let's say I was going to embark on a movement practice or a child was going to embark on a movement practice and either throughout the day or for a dedicated period of time, what are the sorts of categories of movement that I might want to think about, ballistic movement, smooth movement? Maybe you could just enrich us with some of the landscape around that. - Okay, first I'll address the first part that you mentioned. And I've learned from you about certain changes in the way that things develop later in life versus earlier in life. And you're right, it is something that Charles Poliquin also mentioned and I learned from back in the day as well from him, which can seem dark a bit and kind of hopeless, but then you should go beyond that. One thing that does seem to appear for me when I look around is these the concepts of unique postures. And I think this is true for postures of thought, emotional postures, and movement postures. Truly, earlier in life, we are creating these unique postures and they get into these drawers or like language letters. Later in life, the process moves more towards integration of these unique postures into all different organizations. The beauty of it is that you can use very few postures to create many possibilities, just like a lib needs a search for a language that contain one symbol only versus two, which he discovered. And this is something that is often seen, like you take someone who moves in a certain way and you teach them all these new sports or techniques, but essentially if you look deeply and you're sensitive, you see it's the same postures that he will have to work with till the end of his life, the same thinking postures. And this is really problematic, where we are not freeing the mind beyond this, how would I say, a scaffolding of thinking and we are actually letting go of the content. We get more and more focused on the way of thinking versus the thinking itself, or habitual ways and forms of thinking, associated thinking, et cetera. And emotionally the same, we are constructing these emotional postures and then we have to go through the rest of our lives working with that. So, this is the dark side, right? But of course, there are always possibilities, both I think invading this early system, to some extent, even if it's 5%, or 7%, or whatever percent, and also on the freeing yourself of going beyond all postures period. Working with the postures you have, but towards a postureless way of doing things. So, this is something interesting to work when people work with movements, but finally are able to go into movement and this magic starts to happen, and then the techniques fall apart and something appears, and it's a face change, it's a transformation, it's a binary moment. There is a jump there for sure, and it's very rare to see both in thinking, and emotionally, and other ways, we have many names for it. And some talk about enlightenment and some talk about all kinds of processes related to it. And I think most of them are shadows of the sun, but it's not the sun itself really. And then, talking about ways of thinking about movement, this is where I use something I called my slice and dice because of the problem of using words, and definitions, and categories, I try to create a lot of them and I write them on the paper and then I crumble them, throw them into the bin, and I keep doing it all my life. The writing them down and the geeking on it is very important, also very important to let it go. I tell people what you forgot is not the same, forgetting is not the same as never knowing it. The crumbling and throwing away is a form of forgetting, but it leaves some kind of a homeopathic trace behind. So, let's take some slice and dice, and try to look at it. Here is a physical one, contraction, relaxation. That's a spectrum, and pretty much everything falls on this spectrum. Also, in terms of analyzing a person or yourself, you can tell me if you feel closer to this side or closer to that side, and then it allows you to examine your practices. How many of the practices are moving you towards balance and how many are it's your addiction of just doing what you're good at versus what you need? Here is another example, physical culture. So, we have the dense realm working with internal concepts and expressing them, abstract concepts, expression. Second perspective, the Marshall concept, but not in the sense of just fighting, but also partnering, working with another person, a dynamic entity that is communicating with you. The third one is I call the elements, working with the environment. The next one is a somatic one, is the internal practice. And of course, there are all gray zones, and another one is object manipulatory, which you can think of it also as the environment, but it's more small objects, heavy objects, many objects, few objects. And then you can look at this way of thinking, and you can say, "Oh, I have many of my practices in this direction, but not," and you can draw it for yourself. So, that's another perspective, and this way I use dozens of perspectives. And with the years, it gives people a sense of where they want to go, how they want to do it, and what they need to address versus what they like to address, et cetera. Is it helpful? - Very helpful, those different bins are very helpful. I really appreciate that you mentioned that people will often practice what they're good at as opposed to what they need. In gym culture, we refer to this as the guy that always skips leg day type of person, right? You know, big upper body, skinny legs, or you you'll see people that have these enormous thick torsos and they're bench pressing all day, but they clearly need to pull on an object every once in a while to create some balance, but they don't do it because they, for whatever reason, they have an obsession with moving greater and greater poundage or something like that, which in certain sports like power lifting or aesthetics aren't the goal, and it's simply to push more weight off one's chest that you could imagine that there's something beneficial there. However, I think that it's really important in intellectual endeavors and in movement endeavors, if I understand correctly, to bring oneself to a place of real challenge on a regular basis. In fact, earlier today, I was in a state of constant challenge 'cause it was all new to me. And as much as I told myself, "Beginners' mind, beginners' mind, beginners' mind," it's hard, I confess, to not want to do well, to perform well, right? And I think that's a natural and healthy thing. Yet- - Not only natural, it is necessary, but I want you to keep it on that side and to bring something to balance it. If there is not this challenge, the process will not work. It has to be this scale. And you're talking about scales of pain, pleasure, and this is another scale. And this discomfort again is necessary and should be recognized as, "I'm in the right place." When it becomes too high and I'm unable to resolve, to make any progress, I went overboard, but when it's not present, I don't do nothing here. Nothing that I'm truly interested in, I'm just gratifying myself, wankery. It's in essence, it's not about searching for the discomfort, but it's a marker. And I think the question should be who am I serving? 'Cause people do not serve themselves, in essence, they serve part, parts of it, some kind of a fraction of themselves. And this separation of oneself from oneself, and this is also a result of the practice, a good practice. I think maybe the biggest gift I received from the practice is I can say although it will take maybe a certain context, I am not my friend. At times I am, but many times I am not my friend. And by creating this separation, I can assume a certain stability in the face of everything all the way up to our own mortality and death, which is, and maybe beyond, who knows? - Yeah, it was a striking moment for me earlier today when I was really challenged with one of the practices we were doing, and you said, "This is exactly what I experienced this morning, Andrew," that's what you said. And I couldn't imagine that you were having challenges doing what I was attempting to do. And of course, you were, and I believe what you were referring to is that you had put yourself at that edge earlier in the day in which you were making failures, you were failing to execute the way that you were attempting to execute movement. I should just to inject some neuroscience and neuroplasticity there, I can't help myself, it is what I do after all. There are beautiful data in animals and humans showing that in the seconds and minutes after a failed attempt at a motor execution of something, the forebrain is in a heightened state of focus. And when you hear it, suddenly makes perfect sense, of course, why would the nervous system change unless it got a cue to change? And the cue almost always comes in the form of frustration, the [imitates buzzer] or as we said earlier, nah, the nah signal [Ido laughing] is the one that preps you to extract more learning from the subsequent trials. And yet, for a lot of people, they feel that ugh, that failure to execute, or even to approximate execution and they feel and experience that ah negative signal, and they lean out of the practice, they start to depart either mentally or physically or both. And if there's anything I think that perhaps we can offer is this understanding that that edge as some people call it or that failures aren't just necessary, they are part of the learning process, they are the entry gate to neuroplasticity. - Yes, contextualizing or recontextualizing that sensation is something I work a lot with and I just remind people and I also reminded to myself, and if it wasn't difficult and we didn't need to redo it again and again, we wouldn't be again on this correct scale, which is dynamic and moving just like rolling downhill. So, there is definitely a necessity to succeed, to orient, there is certain aspects that you want to achieve, but then there is also the letting go of it and the deambitioning of it. And within that tension, the plus and the minus comes movement, and that that's how I did it. And again, if I stretch it too far away, or if I increase one of them too much, then I would have some issues, but you will with practice learn to recognize the optimal point of progression. Of course, it takes many years and a lot of play and exposure to get a sense of it, regardless of the layer in which it is applied. So, I'm sure in your field and in your pursuits, you are already aware of it and applying it in your life, talking about focus, talking about ways of thinking, creativity, et cetera. But then it's enough that I pull into another perspective and you will see that people are specialists, and then they don't have really the real essence of the concept. It's not theirs, it's applied specifically. The one who changes all the time gets the general component because what appears when everything changes? That is that new entity. Everything changes, something stays. That's what we want to get, this concept and this understanding. - I've heard the statement before, we are just a meat vehicle, right? We're just a sack of cells and it's I truly despise that statement because, first of all, it deprives us of all meaning in of our lives. And we can go down the route of philosophy as to whether or not there's meaning or not, but more importantly, it divorces us from the idea that the body and brain are interconnected and have at least equal value at any one moment that they're informing each other. Emotions inform movement, movement informs emotions. One thing that I've heard you say before, and I'd really love to hear you embellish on is this important principle that human beings are truly unique in terms of the enormous range of movements that we can perform. And yet, we are excellent, maybe superior to all other species at certain types of movement. The one that comes to mind is walking, strides, striding. So, maybe we could just explore that idea because obviously a cheetah is very fast, the gibbon seems to have a lot of proficiency at grabbing and swinging from branches, but human beings perform an enormous or can potentially perform an enormous array of movements. Do you think all human beings are potentially able to explore all the different types of movement? And if so, how does one approach that? So, basically what I'm doing is I'm tabling a concept, which is not range of motion, right, for the gym rats, discard with range of motion, I'm talking about the variety of movements. - First, it's not important what I think, if it's possible or not possible, or if it's even possible for you or not possible for you, what is important is what you truly want to do, what you truly are after. And it's important for me because many times, this way of thinking about things is already limited. I like to say a man doesn't go to the ocean to empty it with a spoon. A lot of the types of dressing up of the concepts nowadays is trying to fit an elephant into the hole in the needle, yeah? Like for example, the concept of practice, and then our lives, as if we have a life. We have some kind of a stream of behaviors, we have there is an argument of free will, et cetera. There is a multiplicity, definitely a man is a legion, that's the real meaning of that phrase. One day you wake up like this, I say, "Andrew, let's meet tomorrow at 7:00 am," but I don't know who's going to wake up tomorrow. And then you send me a text message, "Oh, I'm feeling off," right at 6:55 and go back to sleep. So, examining that and seeing that I think frees you up eventually and start to orient you in a better direction. So, what do you want to do and what, but in the orientation of also what you need to do, what you sense, and what you are developing as an evolutionary direction for you, this is the important bit. Is it possible for everyone to engage in certain specific physical movement? For example, in Scandinavian countries, the squat is not very approachable, it's very difficult. They're more built for dragging heavy things and also in this climate, I guess it, it makes less sense to squat and 'cause you're going to freeze there. So, this is and then you see the squat in warm climates and it's like so open and accessible. They're very good deadlifters usually, not good squatters and the- - They want to get away from the ground. - Yeah, the shallow hip socket, which allows one activity, but then the stability of the deep hip socket architecture of the hip, the femur heads, the Q angles, the shapes, et cetera. So, we are all unique and there are certain elements, which like, for example, my squat challenge is like for most people there is something there, but- - Could you remind people what the squat challenge is? - The squat was my attempt to bring a new, fresh state of mind into the word squat, not as a strength element, but it's a fundamental resting position really. Actually, should be one of the most abundant ones, we replaced it with sitting, which is not really doesn't work well if you're in a natural environment, it's not very comfortable actually to sit for long periods of time, rocks and different terrains so you end up lying down, standing, and squatting a lot. Also, when you're moving low and dynamic, like even collecting berries, the squat is much more dynamic and open. And then elimination is happening there, so it's like it's such a fundamental thing and we totally eliminated it. We eliminated many other things, overhead movements, behind the back, all kinds of back realm what I call the back realm is totally absent in people's awareness. So, that was my attempt to bring it back into people, and I recommended to in order to really get the transformation, going to accumulate 30 minutes a day in the squat position, unloaded, just resting down, not correct, not erect, many people make this mistake, they didn't read through the whole thing. It's just resting down there. And of course, you have to be mindful of dosages. Some people will get hurt if they try to do it too quickly so they might need a buildup process towards it. And also, I'm not talking about 30 minutes straight, but accumulation throughout the day. And this does a lot of good for digestive problems, for lower back pain, for hip pains, for knees, and generally for aging because it's basically folding your body in the most basic way. Are you folding your body? If you're not folding your body, you will lose the foldability of your body. And this is probably the easiest and the most abundant way to fold the body. So, but this is an example of something that can be very useful with many, many people, but there will always be unique individuals which needs something else. And there are benefits in examining things and also there are benefits in getting hurt, which is not often discussed, especially not in these parts. So, I'm one of the only ones as a teacher that says, "I injured many of my students." And if I did not do that, I would be totally useless for them as well. That totally safe system has nothing to offer, practically nothing is totally safe. And we can, of course, we don't approach it with a ballsy or machoistic thing, but we are aware that sometimes we have to go beyond the boundaries and hopefully those would be the small injuries that will help us avoid the big injuries. But if you try to avoid the small injuries, maybe you'll get those big injuries in there. So, examining which types and forms of movement, the location of the body, speed of execution, the type of organization of the body, which is a whole thing that we can discuss. All of this is up for the grabs and something that we have to create individual relationship with, hopefully with good guidance, where we can get the right scenarios, a facilitator of good scenarios for our learning, which is what I try to do. And less of a technical state of mind, do this ABC or, yeah, like chunking what I really dislike from a long time is like many people they tell me, "Have you met this guy? He's an amazing teacher because he chunked the process into these bits and not even in the correct places to chunk," it was like and it doesn't offer, it locks us, this state of mind. I talk about the chemistry model, I call it my chemistry model where an atom, a molecule, and then a compound is conceptualized versus just chunking. So, there is an actual evolution like I call it also sketch learning. I'm not going to try to draw you, if I know anything about art and drawing, I'm going to start by capturing something very rough. And I need to practice that first, that dynamic entity, before I go into the rendering and the shading, et cetera. So, the same way to learn things, so big picture, the small details. And unlike many of my teachers in that I ran into, and I say, with the greatest respect because I don't know who taught me more, my good teachers or my worst teachers, but some of them just teach from the small details into a big picture that never arrives. - Given that humans can generate such a broad array of types of movement, run, jump, duck, squat, leap, and all these types of movements. Do you think there's value in observing the movements of other animal species? I know I certainly enjoy watching other animals move. I think the most, one of the more spectacular animal facts that was shared with me is when I was a graduate student, someone down the hall was working on the little pedals of the chameleon, which can walk up walls. And it was a great mystery as to whether or not they were suction, but turns out they can do it in a vacuum, so it's not suction. Whether or not there was some sticky substance and it turned out, I don't know, I feel compelled to share this with you so I'm going to do it because I have a feeling it will lead us to an insight of some sort, that those little tiny pedals are so thin and so close together that the chameleon actually sticks to the wall by what are called van der Waals forces, meaning it's a very weak molecular force, but strong enough to stick to the wall because they are actually exchanging molecules with the surface they're on. - Wow. - So, obviously we can't do that, and yet I spent hours, because they were in the lab next door, watching videos of these little chameleon walk and the articulation of these feet is incredible because they're literally rolling those little pedals along in a way that it kind of defies anything else I've ever seen. I told myself this was useful, A, because I thought it was interesting, but, B, because I never really thought about how I articulate my foot. I've thought about being a heel striker or a toe striker when I run and no one can tell me which one I'm supposed to be. And maybe you can tell me, [Ido laughing] but the point is, or I suppose the question is, do you think there's value in observing the extremes of animal kingdom movement as a way to inform the play space and the exploration space of our own human movement practice? - I think so. I think, first, it's inspiring, it opens up, but I will take it away from the romantic point of view. And I would offer another way to examine all these movements exist in us in ways, in certain ways. Like the work of Gracovetsky on the spine, "The Spinal Engine", and to see how these old ways of moving even all the way up to exoskeletons and like primary, very ancient or even single cell things are still within us to a certain extent. And then, of course, this gets developed like the Darwinian state of mind got stuck for many years on the survival of the fetus. But actually, I believe, I always believed and I saw some information about it lately that mutation is the heart of the model, not survival of the fittest. - Yeah, people often hear the word mutation and they think, "Oh, mutations are bad." There are maladaptive mutations and then there are adaptive mutations, for sure. - And then, this places the word change in the heart of it, what it wants to do, change. So, it does not want to become better, there is an inherent change in it. And then, of course, they become better at X, Y, Z, fittest is the secondary perspective that arrives in relation to certain things, but there is still a stronger, more ancient driving force into the process. So, for me, this is cool to see these animals take it all the way to this extreme, but it's also still reflecting within us. So, I love to do, like for example, I introduce with people spinal waves, and by bringing these waves into the body, sometimes you get weird experiences like emotional releases and sometimes, and other times it can become an incredible tool to help an athlete which specialized and reach the top of the top. And then, you defrag his system a little bit and offer him some freshness and some segmental movement. And first you fuck him up, that's usually the case. Technically he's off, his coordination is off, but later the growth will arrive. It's a form of playfulness, it's a form of examining things regardless of their success or failure. More understanding that change is important and then after that, we can also look at the more competitive state of mind and the more success and failure orientation, but there is no game without change. So, this is the primary one, and that's why I say, "Okay, you want to succeed in the tasks like we did earlier, but you stayed within the game, to sustain the game, the infinite versus finite game perspective." To sustain the game means to continue to change, continue to transform, and then to win the game sometimes mean game over. So, it's like, yeah, within that tension I think it's beautiful to play, and to exist, and to be. - You mentioned something that for me is an incredibly important concept for a couple of reasons, and you mentioned these spinal waves. Right, I have to assume that's taking the torso for us, you know, movement morons that I'll just refer to in coarse terms of thoracic spine. So, I mean, I will stay away from the technical anatomy and the torso and creating movement either side to side undulation or arching and extension of the spine. - Yeah, dorsal, ventral, side to side, or rotational as well as spiraling. - Have you ever had the experience that of yourself or other people engaging in those types of movements and experiencing particular categories of emotions? And I have a particular reason for asking this, there's no right or wrong answer, of course, but I'm just curious whether or not movement of let's call it the core of the body, things close to the midline as opposed to far away from the midline like the digits far. Is there any, do you have any evidence that that can evoke a certain category of emotional states? - Evidence, I have none, but I have experience and I have some thoughts about it. Ida Rolf is known to have created Rolfing or structural integration said, "The issues are in the tissues." And around the spine, the spine is us, as you know, it's like can take an arm off, a limb, but there's been attempts, but there is no brainy alone, this cerebral thing alone, the spine and the maybe more parts of n-systems inside the torso are important. So, that's why I like to start from that core entity. And then these little fluctuations they create, they unblock things, they start to move things. And you can avoid, funny enough, mobilizing those areas by doing big frame motions, and competitive motions, and techniques all your life. So, even most yogis, for example, they look extremely mobile, but then when you're actually going into the small, what I call the small frame, I borrowed this from Chinese martial arts, small frame, big frame. The big frame is this big changes of our total body in space posture. And then the small frame is barely moving, but mobilizing the little bits that comprise the same pretty much posture. So, these are very beneficial and it has totally disappeared from our physical culture. When you introduce it back, the small frame offers the big frame, but the big frame doesn't offer the small frame because, of course, the small detail come together into the big picture. So, if I want to place my body in a specific position and I have all these bits moving well, I can construct it in whatever way I want. But if I just work on the big one, most chances are I just mobilize certain areas while other areas are totally held or blocked and then I'm specialized one more time. Take me out of this realm and I'll have difficulties. What will sit there in this stagnation? Emotion, material, thoughts, traumas. That's why people get discharges. The body memory is not what we think it is, that's how I believe, it is stored in a lot everywhere, and I've had those experiences. A lot of people have the opposite. When a certain emotion is evoked, they start to undulate the spine. So, this can be worked from this direction or from this direction. And I believe by applying such a practice, it is wise, you basically turn over the lens and you are allowing things to shift, and to move, and to adapt. So, I highly recommend it and we teach it in a very elaborate and gradual way. And this is needed really because people, when they just go into like some general recommendation, they usually just get stuck into a new pattern, "Ah, that spinal wave, okay, that's it." So, I've been using, again, this slice and dice-like teaching dozens of systems of moving the torso until a person is freed to really move the torso like the language is created, the small enough units are created in your understanding from all these systems and then you improvise, you reach the highest level of the practice. - I love the answer. Let me tell you a bit of why I asked. So, there's a principle in neuroscience, but especially in neuroevolution, they call it evo-devo sometimes, evolution and development, how those link. If you look at, so we have motor neurons, as you know, but for the audience, that live in our spinal cord that cause transmission and contraction of the muscles, allows us to move our limbs. And then, we have motor neurons up here called upper motor neurons that control the motor lower ones. So, once something is reflexive or learned, we're not thinking about it, so to speak, we mainly use the lower motor neurons. We know this because you can do an experiment, it's a rather barbaric experiment, but it's been done many times called creating a decerebrate cat. You actually remove the neocortex and these cats will walk on a treadmill, it's called fictive motion, no problem at all. There are human beings who don't have a neocortex or much of their neocortex is missing, they generate perfectly fine movement. - The pattern has been download. - That's right, and it's truly downloaded into the spine and the connection between the spine and muscles. Now, the motor neurons that control the spinal waves, as you called them, are of a particular category. They have a molecular signature, a physiological signature, they were identified by, he's dead now, but a biologist at Columbia University named Tom Jessell, and many of his scientific offspring. Here's what's interesting, in fish or in animals that really only have the opportunity to undulate and flap their little fins. Though, motor neurons that control undulation in those animals are identical molecularly to the motor neurons that control the spinal undulation in humans. What's been added in human evolution are extra rows, literally categories, of molecularly distinct neurons so that as you move from the center of the body outward, unlike a fish, which can move its fins, but can't actually, it doesn't have digits. We have special motor neurons to move these little bits, these bits, these bits, and I can't do a spinal wave, but I can do the mudras thing, like the belly thing. - Ah-ha. - That comes from seeing the movie "E.T." when I was a kid and puffing out my stomach [Ido laughing] and then realizing that I could wave it, but only in one direction and- Okay. - apparently not up. Anyway, the yogis out there can chuckle at that, but. - The yogis actually do it to the side. - Oh, do they? - Yeah. - I don't know if I can do that. Anyway, my spinal wave is weak, but I'll work on it. But what I find so interesting about these layers of, I don't want to say sophistication, but these with evolution came the addition of more pools of opportunity. These motor neuron pools, as they're called, are opportunity to engage in new, more elaborate types of movement. But with each new pool became the opportunity to create combinations of new movement. And so, the reason I asked you why spinal waves create one category of movement is that if you touch a fish on one side of its body, it moves to the opposite side, it never moves toward it. But earlier we were doing a practice, somewhat similar of testing this similar reflex. And sometimes I or someone will move toward a touch, we don't deviate to the opposite side. So, I have this untested, at least formally tested hypothesis that movements of small digits and portions of our distal, as they're called, far from the midline body parts evoke different sensations, maybe even far more subtle sensations than movements of the core of our body and the stuff closer to the spine. Again, it's just a theory, but I'm grateful for your answer because it lands at least in the general vector direction of my idea here. - The central orientation is mostly gone from our culture, we don't even walk basically these days. If you look at traditional culture, the amount of walking you do on a rest day, it's huge. And so, we started to create technologies to bring everything into the periphery, controlling it with the fingertips, et cetera. So, we have incredible neurological development relating to this, but our central patterns, swimming, running, jumping, throwing, throwing is not pushing away, that's an example, right? - Like some people when you give them a ball to throw, that you can tell if they've never thrown a ball before. - Yeah, they throw like a girl. - Yeah, they don't just- - That is often said [Andrew laughing] here in the US. And it's, of course, unfair, but it relates to experience, right? That is less maybe promoted or offered for females, so you get this peripheral pattern instead of a central-generated pattern that progresses towards the extremities. One thing I wanted to ask you is I know an area that is not often mentioned is that some of these ancient patterns and systems are primary in many ways, hence those newer developments inside of us are constrained by using the connections running through these ancient systems. Hence, we are much more limited by the gene pool. We are hitchhikers on a piece of DNA, I like to say, and that gene pool is like is driving something so primary that even when you are in kind of the driver's seat in your eyes, you're actually not or you're being totally constrained by that. And I wanted to hear about this. - Yeah, recently we had a guest on the podcast named Erich Jarvis, he's a professor at Rockefeller, who was offered a position to dance with the Alvin Ailey dance company. So, an accomplished dancer and comes from a musical family chose to become a neuroscientist instead and study speech and language. - Wow. But he said something incredible, several incredible things, and really looking forward to getting your reflections on. First of all, he said that when you look at the species in the kingdom of animals, including us, that have elaborate language and true song, they all also have the capacity to dance. All the... It turns out hummingbirds actually have a dance and a song capacity. That perhaps, and this is the going idea now in neuroscience and evolution of the brain, that singing actually came before finally articulated speech and language, that voice involved first to sing, to communicate. I mean, to enunciate ugh, or uh, or mm. You know, but then song may have come first. Where you have song, you have dance and the capacity to dance, which of course is movement of the body. And where you have song and dance, you always find that those species can generate elaborate language. Now, the simple version of this is okay, sophisticated brains tend to create clusters of sophisticated capabilities, but the other possibility, and it's the one that Jarvis proposes and I think it's in line with what you're perhaps raising here is the idea that movement of the body and range and sophistication of movement of the body through all these different systems may have actually promoted or even driven the evolution of the things that we think of as speech and language and the ability to have multiple words for the same concept, or to have elaborate articulation of speech. I find this incredibly attractive as an idea because certainly from as a hierarchy of needs, we needed to move first to survive, and to mate, and to flee, and to attack. It makes perfect sense to me that the layers would be built up fundamentally from the body to the mind and not the other way around. So, that's one piece, and then the other piece, which I'll just share for any reflections you might have that just blew me away was Jarvis told me that when we read, if, and this has been done experimentally, if one records the EMG, the low level muscular activity in the larynx and pharynx, we are actually repeating the words that we read, but so subtly so that we don't actually speak them out, unless there's some sort of neurologic deficit, which some people have, some people mumble while they read. But what that tells me is that language is movement and movement is language. So, again, we have this convergence, but at a very basic level I'd love your reflections on those are all his ideas, I want to say, I'm just repeating what he said and not nearly as precisely as he did, but how do you think of movement as either the foundation of language or as its own language that perhaps even defies words? - Mm, [gasps]. Wow, those are beautiful perspectives, and I definitely feel the same. There's a lot to say about singing and dancing as well as also as a form of ancient programs of transmission. Sometimes that there is this in some ancient practices, the mantras. And people don't realize that they are tantric practices, they contain a form of vibrating and breathing all tied together into very elaborate way to promote a certain effect. And how would you do something like this in ancient times? This is ingenious. We, even until today, we need a full book to describe something and it wouldn't work as well, so it's like a very ancient form of transmission. The more accurate we became with the language, the more dead it became, because it is less of a movement entity, it is less of a dynamic entity from its nature. And that's why Yukio Mishima says, "It's corrupting, it corrupts us." So, definitely, definitely the conducing force or the primary force for me is movement that is experienced. Every time we talk about movement, basically, even now we are spilling it into a container to call it what it is, but it is beyond that. So, then it is applied into dancing, into singing, into language. There is no other language that I see as a primary mode, and this is a nature of space, time, things moving. So, I think everything moves into the direction of understanding that more and more, and maybe it's not so popular to call it movement or people have some connotations, and it's okay, you can throw away this word and put another word, and we probably need to do that also like regularly, like I start to see the end of this word for me. Things get corrupted again, overused, abused, and then we need a new word. And that's even that word is only needed for communication and for specific processes of education exchange, it's important to stay within the experiences. It's important to continue to promote scenarios in which the experience is primary, more open experience, let's say, and not try to hold down and define overly accurately or if it's done throwing it away and starting again. So, there is no winning concept, you got to the winning concept, you got nothing. You were able to grab it, you were able to, this is very science, right? It's like, "We got it, we got it," and then it turns out to be nothing. And like more and more time passes I feel science is becoming more humble and things are being discussed in this way. And because really what does science do? Report the sun came up a certain amount of billions of times and then tomorrow it will come up again. It's statistics. - Yeah, it's good prediction. - Yeah, yeah, but we can go beyond, there is something inside of us that can go beyond. Hard to communicate, I can't offer it right now here, but I have the experience and thankfully I have a practice and a way to sense it, to feel it, and to reexamine it, and then we can talk about it, and have something from that. - Edward Wilson, the great sociobiologist, he actually founded the field of sociobiology, E. O. Wilson, they call him, Edward Wilson, had this beautiful word and indeed named a book. Actually, the word was better than the book, sorry Wilson, but the book was a little bit meandering for my taste, but then, again, he's the Harvard professor, not me. Well, Stanford's pretty darn good. This word is consilience, this idea of a leaping together of divergent forms of knowledge to create a truly valuable concept, which I love. I love it because, of course, I'm formally trained as a scientist, I look at things mainly through the lens of neuroscience, but experience is real and observation is real. And even in the field of medicine, you have double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials and then you have case studies, n-of-1, right? Not often discussed, right, I mean, H.M., the most famous example in neuroscience of a patient that had no hippocampus informed us more about the process of memory and indeed the function of the hippocampus than thousands of independent experiments that followed. So, you can't have one, you need all these different forms of exploration, which is I think we share the belief, if I may, that convergent forms of knowledge, eventually this process of consilience can eject a new concept. And yet, the challenge, again, is that if we don't have a language for it, it becomes hard to transmit. One of the things that I find incredibly, I'll use this word again, sticky is this notion of movement culture. I don't know who coined that phrase, or I've seen it in the circles and accounts around your Instagram account and others. I don't know if that's a phrase that you coined, but this idea of engaging in movement practice with others, whether or not it's dance or other movement practices because it's so dynamic, there's the unpredictability of it. Even to like today, two practitioners at vastly different levels of knowledge and experience in movement practice, there's information, I like to think, to be gained from both sides. [laughs] So- - 100%. So, one thing that I've heard you say before, which really resonated with me is this idea that people have maybe particularly in the US have this concept of, "Oh, I have my yoga friends or the people I dance with are distinct from my family friends, are distinct from." But as you pointed out, gathering around movement is an age-old tradition. And that perhaps we better off not thinking about people we exercise with or train with, but that friendship and connection made through movement is perhaps the most valuable form of connection. - Yeah, I think it's a product of those practices that are maybe not so aware or not so movement-oriented in the open sense and then you get this sensation with people, but alone, we do nothing, so much so that we're never alone also on the inside and we will manufacture and produce entities inside, so we're constantly in a dynamic exchange, cultural exchange. And practically, I learned this lesson in capoeira, it's a cultural manifestation. Things happen within this context, we rub against reality, we rub against each other and their movement occurs and their insight is to be gained and development happens and then comes other thoughts, collective knowledge versus self-knowledge. We are transmitting knowledge. If we go on top of some mountain, 20 people, 20 normal individuals, and we spent 20 years just fighting four hours in the morning, four hours in the afternoon, and we do it for 20 years, but we're isolated from any other source of knowledge, we would still not reach anything that a very young fighter these days has. We will be unable to develop those techniques, those insights, that's where collective knowledge comes in and transmission jumps us forward, but what is the problem with that? Staying within just those technical constraints and never making it yours, that's the part of self-knowledge. The digestion of this collective information until it becomes digested and becomes part of yourselves, and then you are it versus you are doing it. And this is a clear separation that you can see in sports on a very high level and on a not so high level, even though I would be honest if I say that some people reach very far just with collective knowledge and a very technical approach, and others reach extremely far with very little of it. And there is always outliers, there are always the outliers in that case. Another thought I had when you mentioned evo-devo, evolution development is also the Greek concepts of poiesis and physis. The growing of the seed into the tree, and the other process of the manufacturing of the chair from the tree. Two processes of development evolution, very different. One from everything to something, the other from nothing to something. One is accumulation based, one is subtraction based. Both of these processes relate to collective knowledge, self-knowledge, but they're not exactly just that. And what should we do? This is a question that my friend Rasmus, he asks in his thesis and thoughts, what is the ultimate for us? Should we manufacture our chair or should we grow like into the tree? Civilize the mind, leave savage the body. Is it in this way or should the mind also be left wild? Wild and wise is a nice combination of words that I like to place together, wild, wise. So, this is something that I try to bring into the way that I live my life and my practice. And I try to bring the information, and the wisdom, and the collective knowledge, but I also try to let go of more and more until an essence is gleaned, until something is appearing and because everything was already there. For example, if I'm sitting here, all the movements are already occurring, all the possibilities are. So, it's just about, I need to open, I open this window, the air would come from here. If I open this window, the air would come. I don't need to drive my motion, I need to discover what is stopping it from happening. Something is constantly holding, and when we remove this immediately movement appears, this is real deep movement versus the driven movement that is a very wasteful of times like walking, you see people pushing through the walk instead of the controlled falling that it should be. Fighting, punching to manufacture the strength and then to have someone who knows how to facilitate the conditions in which you are knocked out. It doesn't knock you out, "It hits versus I hit," like Bruce Lee said. So, this is a beautiful thing to examine and to work within that, so it's to see am I skateboarding? Am I using this perspective? Or am I trying to, to control because of risk and danger, I'm trying to overly control something that actually can never be controlled. The way to control it is to let go of the control and then, okay, but what about all this collection of information, knowledge that I can bring in? Where do I want to play? I can play down here or I can play up here. The collective knowledge is maybe take you further in, and then you're still going need to do your individual work. A lot of people like to romanticize on that and it's you don't need teachers, we don't need nothing, we don't need information. It's not fully honest, you don't need, but depends on where you want to function and how you want to function. They shouldn't be demonized, but they shouldn't be overly glorified as well. - You mentioned about the opportunity for movement, perhaps even all forms of movement coming from deep within, it raises to mind in the neuroscience of motor systems we talk about motor neurons, as I described, the ones that actually evoke contraction of muscles. And then, there's this category of neurons that isn't often discussed, but certainly exist. Aren't often discussed in kind of popular nomenclature of neuroscience, which is the pre-motor system. Most of our movements are the reflection of certain patterns of transmission breaking through from the pre-motor to the actual motor. In other words, we are always in a anticipatory mode of movement. And as and I think you, the way you describe it, you clearly intuitively understand this, you feel it, and you recognize it. And think of it as it's like a layer of neurons that's constantly humming [hums] ready to go. And it's the release of these gates that allows movement to occur in a particular way, could be very smooth, could be very ballistic. - Which is DNA, the same, turning off and on, all the information is already there. - Right. - And then the possibilities are just allowed. So, I'm allowed, I don't do free will already, but I am allowed to do, I am. There are possibilities and I am dancing within that dance, but I am not the only dancer. So, that's, that's my sensation at least with most states of being, let's say. Maybe there is other states that could be reached, a stability that will arrive from the waters, from the movement of the waters, this humming, these potential possibilities to be in that state, to vibrate like this is very powerful for our lives. To wake up in the morning and feel that living thing is the feeling of movement, and, for me, it's a result of the practice. And so, then it's easy not to stagnate and then the mind can stay focused for hours like we've done today, and I can listen and tune in and I won't lose you. Which is very difficult, like I haven't had a good conversation here in the US it's very difficult, and I've had your attention and you're listening, but it's rare. It's rare that somebody can do that, and it's a struggle, always a struggle, but it's definitely my trick, my dirty trick. - In that you said you're allowed and, again, I'm taking some of the language and what you report about your experience and I'm trying to map it to some concepts that relate to neural circuits. In the principles of neuroscience, we talk about instructiveness versus permissiveness. There are instructive cues, like for instance, the ability to pick up this pen, right? There's an instruction, clearly there's a motor command, but that's just one way of looking at it. The way it actually works is that there's a pre-motor system that's already generating that movement, and what we've done is we've flung open the gate and allowed that movement to occur precisely. - Surfing it. - Right. - Surfing that current, or this current, or another current, or opening the window. - Exactly, and if you look at the formal study of movement and improvement of movement, the most basic example I can give is like a tennis serve. And they, if you just, and they've done this many times over. You map the trajectories, and in a novice the lines are all over the place, it ends up looking more like a tangle of rubber band ball, right? Whereas in the Federer or the expert, you almost wonder if it's just one line being drawn, but it's the trajectories are incredibly stereotyped. That's the reflection of one little narrow gate opening again, and again, and again. Of course- - Let me inject something here from an old neurologist, you can say, Bernstein, the Soviet. And he talked about degrees of freedom, and they did in order to increase productivity in Soviet Union. I don't know if you you've heard this story. - [Andrew] No. - He was brought in to examine the movement habits of the workers and he collected some information. He placed, he was one of the first kinetic, I don't know how it's called in English, the kinetic capturing of motion with moving pictures in that time. And so, he placed these dots and they took these photos, which became kind of moving. And what he discovered was something very interesting, the accuracy of the heat of the sledgehammer increased while the variants in the various points became more, not less. So, it wasn't a fixed pattern, it was a meta pattern. And this pattern is adjusted in this way to achieve the perfect execution. Those were very early findings, and I'm not sure how does that sit with everything, but I'm sure there is some truth to it from my experience. Basically, the self-adjusting dynamic nature of the system allows you to reach a very constant and stable end result by being so open and letting go of your control. - Mm-hmm, the example you give fits very well with the one that I described before because and I'm recalling the experiment. If people want to look this up, it's a paper, we'll put it in the show note caption, a guy also happens to be at Harvard named Bence Ölveczky, a Hungarian, I'm clearly pronouncing his name wrong, but I know Bence. And I remember the slide in my mind's eye, and the trajectory that was mapped was the movement of the tennis racket, not of the limbs themselves in the Federer case. So, that I think aligns well with what you're describing. Yeah, that exploration of degrees of freedom is where the opportunity for real advancement and expansion of skill shows up. As that I think the way it's been described to me is that we go from unskilled to skilled and then there's mastery, and then there's this top tier, which is this beautiful, thin layer that so few people occupy, which is virtuosity, in which the practitioner invites variability and chance back in as an opportunity to do truly new things. - It made me think many years ago, this kind of thinking about so what is that entity? Because obviously, it's not technique, and it wouldn't even be honest to say it's a movement pattern, there is too much diversity there. I started to talk about, I called it movement sleeves or meta technique, but the word technique is already misleading. So, there is some kind of a dynamic sleeve in which you can move in as long as you are not out of this sleeve, you are still within the boundaries of achieving the result that you're after. And then, the result is adaptation of all these elements inside to keep you in the sleeve. The sleeve is not constricted as we once thought, "Oh, beautiful technique." There are many ways to skin a cat, and that experience, and that variety, that diversity goes into virtuosity. It's true freedom because your focus is on the right thing. You don't point at the moon, look at your finger, and that's really in essence being a virtuoso, for me, like mastery, let's say if there is such a thing. - Oh, there's I do believe there is such a thing and I'll flatter and attempt to embarrass you by saying I think that I'm not alone in viewing you as a virtuoso of movement. I think that's what comes to mind because there's this notion that not everything is pre-planned, that even you might not know what you're going to do next until the moment of execution, but that here I'm projecting my own assumptions. I'd like to talk about mindsets in approaching practice a little bit more, but I want to wade into that territory by talking about vision in the eyes, something that we both share a deep interest in. I from the background of visual neuroscience, but also from the realization that we have this incredible ability to adjust the aperture of our visual window, we can focus very narrowly and we can focus very broadly. So, something I encountered, I think first as a child, realizing that I could spend all day watching ants play in a very fine domain and then look up and go inside and realize there's a whole world and realizing, "Wow, I'll never be able to consume the full range of experiences at any one moment." There are ants probably in the corner of this room doing their thing. And so too our approach to movement can be, as you mentioned, very big and dynamic in terms of the broad movements of our limbs or fine articulation. When you begin a practice and as you move through a practice, do you apply a regimented way of focusing your vision? Are you in panoramic vision? Are you in a very narrow field of view? Or does it entirely depend? And for the person who's a true beginner, a true novice, like myself, how should I show up to the practice with my eyes? - The eyes are a good starting point as you help a lot of people to understand. And when you encounter difficulties with other layers, it's very powerful to start with the eyes. Another thing important to understand and to experience, you can't believe me, or you've got to examine it for yourself, we do not move the eyes as well as we think we do. 'Cause as long as you can see and move the eyes, people never think about it, that it can be trained, that it can be improved, et cetera, and the effects of it are far reaching. The eyes lead to the inner eye, you can think of it in a beautiful metaphorical way. And it's a representation of the way that we use various cognitive and mind processes and also, of course, affect the body. The eyes lead in many ways and the head is also a very because all of these inputs are coming in here. So, it's very easy to lead the body and if you look at it centrally from the head, it's a very powerful and easy thing. For example, when you teach boxers how to bob, usually it's not done in the way that I believe it should be done, you teach it with the periphery. They teach it from the feet because they have the idea, which is correct, that you need to do it in spatial conditions, in movement, in space. But in reality, the head will organize the feet for you. Instead, you are now putting two elements together and then with years of practice, you hope of tying them together well. I prefer to do something else because if I'll pull your head now to side, you will immediately start to organize your feet under you. So, I give you just one element to manipulate the system from, that's how I would teach someone something like this. Many animals hunt with the head, so you can see the body running forward while the head is turning to the side, the whole thing follows afterwards. So, it's a very powerful way to address movement, not the only one, there are many modes, thankfully, and we're very adaptable in that, but definitely a primary one. And then, the use of the eyes is, of course, maybe the most important element with that usually. Yeah, what else can I say about the eyes? So, how do you come in? Well, it depends on the practice, you need to start to have some kind of a checklist of what you're looking to do. And then by this, you can start to tailor the way that you use your eyes. The same thing I do for posture, the same thing I do for stance, the same thing eventually I do for state. And there is different flavors, there is no correct way to use the eyes. Sometimes it's very peripheral, soft, open awareness orientation, sometimes it's very focused. Notice that I'm pulling these two opposites, awareness and focus, which is often put together and fused, but and then the eyes are like the immediate and the easiest entry point into that. Another thing is the placement of the head and the eyes, like for example, when we lower our chin, we seem to see better. When we raise the eyebrows, there is too much exposure of top light sources and so people would usually when looking into the distance will tilt their chin in. And in many scenarios, tilting of the chin to the side, or placing just like listening with the ear, placing a certain eye or dominant eye, depending on various scenarios. And this is all like information that I can come in cerebrally, and think about, and jump my practice forward. Instead, of just letting the experience teach me that, I'm using some kind of a thinking process to improve. And this is not cheating, this is great. Will it work? We got to try, it's a process. And those are some thoughts and to start to play with. - Yeah, I love that you mentioned chin down because we all have a natural reflex when chin goes down, eyes goes up, and the opposite is true when head goes up, eyes go down. And there are two separate clusters of neurons in these cranial nerve nuclei that, as we call them, when eyes are up, it increases our level of alertness overall. This is not woo science, this is the function of these cranial nerve nuclei. When our eyes are down, we go into states of more calm and quiescence. And this makes perfect sense, you know, and then the eyelids usually go down and then people fall asleep. Eyes up does not mean head up 'cause, as you said, there's a very dynamic control over the amount of luminance depending on the environment. So, that and then, as you mentioned, this difference between focus and awareness, I think is a really important one. When we are in this more panoramic, soft gaze and broad awareness, big swaths of visual field, as we say, the neurons that control that come through a pathway called magnocellular pathway. In any event, those neurons are much thicker, thicker cables, they transmit much faster, just like thick pipes can carry more water more quickly. And your reaction time is at least four times what it is in this awareness mode than it is when you're narrowly focused on something. And this is counterintuitive, I think, to a lot of people, but the person who is running to catch the ball is not tracking the ball in a smooth movement, most of their vision is in peripheral vision. When we drive we're in this peripheral vision and our reaction times are much, much faster. So, I don't know if I'm reluctant to encourage people to shift toward a particular type of practice toward a particular type of vision. I think what you and I, I hope agree on, correct me if I'm wrong, is that exploring these different extremes and everything in between is where the real value is. Panoramic focused, eyes, head up, eyes down, head down, eyes up, playing with it and exploring it and as opposed to for the first 10 minutes of practice being panoramic vision. You know, the sort of- - Yeah. - earlier today we were joking about and kind of lamenting the fact that this word biohacking exists or that the optimal performance, it's that they're unfortunate terms because they suggest that if you just plug it in, it's going to be like two plus two equals four and you're going to get it right every time. - Another pragmatic bit here, if I can offer, is since our culture has been more geared and pushing us towards focus, the focus use of the eyes, and primary language, reading, and other things, we have less opportunities to work with the more open panoramic one. So, it would be smart to start to balance things out a bit more. When you're in nature, you don't look at each leaf, everything is moving, and you are kind of immersed in that. And then, something attracts your attention, "Oh, it's a bird," and you focus, and you go back into the general state, the base state, which is open awareness. Here, we switch things around in our modern culture, we are mostly focused and then we sometimes daydream, which is maybe some kind of a balancing act that comes from deep within, I don't know, maybe you can share some information about that, but I see that many time people need to, the focus is overly done by far in our lives. - I couldn't agree more, and I think a lot of I'll even venture so far as to say that a lot of the visual deficits that we now see in young people, myopia, literally nearsightedness, occurs because if we look at things that are too close to us as children or as adults, the eyeball actually gets longer. The lens focuses the visual image in front of nearer to the lens, nearsighted, than in front of where it should land. And basically, it's a lack of panoramic vision that is or open awareness that's driving these changes. And nowadays, we are essentially, most people are 90% of the time in this narrow focus mode. You know, right before recording, we took a break and went up to look at a vista and to look off to the distance, incredibly useful, easy practice at some level, but I think most people are not doing this sort of thing. And the way that it shapes the mind and the perception of time, of course, is a whole other kingdom of ideas. But one thing I'd like to relate this element of vision to and open awareness is earlier you mentioned the cone of auditory attention, the other sense that we can play with in as in our practice and throughout the day. Do you see any value to both paying attention to things in a very narrow cone of auditory attention, but also just walking and listening to all the sounds at once? I could imagine that could be useful. And in terms of physical movement practices, I was going to say where are your ears? Your ears are always more or less in the same place, but where is your hearing when you approach your practice? - Another set of parameters to think about, and to play with, and to be aware of. Also, I have the experience that some people are better at using this system or that system. And you would be amazed how differently the same results seemingly outside results are done by different practitioners and different scenarios. This goes into this mutation and change idea is what really jumps us forward eventually some kind of a mutation. So, it's like all of our culture, and practices, and success puts us closer and closer to each other, so we have the same opinions everywhere around the world becoming more and more the same, less and less different, but the real hope comes from the different, so and we have a difficulty in promoting that. And so, this is another thing that can be promoted with the right practices, the right, for example, I work with corporates or even worked with governments before to bring in some of that freshness with simple habits in the workday, or in the education of children, or in companies increasing productivity. I don't really give a fuck, but I am there to give what I view is important and what is important maybe increases productivity, but it's more important to me that it improves people's lives who are involved and improves, yeah, being and becoming, being and becoming, these two entities. I'm not there, I'm on my way, I'm a process. So, thinking about hearing, the way that people use their ears, the way that people use listening. Again, we can talk about placement of the head and posture, sometimes angling as well, sharper angle, chin down, some people tend to use the shape of the ear, people with different ears closer or further out. This is it's if you're very sensitive and you're looking around, you would see this is affecting people's motion. Even the shape of our face, like the development of the vocal chords and speaking will totally change how we are, how we look, but how we listen also will do the same. I don't have any proof of it, but it is something I believe in. - Well, people will even make their ears bigger, right? We, we try and become like little fennec foxes or something by, I mean, a lot of people don't realize that's actually why we do this is to capture more sound waves, right? And the leaning is that the localization of sound is based on a simple brainstem calculation of interaural time differences, the time in which something, the brain intuitively, it just knows 'cause it's a pretty hardwired circuit that if a sound arrives first to this ear then that ear, that it's likely coming from over here. Whereas, if it's dead center, arrives at the two at the same time, that it's almost ridiculously simple when one hears it, no pun intended, but it is an incredibly valuable way of thinking about how the architecture of the body changes our experience. Along those lines earlier, you mentioned something and it flagged an important question for me. When I see people walking sometimes I think, "Wow, they really move in a strange way." Occasionally you see somebody, they walk really, it's impressive for whatever reason, you know, and you just think, "Wow, they sort of glide along." People come in different shapes and sizes, short torsos, long arms, et cetera. Do you think that if people have a body type that facilitates certain kinds of movement and not others that they should intentionally try and move in the way that is right at the edge of the kind of friction and challenge in order to shape new possibilities, or do you think that they should lean into the smooth execution of what comes most naturally to them? - Yeah, I think a good practice is to have many walks because they're required. And, of course, there is a very efficient and endurance, stamina-oriented thing that if you have the experience, it will naturally develops and unravel. And if not, you can get some collective knowledge and improve. And then there is a lot of emotion, emotional things related to walk like how I'm walking into a business meeting and/or how I'm walking out of a bad situation. And there is a lot of beautiful things to research there practically with yourself, trying to approach someone with the chin slightly down, very linear, very efficient in the straightest line, or trying to approach someone a little bit more rounded from the side and tilting your head, and you will see totally different results, totally different communication that happens over people's heads. But if you're sensitive, you realize that, "Wow, this opened the door." Instead, many people you start on the minus. My sister, my big sister, Atali, she always says, "I started on the minus, why don't I start on zero with them?" You know, so, but it's part of the approach. You can affect that, and you can start even on the plus if you are the sly man as the practitioner needs to be. So, this is something to play with and to work with and then you have, of course, body proportions, and ways, and we have all these like technical invasions, mathematics, and trigonometry, and architecture, they invaded our bodies, they invaded our nervous system. And now, our walk and our physical practices, they look linear and efficient, the path between two points is a straight line, it's not, this is biomechanics, it's not mechanics, nothing there is a given, there's no gospel. So, the walkers is sometimes have to go around or sway from side to side, and there is coiling and coiling and there are moving bits. And what about the coordination of my breathing with my walk? Because if I walk too linearly, there is less pumping of the air naturally in and out so now I have to forcefully bring it in and out, I'm wasteful. And that's why you see in last years, these incredible runners, especially in long distance, doing things we never thought were possible in the worst possible way that we used to think, pronation and all kinds of things like our technical thoughts were totally misguided and wrong. And then, somebody comes in and does it in some way that is totally wrong and he gets results we could never get. And that's the beauty of playfulness, experimentation, change, being different. - As you're describing this I'm smiling because one of my favorite neuroscientists, he's out of the university of Chicago, was in a meeting and there was an argument about evolution of the nervous system and he said, "At the end," and people were arguing about whether or not this gene in one animal was homologous to this gene in humans, et cetera, it can get very dicey. And he said very, very appropriately that, "One of the major jobs of evolution is to take existing cell types and circuits and give them new functions. But that can only be done through the playful exploration of new possibilities," which I think maps very well to what you're saying, that at the extreme thresholds of technical execution, you know, mastery, mastery, mastery, you, your obviously performance is very high, but the opportunity for evolution of the sport, or the music, or the dance, or the intellectual endeavor is limited because you're not introducing variability. In the attempt to get proper execution, you're limiting oneself. - Hence, I want to offer something that is relating to you. We should be wary of defining the mechanisms and putting certain meaning with certain processes and ways because just history and experience shows it doesn't work well for us most times, or it becomes like this much more elaborate thing even if we were somewhat in the right direction because even thinking this way can offer a lot. Like for example, your advice about heat, dopamine, light, offers a lot of benefit, but also can create problems and it can enclose something which the improviser will find, the MacGyvers, right? Like take a pink, some paper clip, and you make it into something great. And this is really our, we are the biggest improvisers around like that's what made us who we are, I think, and this is incredible what we can do with it. You know, the Russian-American space exploration story with the space pen, famous story about the development of the space pen. - I don't know. - It's a- - A space pen? - Yeah. - No, I don't know about this. - I think it's an urban myth. I don't know if it's true, but I like it so I use it. Well, there was this, of course, a space competition and the Russians put the first animal in space and the first. - He was a macaque monkey or something like that, yeah. - Yeah. And then Laika, and they put the first Sputnik, the satellite, and men in space, but Americans took the man on the moon. And on the way a lot of technologies got developed and the Americans because of lack of gravity out there developed the space pen with a huge investment, the Russians used a pencil. [Andrew laughing] So, I don't know if it's true, I don't think it is, but it represents something in the state of mind. Like you look at, for example, the military equipment in Soviet equipment, it all can do multiple things and it means that it's heavier, it's less efficient, it's not as light, but even the Navy SEALs will still carry an AK with certain conditions, why? Because you can pour a whole bucket of sand into the mechanism and it will keep running while the most advanced German Heckler & Koch and accurate and light weapons, for every grain can get stuck and overly specialized. And there is something about this openness that we humans need to keep, and also maybe something for our leaders to be more of less specialists and more in this openness, less capable in this or that way, but more capable of doing the whole thing. - I love the story, whether or not it's a legend or not, it's legendary because it's fantastic. As you say, in the laboratory, whenever someone takes on a project in my lab, I always say, "You know, you have to ask yourself how much technical detail and challenge you want to take on because with more technology, advanced technology, yes, there's the opportunity for more discovery, but more downtime. Your PhD will literally take longer if you're going to use a microscope that's out of commission 30% of the time, and you just have to understand that." So, there's a dynamic interplay there. - By the way, I think that scientists get it right, it's where you transmit the knowledge out of the scientific field because science have debate and everything, you're not so connected, of course this can happen as well, but then when it goes out and the simple person without the experience takes it more as a gospel, as a fixed thing, and then it was just a report. - Right. - It was just reporting some functions here and play with it, see what it does for you. Because with all the greatest information that I can give, the person will examine it and it might be not useful at all for him. This is the practitioner, make it your own, go practice, try heat, cold, light, movement, awareness to this, awareness to this. And this is up to you to make it yours, but we don't like to have this responsibility. - No, people prefer to have that this will work the first time every time and will serve you best compared to everything else. And while there are more reliable tools than others, in my mind, the more reliable tools tend to be ones that are grounded in our innate physiology as opposed to some, I don't like the word hack, in fact, I loathe the word biohack, as we were talking about again earlier, because a hack in my mind is something that is designed for one purpose that's used for another, it's not the most efficient use of that tool, nor is it naturally the best solution. Whereas, biology has some very good solutions, but they don't always work, not every time. Earlier today, we did a practice in which involved a invasion, shall we say, of peripersonal space. We weren't standing super close for any particular reason, but there was God forbid- - God forbid. - But there was we were close enough together we could touch one torsos and we were doing that as part of this practice. And you encouraged me to pay attention to how does it feel to have someone in your peripersonal space? And then, this notion of reactivity. I find this an immensely interesting and potentially powerful practice because I think a lot of people, I know a lot of people suffer from anxiety just being in a face-to-face conversation. Some people have a lot of anxiety about being physically close to people, whether or not they know them or not. And many people are reactive, they are in that anticipatory state of something that is going to happen. And sometimes this relates to trauma and negative experience, but sometimes no, sometimes they're just not used to being in dynamic, excuse me, exchange with other beings. And so, one thing that I love about the movement practice and how dynamic is that one can explore that space. Maybe you could talk about that a little bit more. - Yeah. Touch, proximity, all these things, also taking very, it takes a very, I think, limited place in our lives. People are not touched and they don't touch enough. There is certain bubbles of peripersonal space according to culture, according to environment, what is right, what is wrong? And then came all the, of course, political correctness, and harassments, and all kinds. And this is a problem, it's a problem to navigate all this scenario. And I think we are, there is definitely this side which is suffering. People go to BJJ classes to touch, not to learn BJJ. Most of it, they're not even aware of it, before they would go to a prostitute, maybe. It would not be honest to say that, yeah, this is not required or necessary more in our lives. Children who are not touched, there is a lot of information about that and the problems, but adults who are not touched, there is not a lot of information. And I think it's no less of a problem because it's something that has to be constantly present. And then, proximity being able to, as you said, remove certain reactivity and to learn to control that volume control over how reactive I am, and in other scenarios, how do I remove this reactivity altogether is very important for performance and also for our lives for clear thinking, et cetera, because everything is moving through us and is being monitored by us so everything has the potential to detract us from a certain direction of exploration or and if you're reactive, you're a slave, and it becomes worse and worse and worse. Or as, for example, a fighter, or a football player, et cetera, has to know what to take, what not to take. The fact that you can sense more doesn't mean you should react to it. And the practice helps that by bringing people into these scenarios, but oftentimes disarming them. Like when we were working closely today, and because you have a certain background with boxing or fighting, I can tell you, you are missing some kind of a way to be in that space that is not marshaled. So, you carry a certain tone, although you're a very kind person, but oftentimes you held me without realizing you're holding me with a lot of strength, for example, and it just, it was clear to me you're not fully aware of what is unfolding and it's just, of course, a question of experience. So, to be able to be in this scenario, but do something else, which is not geared towards winning, losing competition, or just being able to play with another person. Like for example, contact improvisation took that and played with that, and the work of Steve Paxton for the ones who are not familiar. So, this is where I call it the hybrids become very useful, like we don't when you are practicing in this open way, you are not bound by specific rule set or ways of doing things. It can be a fight, but it can be a dance a moment after. Another thing that I learned from capoeira the situation's very tricky there 'cause I've seen kids doing cartwheels in Brazil and scissors fall from their pocket. Why, why would you go to with a scissor in your pocket? Obviously, there is certain intentions and then at other times you see back flips and beautiful things, but people die in capoeira every year. - Neck breaks or something? - Kicks through the face from various violence. It's I've explored other martial arts and boxing, I was involved with MMA and BJJ, but I tell you the most violent arenas is that vibe 'cause it's unknown. One moment, it smiles, another moment, it's something else and it's uncontrolled. There is no categories, no weights, and it's a street phenomenon. So, you have musical instruments, sometimes they break it on your head. People don't see that, but you can look online on YouTube and see some of that side of capoeira, which is actually the day-to-day in Brazil and the reality and how things unfolded. So, it's very important to explore many ways of being within different distances and spaces from other people and touched in different ways and not contextualizing it always in the same way. I can touch your chest in one way, I can touch it with the exact same pressure and speed, but it will feel very different. The parameters, I'm not sure, certain intentions, certain combination of postures or ways, and this is beautiful exploration. And again, I would encourage you and others to explore the discomfort. For example, certain discomfort to be with a man in a certain scenario or with a woman and trying to see what is that? Because if we're truly strong, we are not afraid of anything. If we truly know who we are and we are in that exploration, we don't know the end result, but we are in a research and then we are not afraid of being in debt or this, and we don't come out of boundaries, and this will improve our culture tremendously. Of course, there must be agreement, you never force yourself, but you meet someone who is also interested in that exploration and then you do it. And there are many scenarios to do that with traditional practices, like learning to grapple or going to contact improvisation and studying there, or going to dance, to Latin dance class or and there is, of course, my favorite is to create and to come up with your own hybrids of that and scenarios. Communicating with your loved one through movement, not sitting around food and talking, moving together in all kinds of ways. Sometimes it's walking together, but sometimes it's all kinds of, it can be game, playful, it can be romantic. And there are many shades, sex doesn't start here and end here, right? It's like a continuum, and we don't even need to define it in that way. So, with time, I think it unlocks a lot of things. People become much stronger in a good sense, in sense of becoming, being, and we abuse less, and we can approach, yeah, other aspects to us. - I love the idea that through the exploration of a range of physical contacts provided one knows they can always return to their center, so to speak, then there's a lot of opportunity that opens up. I wish there was more of that encouraged in children's play, but also, as you mentioned, in adult environments. Because yeah, nowadays for all sorts of reasons that you've touched on, the idea of keeping at least in arms length distance has become critical. There are a lot of environments actually where hugging is not allowed. I don't know what it's like in Israel, but in the states many institutions you're not allowed to touch anyone else's body. There's actually a wonderful study that comes to mind from an Israeli laboratory, a guy named Noam Sobel, who's over there, who has shown that by recording people's first interactions that when people meet, if they shake hands, they almost always, I think it's greater than 85% of the time they will then wipe the chemicals from the other person onto their own eyes, typically their eyes or their face. This changed a little bit during the whole pandemic thing, but this is thought to be a carryover from what other animals do in terms of exchanging microbiome elements, exchanging chemicals that we're constantly feeding our subconscious with the chemical knowledge of the chemical constituents of other people, right? So, it goes way beyond how people smell, how they look, et cetera. More touch seems to me just, as you said, provided it's consensual, it seems like it's just a really good thing overall. - And I think maybe also important for discharging, discharging certain experiences, remodeling, reframing. So, it's like touches, it's very powerful in that. If you're touched and you're touching a lot, you're unpacking and you experience that touch that maybe has been traumatic and you're reframing it, you have the opportunity, which is something interesting. I've heard some story about some traditional culture in which when you were burned by mistake, they would immediately burn you again. And it made me think, and then there would not be any burn marks and there would not be the same side effects, that's the claim. It made me think it's like, "What's the source of this?" And I realized that maybe it allows a certain completion to happen that in the traumatic moment is not there. So, the re-exposure, while you're still open, the pores are still open, allows you to reframe the experience and then the unfolding of the rest of the event is very different. This is if you're touching in your practice in the day-to-day, and you're working with people, and you're being touched, and people come closer, further away, it happens naturally. Yeah, and if you pass a certain limit and it becomes too much, there is always, of course, communication that has to be present. Certain cultures make this communication pre, certain cultures post. The Israeli, for example, post, here pre. - Ah, so in Israel, they'll say, "That didn't feel good to me," or, "That felt good," or, "That was fine." - Yeah, it would be more common. Here in the airport, the guys telling me, "I'm going to slide my hands up towards your crotch until I meet the hard stop," and then he does this in a way that is supposed to show me, I have no enjoyment in that and for me it just feels aggressive. But his intention is good, showing me. But if it was a loving touch, it would be nicer for me actually, personally that's it would be gentle, but he goes up there and he shows me, "I have no enjoyment in this." [groans] That's my testicle right there, so it's different choices. [Andrew laughing] I don't think it's like worse, but this description can be a bit dissociated. And what does it make me think? Is it truly what he feels or not? 'Cause it feels robotic, so it's not. So, sometimes I'd rather not say it and I'm going to touch your chest and just place my hand on the chest. And, of course I, we can't avoid a problem, I'm not suggesting that there is, but there is an examination. And because I moved around and around the world, I've seen many things and I've seen benefits here and benefits there. And in the practice, I think it's important to discuss this, to examine this, I don't have a solution, but it's something to talk about. - It is something to talk about, and I'm glad you raised it because I think that it's so clear to me that much of the value of a movement practice involves this dynamic interaction with somebody else. As you pointed out, it can be performed on one's own and practiced throughout one's day. But the unpredictability is a key element to all of it, and in bringing out all the potential that you've described. In reference to this notion of trauma and burn and re-burn. My colleague at Stanford, David Spiegel, he works on trauma and has actually on this podcast, he voiced that he's against things like trigger warnings because of the way that it puts the nervous system into this state of readiness and reactivity that can exacerbate problems. Whereas, it's very clear from the literature on trauma and trauma relief that the way to deal with that is through a controlled, but clearly a controlled re-exposure to the trauma in order to diminish the emotional response over time. I mean, it's very clear if we avoid the thing, obviously we don't want to re-injure ourselves or re-traumatize, but if one avoids the thing that makes them upset over and over, all it does is serve to create a heightened state of readiness, it primes more trauma. - Yeah. - So, I think it makes good sense. - I think impressions are very useful here also when stepping into an area in which trauma can occur. And then, by going through the impression that it already occurred, you create some kind of a thermal layer of protection, so I've already been hit when I'm entering that space, it's so beneficial. Or I've already been touched in a way that I didn't like if I go to a contact improvisation class, and just running this scenario in your head protects so well, yeah. - I'm glad you mentioned running scenarios in your head. I've been curious all day as to whether or not you do visualization or mental rehearsal of physical movement. This is it seems to be a popular idea in the states, people are always asking me, "You know, can you just imagine a movement and learn it better than where you to actually perform it?" My hunch based on and my understanding of the scientific literature is that visualization can be useful to some extent for people that are very good at visualization, but for many people, it doesn't help. And that there's nothing like real physical practice to improve physical practice. - Yeah, the word visualization's not good, obviously, it has to be experientialization in a very complete way, not just visually, of course. And unless you already developed certain experience, tangible experience that has benefited from feedback, from outside feedback. It is not a very useful thing to do, and it ends up being fabrications. But if you are very experienced and you already gained the benefit of being burnt here or overextended here, then you have a certain experience and then you can strengthen certain aspects of it, but you got to be careful because you do not have feedback. And because of the missing feedback, you might develop delusions. It might be that you develop stronger patterning, but ultimately this would lead you away from the aliveness of the movement itself. Drilling, for example, very useful to learn a general infrastructure of the movement sleeve or the technique, but then to dress it up, you need feedback, you need it to be alive, you need to receive something corrective. - I love it. For many people, they approach movement in the form of weight training, or yoga, or running. Yoga's a bit more dynamic, but it fairly linear types of exercise and movement, Peloton, rowing, those kinds of things. I think most people will probably not depart from those practices entirely because they like them. I'm speaking about myself, I like some of those very much, I enjoy them. But in terms of thinking about adding a movement practice to one's already existing exercise regime, I can imagine threading it throughout the day, I can imagine having a dedicated movement practice. One thing that I have started doing on the basis of some of your teachings, and I just sort of created this idea is rather than statically standing there and lifting weights, actually walking from, as I alternate repetitions, it occurred to me that I'd never done a curl, a bicep curl with one foot in front of the other, and then I'd never actually switched that up. And it's kind of an odd stance to be standing in parallel and curling one's arm, it's kind of a ridiculous movement when one thinks about it. So, I started incorporating some of that, you get some strange looks in the gym, but I just give them strange looks back. So, what are your thoughts [Ido laughing] about these very linear forms of exercise? And, do you encourage people to expand the play space, as it were, for these kinds of exercise? Or do you think that movement practice is just best explored through three dimensionality, gravity, and maybe a stick or a ball? - Hmm, it's definitely a problem, and it's approachable. People want a quick, people want a hack, people want the icing, there is no cake. There is no cake, and it's just like industries of icing, icing, icing on what? What are you putting it on? So, for me that, that's why I'm going towards this side, it's like I have my life, now tell me what movement practices I should pursue. You are movement, in essence, you are not thinking of yourself in any serious way through my eyes. There is a dynamic entity to you, the body is a huge part of it communicating, you have genetic layers, there is a personalities that got developed and built around various influences, but then there is also some kind of an essence, something that reeks from within the cells. And if you grew up in my family and I grew up in your family and it would still be the same, and that it's something that I always try to think about, what is that inside of me? So, I think these practices, they're very good, but they're not designed for the goal that we think they were designed to do it, it orients towards something else. For example, yoga, there is a good book called the "Yoga Body", which will destroy a lot of people's yoga practice. And it goes into how did we get to this yoga, the influence of Swedish gymnastics and Mongolian contortionists, and the Western, the West affecting it, and then the ancient practice, which was barely asana-related, posture, position. So, actually you said yoga is less linear, yoga is very linear, very linear these days, these lines. Look at all the traditional dances, they look like nothing like yoga. Look at tai dance, look at Chinese dances, martial arts, it's all rounded, it's all curved, it's like the like out nature, what you see in nature and the movement of the animals. So, where does it come from? These are things to understand because it designs you now, it shapes you. You're placing yourself in these forces of change and these streams of change, and you have a good intention, you just want this or that, but the joke is on us. And this is the movement practice for me is first education, let's start to think about this. I have nothing that I can just sprinkle now, some magic powder that will help resolve this because it's a start of a deep investigation. And then, some of the things, let's talk pragmatically, because what you described is not about you placing the foot in front when you're curling, it's about the examination, this is why it is a very good direction. And then, you will need another one, another one, don't get stuck on that foot in front of it and try to do with the eyes closed or with a different head posture, and you will see things arrive, unrelated things because the associative mind, the thinking, this relates, this doesn't get to the heart of it, never. So, just infusing these elements like in a cup will create endless combinations, possibilities, and a lot of discovery. And this for me is humility of the practitioner. I don't know, I try like today with you., I tried various combinations and oh, I discover something, oh, there is, this is a playful approach, and this is a researcher approach. I don't try to fit my truth into something, I'm there to examine. I don't have a motive yet, why? Because I'm fine, I don't depend on that to define myself. I'm a human being, but if I don't have that sense of worth, I'm already like geared towards I need to do this, I need to prove this, I have this agenda. And this is how we get all the lies in the world and all the problems and difficulties. So, these practices, they are related to it to prove this, that, this way, why we need muscles for X, Y, Z. And a lot of the reported outcomes are often from my place is like funny. I hear about something like I heard you say about gratitude practice that actually experiencing from outside as somebody else, or you are receiving gratitude is actually more powerful. It's true, but I see why it's true, I'm not sure everybody sees. If somebody tries to feel gratitude, just sit with the eyes clothes or watch a movie and sense the gratitude there, it will be clear to you, one is very difficult to do and the other is very easy. Hence, if gratitude is achieved easier this way, that's why it works like that. Although all the traditional practices are about you and by challenging yourself to sense that gratitude yourself, they achieve much more powerful thing, but this is not the research people and the people in the research, we don't have a lot of those people. So, a lot of the things that can arrive to us, weight training, the benefits, or the way that the hormonal effect, the effect of cognition, et cetera. When you open a bit and you go far out, you see certain things, not the truth, but maybe less delusion. There is nothing definite, but there is something maybe more wholesome that appears. Yeah, I think this is so this is a state, a state of exploration. I don't want to have the same thought if I already had it, why would I want to have the same thought? I already had it. I don't want to have the same practice, I don't want to. I curled already in this way, I want to experience something else, I want to. There is a benefit to gain, No, but that was better. The better is better, is not more, is not faster. It's like better is better, and better isn't, we don't know what better is, right? So, it's like it's open. Oh, this is better, I don't know. It's just more weight, it's one more kilo, but maybe if I remove one kilo, I discover something like, for example, power development that has been shown to gain certain benefits when you lighten the load and you accelerated more in certain conditions, but who discovered it? A practitioner, a math person, not Verkhoshansky, Zatsiorsky, they reported something, but it was already within the grasp of the practitioners. And I think, and as a researcher, this is very powerful to remind yourself this and to work with that. And as a practitioner, as a living human being, for everyone, I think something very useful. And then, those plays that you're doing, people give you the weird looks, and it's like yeah, I tell people, "You don't want to be normal. If you don't get the weird looks, you're not moving in the right direction." You're moving in a very fixed and you already know the result of that direction, let's say at least that. So, continue to play with that, continue to play. Look elsewhere, look at places you didn't look at because this is still like within the same layer, one foot in front, one foot behind, what happens when you do it with a smile, the same workout, and when you do it with a frown? Or what happens, breath holding or blood restrictions, all this is great play, and I think very beneficial to do, to go through. - Love it, I think that's a wonderful message. And what I keep hearing from you over and over again is that people should explore, explore, explore. And listen, I want to thank you for your time today, first of all, for the incredible teachings here at this table, but also the introduction to a movement practice. Although, now I'm tempted to say that I've been moving my whole life, I just didn't know I was- - It's true. - that it was such a vast landscape. Also, that your willingness to tread out in this journey that is truly unique. You know, that the greatest compliment that one can give in science is the one that I'm going to tell you now because it's entirely appropriate, which is we say you're an n-of-1, right? That and you truly are, I don't think there's anyone that has been as willing to embrace existing practices, evolve them, create new practices, and to share so broadly to really be willing to give and teach so much knowledge. You know, earlier you made the mention of your goals of in part of being wild and wise, and I'm here to tell you that you are both wild and wise. And so, thank you so much. - Thank you very much, thank you. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about the science and practice of movement and movement culture with Ido Portal. If you'd like to learn more about Ido, and his workshops, and other aspects of what he does, please go to his social media. His Instagram handle is Portal, P-O-R-T-A-L.Ido, I-D-O. You can also go to idoportal.com, and there, there are a tremendous number of resources that will lead you to more information about what he does. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel, that's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. As well, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. On Apple, you can also leave us comments and feedback. And if you have suggestions about topics or podcast guests that you'd like us to cover on the podcast, if you have criticism or questions, please put those in the comment section on YouTube, we do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, that's the best way to support this podcast. Not on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, or could derive tremendous benefit from them. For that reason, the Huberman Lab Podcast has decided to partner with Momentous. We decided to partner with Momentous because, first of all, they are the absolute highest quality. Second of all, they ship anywhere in the world. And third, we wanted to have one site that people could go to where they could find the supplements that are discussed on this podcast in the various dosages and single ingredient forms that we often suggest or point people to on the podcast. So, if you'd like to see the supplements that I take, or that have been mentioned on the podcast, please go to livemomentous.com/huberman, and they're listed there as well as available there. If you're not already following us on social media, we are @hubermanlab on both Instagram and Twitter. Both places, I do short posts about science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, and other of which is distinct from the information on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So, again, that's @hubermanlab on Twitter and @hubermanlab on Instagram. We also have a newsletter that many people find useful. This is a completely zero-cost newsletter, you can find it by going to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu and go to newsletter, and you sign up with your email, we do not share your email with anybody, and we have a very clear privacy policy listed there. You can also get access at the very same site to newsletters from the past to see if those newsletters are indeed of interest to you. We have newsletters about a toolkit for sleep, for instance, or a neuroplasticity super protocol that incorporates a lot of different podcast episodes and themes that you might find useful. Again, that's hubermanlab.com, and go to the menu and click on newsletter, and sign up. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 271 ---
Video ID: tkH2-_jMCSk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tkH2-_jMCSk
Title: Improve Flexibility with Research-Supported Stretching Protocols
Published: 2022-06-13 12:00:28 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain the science behind limb range of motion and flexibility and how to increase them by using science-supported protocols. Flexibility is crucial for physical movements and can help prevent injuries, decrease inflammation, modulate physical and mental pain, impact exercise recovery speed and even potentially slow the progression of certain diseases. I explain the biology of flexibility, including the specific neural mechanisms that sense stretch and load (i.e., tension) on the muscles and limbs, as well as how specific brain regions like the insula combine those signals to ultimately control limb range of movement. I also provide science-based stretching and “micro-stretching” protocols that reliably improve limb flexibility with the minimum necessary time investment. I review all the details of those stretching protocols: how often to do them, for how long, their timing relative to other exercises, sets, the time between sets, measuring progress and more. All people, physically active or not, should benefit from the information and tools described in this episode.

Some Huberman Lab podcast sponsors may have changed, so please visit our website for the current list: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Force enhancement after stretch of isolated myofibrils is increased by sarcomere length non-uniformities: https://go.nature.com/3tyUfxT
Microfluidic perfusion shows intersarcomere dynamics within single skeletal muscle myofibrils: https://bit.ly/3MLJWNV
The Effect of Time and Frequency of Static Stretching on Flexibility of the Hamstring Muscles: https://bit.ly/3aKIDRN
The Relation Between Stretching Typology and Stretching Duration: The Effects on Range of Motion: https://bit.ly/3aXtpcw
A Comparison of Two Stretching Modalities on Lower-Limb Range of Motion Measurements in Recreational Dancers: https://bit.ly/3Hkpy5q
Stretching Reduces Tumor Growth in a Mouse Breast Cancer Model: https://go.nature.com/3xLQY0U
Insular Cortex Mediates Increased Pain Tolerance in Yoga Practitioners: https://bit.ly/39pLIXd

Timestamps
00:00:00 Flexibility & Stretching 
00:02:57 Thesis, InsideTracker, Eight Sleep 
00:07:22 Innate Flexibility 
00:09:23 Movement: Nervous System, Connective Tissue & Muscle; Range of Motion
00:17:51 Golgi Tendon Organs (GTOs) & Load Sensing Mechanisms
00:20:20 Decreased Flexibility & Aging
00:22:38 Insula, Body Discomfort & Choice
00:30:02 von Economo Neurons, Parasympathetic Activation & Relaxation 
00:42:00 Muscle Anatomy & Cellular ‘Lengthening,’ Range of Motion 
00:47:16 Tool: Protocol - Antagonistic Muscles, Pushing vs. Pulling Exercises 
00:51:57 Types of Stretching: Dynamic, Ballistic, Static & PNF (Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation)
00:59:36 Tool: Increasing Range of Motion, Static Stretching Protocol, Duration
01:05:56 Tool: Static Stretching Protocol & Frequency
01:13:55 Tool: Effective Stretching Protocol
01:17:12 Tool: Warming Up & Stretching
01:19:17 Limb Range of Motion & General Health Benefits
01:25:30 PNF Stretching, Golgi Tendon Organs & Autogenic Inhibition
01:31:23 Tool: Anderson Protocol & End Range of Motion, Feeling the Stretch 
01:32:50 Tool: Effectiveness, Low Intensity Stretching, “Micro-Stretching”  
01:41:33 Tool: Should you Stretch Before or After Other Exercises?
01:45:41 Stretching, Relaxation, Inflammation & Disease 
01:51:37 Insula & Discomfort, Pain Tolerance & Yoga 
02:00:36 Tools: Summary of Stretching Protocols 
02:03:00 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Flexibility #Health

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss the science and practice of flexibility and stretching. Flexibility and stretching are topics that I believe do not receive nearly as much attention as they deserve. For most people, the topics of flexibility and stretching bring to mind things like yoga, injury prevention, or maybe even contortionism. But it turns out that flexibility and stretching are features that are built into our basic body plan. Young children, young animals, and adults, and, indeed, older children and animals all stretch and all have some degree of flexibility. It turns out that having flexibility, and our ability to stretch, and the interaction between stretching and flexibility are fundamental to how we move, our ability to learn new movements, indeed also to prevent injury or repair injuries, and to offsetting and reducing inflammation throughout the body. In fact, today I'm going to share with you a remarkable set of studies that show that stretching can actually adjust things like tumor growth. This is work that was done by one of the major directors of the National Institutes of Health. So, today's discussion will start with a description of the mechanisms, literally the cells and the connections from your nervous system that mediate flexibility and stretching. And I promise that I'll make that information accessible to you whether or not you have a biology background or not. Then with that information in hand, I'm going to present to you what the scientific literature says about the best times and ways to stretch, everything right down to the detail of how long to hold a stretch, whether or not to hold a stretch at all because it turns out there are multiple kinds of stretching. So, you can imagine you have stretches where you hold the stretch for a very long time and use as little momentum as possible, and then there's also what's called dynamic and ballistic stretching where you're literally swinging your limbs trying to increase the range of motion. I will explain the science and application of flexibility and stretching in the context of sports performance, whether or not you are engaging in cardiovascular exercise, or resistance exercise, or both, whether or not you're a competitive athlete or simply a recreational exerciser, as I am, whether or not you are trying to increase your range of motion and flexibility for longevity purposes, or whether or not you're trying to do it in order to access different parts of your nervous system 'cause we'll soon learn today that your ability to improve flexibility and, indeed, to engage in specific stretching exercises can actually be used to powerfully modulate your ability to tolerate pain, both emotional and physical pain. So, this thing that we call flexibility and stretching is actually a vast landscape. We're going to simplify and organize all that for you today and by the end of today's episode, you're going to have a number of simple, easy-to-apply tools that are grounded in the best scientific research that you can apply for your specific goals. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics that are designed to get your brain and body into the optimal state for the cognitive and physical things that you need to perform at the highest level. I have to confess, in fact I've said it many times before, I am not a fan of the word nootropics because it means smart drugs. And frankly, as a neuroscientist, I'd be remiss If I didn't acknowledge that there's really no circuit in your brain for being smart, you have neural circuits in your brain that are designed to get you to focus very well, or to task switch very well, or to be creative. Thesis understands this, and as a consequence they've designed nootropics that are tailored to your specific needs in the cognitive and physical realm. What I mean by that is if you go to the Thesis site, you fill out a short quiz, and they'll give you the opportunity to try a small kit of different nootropics with different ingredients. You have the opportunity to try several different blends over the course of the month and discover which nootropics works best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics. I've been using Thesis for about eight and a half months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a game changer. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman. There you'll find that three-minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman, and use the code HUBERMAN at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular bloodwork done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there is that you get information back about hormone levels, metabolic factors, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker has a very easy to use personalized platform that lets you look at those numbers and then you can literally move your cursor over those numbers and there are little popup windows that will tell you the things that you can do in terms of lifestyle, so exercise, and nutrition, supplementation, and so on to bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. So, it really takes all the guesswork out of what to do with that bloodwork and DNA information. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans, just use the code HUBERMAN at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans, again, just use the code HUBERMAN at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers that have cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. And, indeed, you can dial in, you can literally program the temperature of your sleeping environment from the time you go to sleep until the time you wake up in the morning. This turns out to be immensely powerful because as I've talked about on the podcast before, in order to fall asleep and stay deeply asleep throughout the night, your body has to drop by about one to three degrees, and waking up in the morning actually involves a warming up of your body temperature. For many people, they just can't precisely control their sleep environment well enough in order for all that to go well. I was one such person. So, for a long time I'd fall asleep pretty easily, but then I'd wake up in the middle of the night, I tended to run warm, but then sometimes I'd feel really tired in the morning as if I couldn't wake up. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover. I programmed it so that the temperature would be rather cool in the early part of the evening when I would get into bed and then would drop into the deeper phases of the night when I was entering deep sleep and then rapid eye movement sleep, and then would warm towards morning, it would help me wake up quickly. And as a consequence, I'm sleeping throughout the night now and I'm waking up feeling completely refreshed. If you'd like to try an Eight Sleep mattress cover, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to check out the Pod Pro Cover and save $150 at checkout. Eight Sleep currently ships within the USA, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 at checkout. Let's talk about flexibility and stretching. Before we talk about the practices of flexibility and stretching, I'd like to just highlight some of the features that are already built into your nervous system and into your body that allow you to be flexible. Some of us feel tighter than others, sometimes in specific limbs or areas of our body, some people feel really loose and limb, some people even have what's called a hyper-flexibility. I, for instance, have a relative that can take her fingers and bend them back to the point where they touch her wrist. And it always makes me cringe a little bit, but she can do that without any pain, she seems to have some hyper-flexibility in her joints. I do not have that feature. Some of you may find that you are more flexible than others naturally, and some of you might be thinking you don't need to build in additional flexibility. Well, I think by the end of today's episode, you'll realize that almost all of us can benefit from having some sort of understanding about flexibility and having some stretching protocol that we incorporate into our life, if not just for physical performance reasons and for postural reasons, then also for cognitive and mental reasons, and I'll be sure to clarify what all of that means. Right now, I'd like to take a moment and just highlight the flexibility that you already have. For instance, if you were to move your arm behind your torso a little bit and then sort of let go or stop exerting any effort in doing that, you would find that the limb would return more or less to a position next to your torso, at least I would hope so. And why is that? Well, it turns out that there are aspects of your nervous system, aspects of your skeletal system, aspects of your muscles, and aspects of the connective tissue that binds all of that together, that try and restore a particular order or position to your limbs and your limbs relative to one another. So, that reflects a very specific set of processes that it turns out are the same set of processes that you use when you are trying to enhance flexibility and stretching. So, I'd like to just take a moment and review the basic elements of nervous system, muscle, connective tissue, and skeletal tissue, bone, that allow for flexibility and stretching. And here we can point to two major mechanisms by which your nervous system, neurons, meaning nerve cells, communicate with muscles, and those muscles communicate back to your nervous system to make sure that your limbs don't stretch too far, they don't move too far such that you get injured. And in addition to that, mechanisms that ensure that you don't overload your muscles too much with weight, or with tension, or with effort and damage them that way. 'Cause it turns out that the second security mechanism of making sure that you don't overload muscles can be leveraged toward increasing your flexibility almost immediately. That's right, there are protocols and tools that I'll share with you that are going to allow you to vastly improve your flexibility over time. But there are also mechanisms that allow you to quite significantly increase your degree of flexibility in a very short period of time, and within just a few seconds. So, let's establish some of the basic biological mechanisms. Any time we talk about biology or physiology, we're going to talk about structure, meaning the cells and their connections, and functions, what they do. There are just a few names to understand, you do not have to memorize these names. The important thing that I'd like you to know is that flexibility and the process of stretching and getting more flexible involves three major components, neural, meaning of the nervous system, muscular, muscles, and connective tissue. Connective tissue is the stuff that surrounds the neural stuff and the muscular stuff, although it's all kind of weaved together and braided together in complicated ways. Some of you may have heard of fascia. We're going to talk a little bit about fascia today, although it's such an interesting tissue that's really deserving of its own episode. Fascial tissue, we're going to talk about some of the stuff that surrounds muscles that really gives you your shape, and holds everything together, and allows for flexibility to occur. So, here's a key thing that everyone should know whether or not you're talking about flexibility or not. Your nervous system controls your muscles, it's what gets your muscles to contract. So, within your spinal cord, you have a category of neurons, nerve cells, that are called motor neurons. To be precise, they are lower motor neurons 'cause they're in your spinal cord. We call them lower to distinguish them from the motor neurons that are in your brain up in your skull. Those lower motor neurons, hereafter I'll just refer to them as motor neurons. If I want to talk about the other kind of motor neurons, I'll say upper motor neurons. So, if I say motor neurons, I just mean the ones in your spinal cord. Those motor neurons send a little wire or set of wires out to your muscles, and that creates what's called a neuromuscular junction, which just means that the neurons meet the muscles at a particular place. Those neurons release a chemical, that chemical is called acetylcholine. Some of you may have heard about acetylcholine before, acetylcholine also exists in your brain and does other things in your brain, mainly it's involved in focus and attention. But at the neuromuscular junction, the release of acetylcholine from these nerve cells, these neurons, onto the muscles causes the muscles to contract. And when muscles contract, they are able to move limbs by way of changing the length of the muscle, adjusting the function of connective tissue like tendons and ligaments. And for instance, if you're bringing your wrist closer to your shoulder, that biceps muscle is contracting, it's getting shorter. I mean, in reality it hasn't gotten shorter overall, it's just temporarily shorter, of course. All of that is controlled by neurons. And it's those motor neurons from the spinal cord that are really responsible for the major movement of your limbs by way of causing contraction of specific muscles at specific times. So, the key thing to take away is that nerve controls the contraction of muscles. Now, within the muscles themselves, there are nerve connections. And these are nerve connections that arise from a different set of neurons in the spinal cord that we call sensory neurons. The sensory neurons exist in a different part of the spinal cord, and they send a low wire or set of wires into the muscles. And there's a particular kind of sensory neuron that comes out of your spinal cord and into your muscles, which are called spindle neurons. They create or they actually wrap around muscle fibers, kind of corkscrew around them and give kind of a spring-like appearance. And for you aficionados out there, these are intrafusal connections or neurons. Intrafusal means within the muscle, but you really don't need to know that unless you're really curious about it, or you're going to become a neuroscientist, or you're in medical school or something. These spindle connections within the muscle that wrap around the muscle fibers sense the stretch of those muscle fibers. So, now we have two parts to the system that I've described. You've got motor neurons that can cause muscles to contract and shorten, and we have these spindles within the muscles themselves that wrap around the muscle fibers, and that information is sent from the muscle back to the spinal cord. It's a form of sensing what's going on in the muscle. Much in the same way that you have neurons in your eye that sense light in your external environment, you have neurons in your ear that sense sound waves in your external environment, you have neurons in your spinal cord that are sensory neurons that are sensing the amount of stretch in the muscles. What happens is if a given muscle is stretching really far, those sensory neurons, those spindles within the muscle will activate and will send a electrical potential, literally a bit of electricity along that wire's length into the spinal cord. And then, within the spinal cord that sensory neuron communicates through a series of intermediate steps, but to the motor neuron and makes sure that that motor neuron contracts. Now, why would that be useful? Well, what this does is it creates a situation where if a muscle is or is stretching too much because the range of motion of a limb is increased too much then the muscle will contract to bring that limb range of motion into a safe range again. Now, what determines whether or not a range of motion is quote-unquote safe or not is dictated by a number of things. It's dictated by things that are happening in this kind of loop of neural connections in the spinal cord and muscle. It's also determined by what's going on in your head, literally in your mind cognitively about whether or not the movement of that limb its increasing range of motion is good for you, whether or not you're doing it deliberately, whether or not it's bad for you. And then there are also some basic safety mechanisms that are put in there that really try and restrict our limb range of motion. Okay, so just to clarify, this whole thing looks like a loop, and the essential components of the loop are motor neurons contract muscles, sensory neurons, of which there are a bunch of different varieties, well, in this case, what we're calling the spindles are sensing stretch within the muscles. And if a given muscle is elongating because of the increased range of motion of a limb, those sensory neurons send an electrical signal into the spinal cord such that there is an activation of the motor neuron, which by now should make perfect sense as to why that's useful. It then shortens up the muscle. It actually doesn't really shorten the muscle, but it contracts the muscle that brings the limb back into a safe range of motion. Okay, so this process is very fast, it was designed to keep your body together and safe. It's designed to make sure that you don't take your arm and swing it behind your torso and it just goes all the way back to the middle of your back. I mean, unless you're a contortionist or you've trained that kind of level of flexibility, that would be terrible because it could provide a lot of damage to the muscles, and to the connective tissue, and so forth. So, that's one basic mechanism that we want to hold in mind, this idea of a spindle that senses stretch and can activate contraction of the muscles and shorten the muscles. The next mechanism I want to describe, and once again there are only two that you need to hold in mind for this episode. This other mechanism has a lot of the same features as the one I just described, but it has less to do with stretch, in fact, it doesn't have to do with stretch as much as it has to do with sensing loads. So, at the end of each muscles you have tendons typically, and there are neurons that are closely associated with those tendons that are called Golgi tendon organs, right? These are neurons that are sensory neurons that sense how much load is on a given muscle. Right, so if you're lifting up something very, very heavy, these neurons are going to fire, meaning they're going to send electrical activity into the spinal cord. And then, those neurons have the ability to shut down, not activate, but shut down motor neurons and to prevent the contraction of a given muscle. So, for instance, if you were to walk over and try and pick up a weight that is much too heavy for you, meaning you could not do it without injuring yourself and you start to try and heave that weight off the ground. There are a number of reasons why you might not be able to lift it, but let's say you start to get it a little bit off the ground, or you start to get some force generated that would allow it to move. But the force that you're generating could potentially rip your muscles or your tendons off of the bone, right, that it could disrupt the joints and it could tear ligaments. Well, you have a safety mechanism in place, it's these Golgi tendon organs, these GTOs, as they're called, they get activated and shut down the motor neurons and make it impossible for those muscles to contract. Okay, so on the one hand, we have a mechanism that senses stretch and can figure out when stretch is excessive. And when this system detects that stretch is excessive, it activates the contraction of muscles. And then, we have a second mechanism that senses loads, and when tension or loads is deemed excessive by these circuits, and remember these circuits don't have a mind, they don't go, "Oh, this is excessive," they just sense loads. And when those loads exceed a certain threshold, well then those GTOs, those Golgi tendon organs, send signals into the spinal cord that shut down your motor neuron's ability to contract muscle so that you no longer can lift that heavy load. So, both of these are protective mechanisms, but both of these can be leveraged in a very logical way and in a very safe way in order to increase your limb range of motion. So, there are a couple of things I want to point out before going a little bit further into how your nervous system controls flexibility and stretching, and those key points are the following. There are now dozens if not hundreds of studies that show that a dedicated stretching practice can improve limb range of motion. Now, for many of you listening, you're probably saying, "Duh," but I think it's important to point that out, that a dedicated stretching practice can increase limb range of motion. And as you'll soon learn, there are specific mechanisms that can explain that effect. The second point is one of longevity. And when I say longevity, I don't necessarily mean late-stage aging. We all undergo a decrease in limb range of motion, unless we do something to offset that decrease. And the current numbers vary from study to study, but if you look en masse, you look at all of those studies and what you basically find is that we start to experience a decrease in flexibility from about age 20 until about age 49 that's pretty dramatic. And then, of course, it will continue after age 49, but basically it's a 10% decrease every 10 years. So, we could say it's a 1% decrease per year, although it's not necessarily linear. What do I mean by that? Well, it's not necessarily that on your 21st birthday, you are 1% less flexible than you were on your 20th birthday and it decreased by 1% per year, some of these changes can be non-linear. So, you can imagine the person who's doing just fine in terms of flexibility between 20 and 30, and then they get to 32 and suddenly they've lost 5% of their flexibility. Now, of course, there will be a ton of lifestyle factors. If you're a regular practitioner of yoga, if you have a dedicated stretching practice, if you're doing other things to improve your muscle contractibility, so you're doing resistance training it turns out can actually indirectly improve flexibility. There are a number of different factors, but the key point is that maintaining some degree of flexibility and maybe even enhancing range of motion and flexibility is of immense benefit for offsetting injury provided it's not pushed too far. There are a number of people who have pushed their limb range of motion so far that they experience all sorts of injuries, both acute and chronic injuries. Today, we'll also talk about how to avoid those scenarios. Okay, so we've established that there are mechanisms within the spinal cord, muscles, and connective tissue, those remember it's the motor neurons, the spindles, the GTOs, and, of course, the muscles themselves, and connective tissue, tendons, but also other forms of connective tissue that establish whether or not a limb is going to stay within a particular range of motion or not, and whether or not a limb is going to be allowed by the nervous system to pursue or handle a given load, a given tension. There are also mechanisms that arrive to the neuromuscular system from higher up in the nervous system, from the brain. And those mechanisms involve a couple of different facets that are really interesting, and I think that we should all know about. In fact, today, I'm going to teach you about a set of neurons that I'm guessing 99.9% of you have never heard of, including all you neuroscientists out there, if you're out there, and I know you're out there, that seem uniquely enriched in humans and probably perform essential roles in our ability to regulate our physiology and our emotional state. So, within the brain, we have the ability to sense things in the external world, something we called exteroception, and we have the ability to sense things in our internal world within our body, called interoception. Interoception can be the volume of food in your gut, whether or not you're experiencing any organ pain or discomfort, whether or not you feel good in your gut and in your organs, that's actually a kind of feeling, "Hmm, I feel great, I feel sated, I feel relaxed," but those are all different forms of interoception. The main brain area that's associated with interpreting what's going on in our body is called the insula, I-N-S-U-L-A. It's a very interesting brain region, it's got two major parts. The front of it is mainly concerned with things like smell, and to some extent vision, and to some extent other things that are arriving from the external world and combining with what's going on internally and making sense of all that, or at least routing that information elsewhere in your nervous system to make decision, like if you smell something good to approach it, or if you smell something bad to avoid it. The front of the insula is really doing all of that kind of stuff along with other brain areas. The posterior insula, the back of the insula that is, has a very interesting and distinct set of functions. The posterior insula is mainly concerned with what's going on with your somatic experience. How do you feel internally? And how is the movement that you happen to be doing combining with your internal state to allow you to feel, as I like to say the nervous system mainly batches things into yum, like, "Oh, this is really good for me," yuck, "This is really bad for me and I need to stop," or meh, "This is kind of neutral." Okay, so this isn't about food, but we could say for most stimuli, most senses, whether or not they're senses of things internally or externally, our nervous system is trying to make decisions about what to do with that information, and so it mainly batches information into yum, I want to keep doing this or approach this thing, or continue down some path of movement, or eating, or staying in a temperature environment, et cetera, or yuck, I need to get out of here, I don't want any more of this, I don't want to keep doing this, this is painful, or aversive, or stressful. And then meh, so if it doesn't really matter, I can just kind of stay right here or not. Yum, yuck, and meh. Well, in your posterior insula, you have a very interesting population of very large neurons, these are exceptionally large neurons called von Economo neurons. These are neurons that are, again, unbeknownst to most neuroscientists and they seem uniquely enriched in humans. Chimpanzees have them and some other large animals have them. So, they're found in whales, chimpanzees, elephants, and in humans. But even though we are much smaller than most whales and even though we are much smaller than most elephants, I mean, remember there are baby elephants. As far as I know, they haven't bred up like mini-elephants yet, they seem to have a teacup version of pretty much every dog breed. You can look that up, I certainly have mixed feelings about this notion of trying to downsize everything to the point where you could kind of like the pocket-sized bulldog I think of someday will arrive. I'm not a fan of that kind of downsizing of different breeds, but because there aren't teacup elephants and teacup gorillas, and teacup chimpanzees, and so forth, most all of those other species are larger than us. They have these von Economo neurons and we have these von Economo neurons, but we have in upwards of 80,000 of these things in our posterior insula. These other species tend to have somewhere in the range of 1,000 to maybe 10,000 or so. Why is that interesting? Well, these von Economo neurons have the unique property of integrating our knowledge about our body movements, our sense of pain and discomfort, and can drive motivational processes that allow us to lean into discomfort and, indeed, to overcome any discomfort if we decide that the discomfort that we are experiencing is good for us or directed toward a specific goal. This knowledge turns out to be very important to keep in mind because as we migrate this conversation toward the things that we can do to enhance flexibility and stretching, you'll soon learn that there are moments within a stretching protocol where you have the opportunity to either override pain and discomfort to kind of relax through it or push through it. Right, there's a decision fork in the road there, and it'll tell you which fork in the road to take, or to say, "Uh-uh, I'm not going to do that. I'm going to allow these natural reflexes of the spindle to kick in and just essentially stop me from stretching if a given limb isn't designed or shouldn't be stretched that far." So, I'd like you to keep these von Economo neurons in mind. I should mention they're named von Economo because the guy, Constantin von Economo, that discovered them at the end of the 1800s, early 1900s, decided to name them after himself, as many scientists do, or certainly the neurologists and physicians are famous for naming things after themselves. These von Economo neurons turn out to be very important to keep in mind as we embark on our exploration of what sorts of stretching practices can be best applied to increase flexibility because whether or not you undertake a mild, moderate, or intense flexibility training, you will no doubt encounter a scenario at some point where you will have to ask yourself, "Do I quote-unquote relax into this stretch, or do I try and push through just a little bit of discomfort?" And I'll explain how to gauge that decision in a very specific and ideally safe way, and I'll give you some tools that will allow you to make that decision in a way that best preserves the integrity of those neural circuits that I described earlier and can keep you safe. These von Economo neurons sit in the exact position that one would want to be able to evaluate what's going on in the body, in particular what's going on in terms of limb movements, how that relates to our feelings of discomfort. And then there's the other aspect of these von Economo neurons, which is that these von Economo neurons are connected to a number of different brain areas that can shift our internal state from one of so-called sympathetic activation. So, this is a pattern of alertness and even stress, sometimes even panic, but typically alertness and stress to one of so called parasympathetic activation to one of relaxation. Oftentimes, you'll hear that stretching should be done by relaxing into the stretch. Well, what does it actually mean to relax into the stretch? Well, these von Economo neurons sit at this junction where they're able to evaluate what's going on inside our body and allow us to access neural circuitries by which we can shift our relative level of alertness down a bit, or our relative level of stress down a bit and thereby to increase so-called parasympathetic activation and to literally override some of those spindle mechanisms, even the GTO mechanisms, but especially the spindle mechanisms at the neuromuscular and muscular spinal junction. And in that way, gently, subtly override the reflex that would otherwise cause us to contract those muscles back. The reason that's possible is because your brain has those other kinds of motor neurons, the upper motor neurons that can both direct, meaning control, and can override lower motor neurons. I'll give you a brief example of this that you've already done in your life, and that we all have the capacity for. What I'm referring to is the monosynaptic stretch reflex. This is something that every first year neuroscience graduate student learns, which is that if you were to step on a sharp object with a bare foot, you would not need to make the decision to retract your foot, you would automatically do that provided you have a healthy nervous system. There are mechanisms in place that cause the retraction of that limb by way of ensuring that the proper muscles contract and other muscles do not contract, in fact, that they fully relax. Okay, so in the case of stepping on a sharp object like a piece of glass, or a nail, or a tack, you would essentially activate the hip flexor to lift up your foot as quickly as possible. In doing so, that same neural circuit would activate a contralateral, meaning opposite side of the body circuit, to ensure that the leg, the foot that's not stepping on the sharp object would do exactly the opposite and would extend to make sure that you don't fall over. All of that happens reflexively, it does not require any thought or decision making. In fact, humans without any neocortex, literally that who decerebrate or an animal that doesn't have... When I say decerebrate, I mean lack of cerebral cortex. They can perform that because it's all controlled by circuits that are basically below the brain and in the spinal cord. There's a little bit of activation of circuits in the kind of deeper parts of the brain, but basically you don't need to think or decide in order to do that. However, if your life depended on walking across some sharp objects, let's say. Let's make it a little less dramatic so it's not like the "Die Hard" movie or something where he has to run barefoot across the glass, although that's a pretty good example of what I'm describing here, but let's say you had to walk across some very hot stones to get away from something that you wanted to avoid. You could override that stretch reflex by way of a decision made with your upper motor neurons, your insula, and your cognition, and almost certainly those von Economo neurons, which would be screaming, "Don't do this, don't do this, don't do this," could shuttle that information to brain areas that would allow you to override the reflex and essentially push through the pain. And maybe even, in fact, even not experience the pain to the same degree or even at all. So, these von Economo neurons sit at a very important junction within the brain. They pay attention to what's going on in your body, pain, pleasure, et cetera. And that includes what's going on with your limbs and your limb range of motion. They also are paying attention and can control the amount of activation, kind of alertness or calmness that you are able to create within your body in response to a given sensory experience. And as I mentioned before, they seem to be uniquely enriched in humans, they seem to be related to the aspects of our evolution that allow us to make decisions about what to do with our body in ways that other animals just simply can't. Before we go any further, I want to give you a practical tool that you can, of course, use, but that will also give you insight and experience into your muscle spindle spinal cord circuit mechanisms. So, what I'd like you to do is if you're in a proper place to do this, you're going to stand with legs straight, meaning knees not bent, and you're going to try and touch your toes, or for some of you that's going to be very easy and you might even be able to put your hands flat on the floor. I don't have that kind of flexibility, it's pretty easy for me to touch my toes. I don't care if you round your back or not, although ideally I would say don't round your back. Not because it's bad to do so necessarily, but just to try and keep this the same from trial to trial, as it were. So, try and get a sense of what your range of motion is in terms of bending over at the waist while maintaining a flat back and trying to touch your toes or even touch the floor. Maybe, again, you can even go hands flat to the floor or maybe even far out in front of you. Okay, now what I'd like you to do is stand back up and I'd like you to contract your quadriceps as hard as you possibly can for about 5-15 seconds. Let's say 10 seconds just to keep things more or less normalized. This obviously is not a super controlled experiment. So, to contract your quadriceps for those of you who don't know, you're going to extend your lower limb out. So, this would be like kicking, although don't do it too quickly, you're going to kick out your foot, you should feel your quadriceps contract on the top of your thighs. And you're going to try and consciously contract them as hard as you can. Okay, typically if you want to point your toe back towards your knee or shin that's also going to help somewhat to contract even harder and harder. Okay, so, do that for about 10 seconds. A lot of you will do this just while standing, contract, contract, contract. Okay, then release it, and then now go ahead and repeat that stretch where you're trying to touch your toes or touch the floor. So, this is, again, relying more or less on hamstring flexibility among other things. Okay, what most of you will find is that you have an immediate increase in hamstring flexibility, or your range of motion has increased. If you didn't experience that, then I would encourage you to try and contract your quadriceps harder and longer, so maybe 20 or 30 seconds, and then try this so-called experiment again. Why would contracting your quadriceps allow your hamstring flexibility to suddenly increase? Well, the way that our muscles are organized is such that we have muscles that are antagonistic to one another. So, our quadriceps and our hamstrings work in sort of a push-pull fashion, if you will. They can antagonize one another, so when you move your heel towards your glutes, you are using your hamstring, the hamstring obviously also does other things related to hip movement. And when you lift your knee or when you extend your foot and contract your quadriceps, you are essentially relaxing the hamstrings. Now, of course, most movements involve both quadricep and hamstring in synchrony. And that synchrony is really an elegant one, but here we're more or less isolating the quadriceps from the hamstrings, at least to the extent that it can leverage these spindle stretch mechanisms. So, what happens is when you contract your quadriceps hard, you are relaxing or releasing some of the stretch that's occurring in those intrafusal spindle sensory fibers going into your spinal cord. And as a consequence, you're able then to stretch your hamstrings further, or we can be more accurate and say that your range of motion about the hamstring and its related joints is greater when you aren't engaging that spindle reflex, which would cause the hamstrings to contract. Okay, so if you are somebody who has tight hamstrings, there could be a variety of reasons for that, but part of the reason is likely to be neural and you can release that neural spindle reflex by contracting the opposite antagonistic muscle, which in this case is the quadriceps. The same thing is true and can be leveraged for stretching other muscles. So, for instance, if you're going to do a tricep stretch, the typical kind of overhead where you grab your elbow and move it toward the midline of your body with using your opposite hand. Well, you can do that, and then I would suggest trying to flex your bicep, contract your bicep that is, while doing that. And for most people you'll notice a increase in the tricep range of motion or ability to kind of lean into, or to relax into, or to push that stretch, excuse me, a little bit further. Now, for you physios out there and for those of you that have backgrounds in kinesiology, I want to acknowledge, of course, there are other mechanisms that are coming into play. There are actually neural connections within the joints themselves that are providing proprioceptive feedback, et cetera, et cetera. But this is simply to illustrate that part of our range of motion is determined by these spindle mechanisms that I spent some time focusing on earlier. And indeed, this approach can be leveraged toward creating increased limb range of motion, not just for the hamstrings, but for your quadriceps. So, for instance, if you have tight quadriceps, you can do the opposite. You can contract your hamstring very intensely for let's say 10 seconds, or 20 seconds, or 30 seconds. So, that would take some conscious effort of bringing your heel up towards your glutes. You could do that in a way that you're really trying to contract those muscles hard, you'd have to use some deliberate hamstring activation there, meaning you have to use those upper motor neurons and the other aspects of your upper brain power, as it were, to try and really contract your hamstrings as intensely as possible, then you would relax that, and then you would do your quadricep stretch again. And if you did a pre-hamstring contraction measurement of your quadricep flexibility, and then you did a post-hamstring contraction measure of your quadricep flexibility, almost certainly you would find that that flexibility had increased. Now, of course, the muscle really didn't change much, the tendons didn't change much. What changed was the patterns of neural activation that were restricting you from in the first case stretching your hamstring or having a... To be more accurate we should say having a certain range of motion about the hamstring and its related joints and those brake mechanisms were removed. And, of course, then when you contract your hamstring, you're removing some of the neural brakes, the spindle acting as a brake and inhibiting that quadricep range of motion. Okay, so you can imagine this, and in fact you can apply this for any number of different muscles, the larger muscles and the sort of biceps, triceps, and hamstrings, quadriceps that are sort of the simplest place to think about this and to apply it. But in theory and, indeed, in practice, it really works for all the various muscle groups, it's just sometimes harder to access these so-called antagonistic muscle groups. Now, we should take a moment and just discuss what actually happens as we get more flexible in the short-term and long-term. I just mentioned what happens in the short-term, clearly those don't involve lengthening of the muscles. It's not like the muscles slide along the bones or that the tendons really stretch out that much more than they had prior to that kind of exercise. But it is the case that if people stretch consistently over a given period of several weeks or more that there are changes in the muscles. This gets a little bit tricky in terms of nomenclature, and I just want to highlight that because I think that a number of people get frustrated and confused, in fact, when we talk about muscles getting longer. You know, that the whole concept of a muscle getting longer isn't really in keeping with reality, but there are elements within the muscles that can change their confirmation. So, to get a little bit detailed here, and we won't spend too much time on this, but I just want to acknowledge this for those of you that are interested in neuromuscular physiology and how it relates to flexibility. You know, you have your muscle fibers and then you have your so-called myofibrils. So, you can imagine kind of a single fiber, that fiber, of course, will get input from those motor neurons. And then within those fibers, you have what are called sarcomeres. And you can kind of think about sarcomeres as little segments, kind of like the segments of bamboo. If you ever look at bamboo, it's not just one big stalk, it's got those little outpouching along the way that going to break up the what would be just one big stalk of bamboo into different segments, but they're all connected. The sarcomeres are somewhat like that. And within the sarcomeres you have a couple of different components. One thing is called myosin, which is like a thick layer, and then the other is actin. And those are interdigitated, as we say, they're kind of connected to one another, kind of like if you were put your fingers together from your two hands. If you put your fingers in between one another, that's interdigitated, literally interdigitated in this case, so pun intended. And that myosin and actin kind of move relative to one another and they have a lot to do with your ability to contract muscles. When we stretch muscles, when we go through a stretching practice, there are a number of things that change, some neural, some related directly to connective tissue, but also it appears from really nice work mainly done from McGill University, I'll provide a link to a couple of these studies if you want to dig in there more deeply, that change the confirmation, the relative size and spacing of some of these things like sarcomeres and the way that myosin and actin kind of work together. But we don't want to think of muscles as lengthening, we can, however, think about the resting state of a muscle being slightly different or, indeed, very different than the resting state of a muscle of somebody or of a limb that has not undergone regular flexibility training. So, that's as much time as I want to spend on that because we could spend an entire hour getting right down into the details, but I do want to emphasize, however, that muscles have different parts, they have fibers, they have sarcomeres, they have myosin, they have actin. But the idea of making our muscles longer, that reflects a number of processes that occur basically within an existing muscle length. The length of our muscle bellies and where our insertions are relative to our connective tissue in our limbs is genetically determined, right? Some people have, for instance, a bicep that goes all the way from the crook of their elbow up to their shoulder, right? And some people can if they were to put their arm in a 90 degree angle could put two or three fingers between their bicep and their elbow. They have, we can say, a shorter bicep, relatively shorter. Now, the reason I mentioned these highly detailed cellular mechanisms is because as we start to embark on different protocols for using stretching to increase flexibility and range of motion, we need to ask ourselves what is preventing our ability to extend range of motion? Is it the spindle, right? Is it because the muscle is stretching too much? Oftentimes, it can be because of that and/or because of a sense of pain or simply a sense that the muscle is not in a position that it's been in before that's unrelated to pain or to spindle activation. And oftentimes, it can be related directly to these changes in the confirmation of myosin and actin, and within the context of the sarcomeres. Now, of course, you can't peer into or sense your individual sarcomeres, however, you do have neurons that innovate these areas and that send that sensory information back into the spinal cord and up to your brain to interpret. So, you'll find that as we move along, there are specific adjustments that you can make at both the macro level, meaning how much movement to insert into your stretching, right? Is it going to be a static, or a dynamic, or even a ballistic stretch? Or, for instance, at the micro level, that even just a slight sub-millimeter or millimeter increase in the stretching of a given muscle and it related tissues can translate into an increased range of motion performance. As a quick but relevant aside, I thought I'd share with you something useful that's also grounded in this notion of antagonistic muscles. So, for those of you that do resistance training, whether or not it's with body weight, or with physical weights, or machines, what have you, you may have found that if you, let's say, were to do three sets of a pushing exercise, so this could be pushups, this could be bench presses, this could be shoulder presses, something of that sort. And then, later in the workout you were to do, let's say, machine pull-downs, or pull-ups, or chin-ups of some sort, so a pulling exercise. Typically, what you would find is if you were to do what's often called straight sets, so you would do three sets of pushups, let's say, with two minutes of rest in between that you might be able to get a certain number of repetitions on the first set. Let's just for sake of example, let's say you can get 10 repetitions on the first set, and then you get eight repetitions on the second set, and then you get six repetitions on the third set with two minutes in between, and then you would move on at some point to your pulling exercises. And similarly, let's say you were doing chin-ups or pull-downs and you would get 10 repetitions, rest two minutes, eight repetitions, rest two minutes, and six repetitions. Okay, fine. Well, typically what people discover is that if they interleave their pushing and pulling exercises, provided they do that for muscles that are antagonistic to one another. So, in this case, pushing with the chest, shoulders, and triceps for the pushing exercises, and pulling with the back and biceps, and, of course, there are other muscles involved as well. But because those muscle groups are at least in part antagonistic to one another, what people often find is that if they were to, say, do their pushing set, get 10 repetitions, then move to a pulling set after just say 60 seconds and perform that pulling set, then go back to the pushing set, then go back to a pulling set, push, pull, push, pull, in other words, interleaving their sets. Even if they were to maintain the same amount of rest between sets of pushing and sets of pulling, what they discover often is that the drop in the number of repetitions that they get is somewhat offset. So, rather than get 10, 8, 6, as it were with the straight sets, it will be 10, 9, 8. So, what this means is not that you're increasing the total rest time to four minutes between sets because then, of course, it wouldn't be equivalent, but rather that while maintaining the same amount of rest between sets for this same muscle group, by going from push, pull, push, pull of antagonistic muscles, you're able to have improved performance. And the reason for that has everything to do with what we were describing before, which is that typically if you were to do push set, rest, push set, rest, push set, rest. Well, in between those sets and, in fact, actually during those sets of pushing, the pulling muscles that would be involved in the chin-ups or pull-downs, et cetera, are actually relaxing, or at least are being released of some tension, including the activation of the spindles among other things. So, that's a long-winded way of saying that interleaving push and pull of antagonistic sets can leverage some of the same neural circuits that we're talking about leveraging for sake of increasing flexibility. Now, I offer this to you as a tool that you can try. One of the challenges with using this tool, however, is that you often have to occupy multiple sites within the gym. You know, if you're doing this at home and you have your own gym, that's one thing. If you're doing this in a gym where you have multiple pieces of equipment, well, then you become that person who has essentially taken over some small corner, or multiple corners, or machines within the gym. And oftentimes, you'll find that you'll walk back to a machine or you'll walk back to a given resistance exercise and someone has now taken it over and the whole thing could be thrown off. So, it takes a little bit of orchestrating in order to do properly. But in general, what people find is that this can allow you to enhance performance overall of these individual movements, again, while maintaining the same amount of rest. And even if you choose not to do this, I encourage you to pay attention to this as a concept because, again, it's leveraging this idea of antagonistic muscles, flexors and extensors, antagonistic neural relationships between the spinal cord mechanisms that control one set of muscles and activating those muscles, allowing the opposite antagonistic muscle to relax and therefore to perform better on its next set. So, now I'd like to shift to the question of what types of stretching can and should we do to increase limb range of motion? If our goal is to do that in the most efficient way possible 'cause I realize that most people don't have endless amounts of time to dedicate to a stretching practice. And even for those of us that do, I'm sure that you want to get the most outcome for a given effort. And what are the modes of stretching that are going to allow us to increase our flexibility and limb range of motion most safely? Now, there are a number of different types of stretching or methods of stretching. Broadly defined, we can describe these as dynamic, ballistic, static, and what's called PNF stretching. PNF stands for Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation, and it involves and leverages many of the mechanisms that I described to you earlier. The first two that I mentioned, dynamic and ballistic stretching, both involves some degree of momentum, and can be distinguished from static and PNF-type stretching. Now, to distinguish dynamic stretching from ballistic stretching, I'd like to focus on this element of momentum. Both involve moving a limb through a given range of motion, in dynamic stretching, however, it tends to be more controlled, less use of momentum, especially towards the end range of motion. Whereas in ballistic stretching, there tends to be a bit more swinging of the limb or use of momentum. So, I invite you to visualize what dynamic and ballistic stretching might look like in your mind, you can even try it if it's safe for you to try it. You know, you could imagine swinging your arm up overhead as much as possible and bringing it down. I'm doing this because I'm seated, it's kind of a ridiculous movement to do while seated or perhaps at all. But for instance, you can see dynamic and ballistic stretching. Anytime someone, for instance, is holding onto something with one arm or maybe not holding on and swinging out their foot, so essentially getting movement about the hip joint. And you'll notice that some people raise it up, and pause it, and bring it down, that's one form of dynamic stretching. Whereas others will swing it up and sort of let it carry itself a bit further due to the momentum at the top of the movement, and then just let it drop back down or maybe even control the descent. There is an enormous range of parameter space here or variables that one could imagine, and there's just simply no way that we could subdivide all those. But again, dynamic and ballistic stretching both involve movement, so we have to generate some force in order to create that movement. Ballistic stretching involving a bit more momentum or sometimes a lot more momentum, especially at the end range of of motion. Now, both of those are highly distinct from static stretching, which involves holding the end range of motion, so minimizing the amount of momentum that's used. So, to stay with the simple example that we are all now familiar with from our earlier discussion, slowly bending over at the waist and trying to touch your toes or putting your hands to the floor and then holding that end position before coming up in a slow and controlled way, such that you reduce the amount of momentum to near zero would be one example of static stretching. Static stretching can be further subdivided into active or passive. Right, there are different names for these kinds of approaches. You can hear about the Anderson approach or the Jander approach, you can look these sorts of things up online. And, again, people tend to name things after themselves, so some of these are proprietary related to specific programs, I'm not focusing on those. Others come to be named after the physiologists or the practitioners that initially popularize them. As is always the case, there's always a naming and renaming and claiming of territory with these things. For the time being, I'd like to just emphasize that static stretching can be both active, where there's a dedicated effort on the part of the stretcher, you, to put force behind the hold to kind of extend or literally to extend the range of motion. And then, there's also passive static stretching in which it's more of a relaxation into a further range of motion, and that can be a subtle distinction. And there are other ways in which we can further distinguish active and passive static stretching. But nonetheless, static stretching involves both those types of elements, active and passive, but is really about eliminating momentum. And then, there's the PNF, the Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation. And proprioception has several different meanings in the context of neuroscience and physiology. To just keep it really simple for today, proprioception involves both a knowledge and understanding of where our limbs are in space and relative to our body. Typically, relative to the midline, so the brain is often trying to figure out where are our limbs relative to our midline down the center of our body. And we know where our limbs are based on so-called proprioceptive feedback, so that's feedback that comes from sensory neurons. Right, now you know what sensory neurons that are essentially monitoring or responding to events within the joints, the connective tissue, and the muscles, and within the deep components of the muscles like the spindle reflex, and within the tendons like the GTO, the Golgi tendon organ. So, PNF-type stretching leverages these sorts of mechanisms, these neural circuits, by way of, for instance, you would lie on your back and if your goal is to increase your hamstring flexibility and the flexibility and range of motion of other related muscle systems, you might put a strap around your ankle and pull that muscle. Or I should say, excuse me, that limb towards you, you're not going to pull the muscle towards you, you're going to pull that limb your ankle towards you to try and get it sort of back over your head. And then, progressively relaxing into that, or maybe even putting some additional force to push the end range of motion and then relaxing it. And then, actually trying to stretch that same limb or increase the limb range of motion without the strap. Right, sometimes these are assisted by other people. So, people will even use loads, sometimes they'll even use machines. There are a number of different apparati that have been designed for this, sometimes it'll involve a training partner. There's a huge range of PNF protocols, and those protocols can be done both by oneself with or without straps, with machines, with actual weights, or with training partners. If you're interested in the variation of exercises to, say, target your hamstrings versus your quadriceps versus your shoulders versus your chest muscles, et cetera, your neck muscles, and so on, there is an enormous range of information on dynamic, ballistic, static, and PNF stretches for all the various muscle groups. And I should say there are some excellent books on those topics, there are also some excellent videos on YouTube and elsewhere. Nowadays, it's pretty easy to find exercises that allow you to target specific muscle groups. Again, I encourage you to be safe in how you approach this, and I would encourage you also to pay attention to the information that soon follows as to what sorts of protocols one would use to apply those exercises. But the number of exercises and the availability of those exercises for targeting different muscle groups with these four different kinds of stretching is both immense and fortunately, thankfully, immediately accessible to all of us often at zero cost. So, specific exercises to target specific muscle groups aside, we've now established that there are four major categories of stretching, or at least those are the four major categories I'm defining today. And we can further divide those categories into which are the ones that are going to be most effective for increasing range of motion in the long-term, not just in one individual session. And there have been a number of studies exploring this. I can list out at least four, and we'll put those four as a kind of a cluster under one heading in the show note captions that arrive at essentially the same answer, which is that for increasing limb range of motion, it does appear that static type, including PNF, but static-type stretching is going to be more effective than dynamic and ballistic stretching. So, at least in my mind, this is good news. Why is it good news to me? Well, while dynamic and ballistic stretching can be immensely useful for improving performance of specific movements, in particular, in the context of particular sports like tennis, or in sprinting, or frankly for any sport, they do carry with them a certain amount of risk because of the use of momentum. So, you don't need to be highly trained in order to perform them. In fact, there is a place and we will describe when one would want to apply dynamic or ballistic stretching. I'll just give away for now, I think that most physios out there and certainly the ones that I spoke to, Dr. Andy Galpin, Dr. Kelly Starrett, and a few others point to the fact that doing some safe dynamic and ballistic stretching prior to, say, a resistance training session, or maybe even prior to a cardiovascular training session can be useful both in terms of range of motion effects and in terms of neural activation effects. I don't want to use the words warm-up because warming up is typically associated with increasing core body temperature, as it should be, but for engaging the neural circuits and becoming familiarized with the neural circuits that you're about to use in other movements while also increasing the range of motion of the joints involved in those movements so that you can perform them more safely and more confidently. So, I'm certainly not saying, I want to repeat, I'm certainly not saying that dynamic and ballistic stretching are not useful, they absolutely are, but in terms of increasing limb range of motion in the long-term of truly becoming more flexible as opposed to transiently more flexible, static stretching, which includes PNF, appears to be the best route to go. So, if your goal is to increase your limb range of motion for a given muscle group, or perhaps for all muscle groups, although you can imagine that'd be pretty tough. I mean, you're not going to spend time, I could imagine, working on your tongue muscle control or neck muscle control and every muscle control, but most of us want to reduce so-called tightness in air quotes and increase limb range of motion for certain muscle groups. And it appears that the best way to do that is going to be static stretching of some kind, which raises the question of how often to do that static stretching and how long to hold those static stretches. And we can also ask the question, we should ask the question, where to hold those static stretches? Is it always a good idea to hold those static stretches at the end or the point of maximal range of motion? We're going to address that now. There's some terrific science around this. A slightly older study, but nonetheless a powerful one because it provided a foundation for a lot of subsequent work, which basically served to just confirm the answer they got here is a study from Bandy et al. And the title of this study is The Effect of Time and Frequency of Static Stretching on the Flexibility of the Hamstring Muscles. It was a study involving 93 subjects, so 61 men, 32 women ranging an age from 21-39 years, so a pretty broad demographic who had limited hamstring muscle flexibility, here I'm paraphrasing, and randomly assigned to one of five groups. So, the four stretching groups stretched five days per week for six weeks, the fifth group, which served as a control, did not stretch. The results clearly show that quote, "The change in flexibility appeared to be dependent on the duration and frequency of stretching." This is great, this tells us that stretching for a given amount of time scales with the amount of limb range of motion improvement that one will see. There were many interesting findings within this study, but the one that I'd like to highlight most is quote, "The results of this study suggest that a 30 second duration is an effective amount of time to sustain a hamstring muscle stretch in order to increase range of motion. No increase in flexibility occurred when the duration of stretching was increased from 30 seconds to 60 seconds, or when the frequency of stretching was increased from one to three times per day." Okay, so now we're starting to lay down some parameters. What this study reveals and what subsequent studies tell us, and we will get into those subsequent studies, is that ideally one would do static stretches that are held for 30 seconds. Perhaps more in certain instances, and I'll explain when that can be useful, but here holding those stretches for more than 30 seconds did not turn out to be additionally useful. So, if you're going to stretch your quadricep, for instance, and you're going to hold that stretch in static fashion, remember not using momentum, and you can use the mental tricks of either trying to push through the pain, which I don't recommend necessarily, I think that makes us prone to injury, or to relax into the stretch, but nonetheless providing some force typically with a hand in order to pull your ankle back, if you're doing a quadricep stretch, some people might do this on the edge of a sofa. Remember, there are a lot of different exercises and ways to do this that you can explore elsewhere. Well, holding that static stretch for 30 seconds appears to be sufficient to stimulate an increase in limb range of motion over time. Again, these are protocols that were used repeatedly over time, and we'll talk about how often to repeat them in order to get maximal effect. But 30-second holds for static stretches is the number that I think we want to focus on and that most of us are going to want to utilize. So, now let's explore how many sets of static stretching one ought to do in order to get a maximum range of motion improvement while not placing us into a system that's going to create injury nor a situation where we have to be constantly stretching throughout the day because, again, most of us don't have time to do that. This issue of sets is an important one. In the context of cardiovascular exercise, we've talked about the data that support the fact that doing at least 150 and ideally as much as 200 minutes per week of Zone 2 cardiovascular exercise is very useful for cardiovascular health and for other aspects of health. And, of course, there are other aspects of cardiovascular exercise that could be layered onto and into that that can be useful like 90 second maximal sprints, et cetera. Discussed this a lot in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin and on our episode about endurance. And we also talked about sets in the context of strength and hypertrophy building, building muscle size and/or strength in the episode about that. And in particular, in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin, and there, we could also arrive at some specific parameters. And it's going to vary, of course, between individuals, depending on how hard you train, whether or not you take sets to failure, your repetition range, et cetera, but in the context of strength and hypertrophy building, we arrived at a approximately six, maybe as many as 10 sets per week per muscle group. Some of that work is done as direct work to a given muscle group, some of that work is indirect. So, doing certain pulling exercise, of course, will target the latissimus dorsi muscles, but also the biceps. So, that doesn't necessarily mean you have to do 10 sets for the biceps and for the lats, sometimes you're getting some indirect work, et cetera. All of that was delineated in the episode with Dr. Andy Galpin. And we arrived at those numbers of sets according to the same criteria that we will apply here, what is the minimum number of sets both to maintain and to improve a given mode of performance? Strength and hypertrophy or cardiovascular health, again, to either maintain or improve. And we can do the same thing for improving or maintaining range of motion because as I mentioned earlier, the data pointed to the fact that if we don't do some dedicated work to improve range of motion over time, we will lose our flexibility and limb range of motion over time just by virtue of the fact that we're not doing anything to offset that. So, whether or not you want to maintain, reestablish, or gain limb range of motion, static stretching of holds of 30 seconds appear to be best. Now, the question is how long should you do that? And how many sets should you do that? And how many times a week should you do that? And to answer those questions, I'm going to turn to what I think is a really spectacular review. This was a review that was published in the year 2018, so it's fairly recent, first author Thomas, Ewan Thomas, last author Palma. We will put a link to this in the show note caption. The title of the paper is The Relation Between Stretching Typology and Stretching Duration: The Effects on Range of Motion. It's a very straightforward title. This is a review article that explored a number of different studies, had criteria for whether or not those studies could be evaluated in the context of the questions here, had some quality standards and some other standards that they applied. And basically, windowed down a large collection of studies to a remaining 23 articles that were able to be considered quote, "Eligible and included in the quantitative synthesis done here." So, key points from that quantification and synthesis done in this paper. First of all, and I quote, "All stretching typologies showed range of motion improvements over a long-term period. However, the static protocols showed significant gains with a p-value less than .05," which means a probability that cannot be explained by chance alone, "When compared to ballistic or PNF protocols." So, again, that we're hearing is that static stretching is the preferred mode for increasing limb range of motion. Although, here they make the additional point that static stretching might even be superior, not just to ballistic stretching, but also to PNF protocols. Because before, as you may recall, there was a distinction between ballistic and dynamic, and static and PNF. And so, here it appears again that static stretching is sort of rising to the top of the list as the optimal approach relative to all other stretching approaches, at least in the context of increasing limb range of motion. The authors go on to say, "Time spent stretching per week seems fundamental to elicit range of movement improvements when stretches are applied for at least or more than five minutes per week." Okay, this is critical. This is not five minutes per stretch. Remember, 30 seconds per static stretch, but at least five minutes per week. Whereas the time spent stretching within a single session does not seem to have a significant effect for range of motion gains. If this is getting confusing, I'll make sure that you soon understand exactly what we can export from these conclusions. The data indicated that performing stretching at least five days a week. Now, some of you may already be groaning, for at least five minutes per week. Okay, so five days per week, that's a lot, but at least five minutes per week, five minutes per week is not that much. "Using static stretching may be beneficial to promote range of motion improvements." Okay, I've read this study in detail now, they highlight, again, the reduction in flexibility that occurs from 20-49 years of age and so on, how acute bouts of short-term stretching up to three weeks can improve stretch tolerance. I think that's a key point that in the short-term, the first three weeks of embarking on a stretching and flexibility program, much of the improvements come from the short-term neural improvements that we talked about before of inhibiting the spindle reflex and so on. And also, a stretch tolerance, a comfort with doing the movements and maybe even a comfort in overriding some of the pain mechanisms. I'll talk a little bit more about that in just a bit and the particular utility of yoga. Something that I don't often practice, but that after reading this article that I'll mention in a little bit, I'm considering perhaps taking up some form of yoga protocol. Now, I've already highlighted some of the key take aways from the study, namely that we need to get at least five minutes per week of static stretching per muscle group. And based on the previous paper that we talked about, we need to divide that five minutes into sets of 30 seconds each. And as I mentioned earlier, it doesn't seem to be the case that you can do all of that in one day, unfortunately. It does seem important that the frequency of stretching practice distributed throughout the week is important. So, let's talk protocols. We are now talking about doing static stretching, so holding, so limiting momentum and holding a stretch for 30 seconds per set. We're talking about trying to achieve five minutes per week of those static holds, but that we can't do it all in one session because the frequency of sessions distributed throughout the week correlates with the improvements in limb range of motion. So, what this means is that we should probably be doing anywhere from two to four sets of 30 second static holds stretches five days per week or some variant thereof. And I do say some variant thereof because it turns out that even though there was that earlier study that we talked about that holding a stretch for more than 30 seconds, in that case 60 seconds, didn't turn out to be additionally beneficial. It appears that if you do hold those stretches for 60 seconds per static stretching set, for instance, you can get away with stretching fewer days per week overall. So, in order to make this as clear as possible 'cause I do realize there are a lot of parameters and you might be asking, "Why didn't you just make me a list of the exact things I should do?" Well, it doesn't work that way because once you understand the mechanisms and once you understand your particular goals, this information is designed for you to be able to construct a stretching program that is tailored to your specific goals. If I just gave you the stretching program that I'm doing, or I should say that I'm soon to be doing 'cause I'm soon to be doing one based on the research for this particular episode. Well, that wouldn't be beneficial for you because, for instance, if you have very flexible hamstrings, but not very flexible quadriceps, or you are somebody who is engaged in sport or not engaged in sport, what you need to do is going to vary somewhat. So, what would effective stretching protocol look like? We're all trying to improve limb range of motion for different limbs and different muscle groups. But just by way of example, and it's because the one we've been using, let's talk about hamstrings for the time being. This could, of course, be applied to other muscle groups. Let's say you want to improve hamstring flexibility and limb range of motion about and around the hamstring and involving the hamstring, you would want to do three sets of static stretching for the hamstring. Again, easy to find such exercises on the internet. You would do that by holding the stretch for 30 seconds, resting some period of time, and doing it again, holding for 30 seconds, resting some period of time, and then holding it for 30 seconds. That would be one training session for the hamstrings. I have to imagine that you'd probably want to stretch other muscle groups as well in that same session. Although, at least as far as I could tell, there was no data pointing to the fact that you couldn't do your hamstring stretching one part of the day and your quadricep stretching another part of the day. But presumably, you're going to want to combine your flexibility training into one single session. So, three sets of 30 seconds each get 90 seconds, and you would do that ideally five times a week or maybe even more because it does seem like frequency distributed throughout the week is an important parameter. Now, one thing that we have not highlighted or at least described is how long to rest between stretching sets. And despite my efforts, I could not find research-backed information that pointed to whether or not 30 seconds of rest for every 30 seconds stretching, or 60 seconds rest for every 30 second stretching was ideal. I think it's reasonable to assume that doubling the amount of time for the interleaving rest would be appropriate or at least doable. If anyone out there has knowledge about rest between stretching sets and has some physiology, or some biology, or some experiential information as to why a given ratio of duration of static stretch to rest in between static stretch sets ought to be used, please put it in the comments on YouTube, that'd be a terrific way for us to get that information. I'd love to do any follow-up to links that you provide and so on. But now, we're starting to build into a protocol that is backed by the scientific data. Three sets of 30 seconds of holds done five times or maybe even six times per week. One thing that did show up in my exploration of the peer-reviewed research is this notion of warming up for all this. We haven't talked about that yet. In general, to avoid injury, it's a good idea to raise your core body temperature a bit before doing these kinds of stretches. Even these static stretches, which we can sort of ease into and don't involve ballistic movement by definition. And the basic take away that I was able to find was that if we are already warm from running, or from weight training, or from some other activity that doing the static stretching practice at the end of that weight training, or cardiovascular, or other physical session would allow us to go immediately into the stretching session because we're already warm, so to speak. Otherwise, raising one's core body temperature by a bit by doing five to seven, maybe even 10 minutes of easy cardiovascular exercise or calisthenic movements, provided you can do those without getting injured, seems to be an ideal way to warm up the body for stretching. We should be warm or warm-up to stretch, although those warm-ups don't have to be extremely extensive. And then, just by way of logic, doing the static stretching after resistance training or cardiovascular training seems to be most beneficial. In fact, and unfortunately we don't have time to go into this in too much detail today, I was able to find a number of papers that make the argument that static stretching prior to cardiovascular training and maybe even prior to resistance training can limit our performance in running and resistance training. I realize that's a controversial area, you have those who say, "No, it's immensely beneficial," you have those who say, "No, it inhibits performance," and those that say, "No, it's a matter of how exactly you perform that static stretching, and which muscle groups, and how you're doing this, and how much time in between static stretching and performance." But to leave all that aside, doing static stretching after some other form of exercise and if not after some form of exercise, after a brief warm-up to raise your core body temperature definitely seems like the right way to go. Now, for some of you out there, and I confess for me as well, doing something five days a week seems like a big commitment, even if that commitment is one to only do three sets of 30 second static stretches. I say this because you've got the warm-up, I generally like to bring a kind of a focus and dedication to a practice. And, of course, because when doing these kinds of protocols, it's likely that you're not just stretching your hamstring, so it's not just 90 seconds of work with a minute of rest in between, but very likely that we're also doing quadricep stretching, and also doing stretching for the shoulders, and stretching for the back, and the neck, and so on. And so, that entire session is going to take some time, and five days a week is a pretty serious commitment for most, especially for those of us that don't exercise or do athletics for a living, which I don't. So, there is some evidence from the literature that one can get away with, or I don't even know that we should think about it as getting away with, but that one can do longer hold static stretches of up to say 60 seconds, but do fewer total sessions per week. So, rather than three 30 second static holds, doing three 60 second static holds and doing those every other day. And there really hasn't been a systematic exploration of this. The article that I was referring to just a few moments ago, this analysis of the 23 articles was combined into this enormous set of tables and some really quite nice graphs that you're welcome to look at since we're going to provide a link to the study. There are a couple of key take aways that I want to mention that are separate from this issue of how long to stretch and how often. First of all, they describe in their discussion that there were improvements in range of motion independent of whether or not people did static stretching, active stretching, passive stretching, ballistic stretching, or PNF stretching. So, all of those forms of stretching will improve limb range of motion. This is essential to point out and I want to emphasize this. Static stretching, however, gave the greatest degree of gains in limb range of motion. And on average, they saw a 20.9% increase, but some of the other increases they observed were also quite substantial. So, ballistic stretching can also provide some pretty impressive limb range of motion improvements. However, they tended to be in the range of, here they point out, 11.65% increase, or in the case of PNF, a 15% increase. So, it appears that the greatest improvements in limb range of motion for your time spent and effort spent is going to be this minimum of five minutes per week to elicit a significant response with five days being the minimum weekly recommended frequency to achieve significant range of motion improvements. I confess, this was pretty surprising to me when I compare flexibility training to, say, resistance training for strength and hypertrophy. I've had the experience, and I know that other people have had the experience, and I think Dr. Andy Galpin would probably agree that provided one trains hard enough and appropriately that you don't need to train resistance training five days a week in order to get significant improvements in strength and hypertrophy. Some people might need to, but you can get a lot of positive results in those variables with less frequent training, certainly with three or four days a week of training. And for cardiovascular training, I'm not aware of anyone having tested whether or not one very long run each week can actually increase cardiovascular fitness and you're not doing anything else. Although, I have to imagine you'd probably see some improvement compared to not doing anything, but most people are doing repeated training sessions of cardiovascular strength training. Not a lot of people are doing five days a week of strength training, at least that I'm aware of. Some people are, but most people I think are not. And some people are doing five or more days a week of cardiovascular training. I'm guessing that most people are not doing five days a week of dedicated static stretch range of motion directed training, but it does appear that that frequency about the week getting those repeated sessions, even if they are short for an individual muscle group, turns out to be important. And so, that points to perhaps the reason why so few people are doing dedicated range of motion work, but it also reminds me that all of the studies that were described at least in this review and some of the other ones that were not really show impressive changes in limb range of motion. I mean, 20+%, or even 15% with PNF, I mean, these are big changes that are going to benefit us, they're going to offset the age-related losses in flexibility, for sure, if one is dedicated about these practices. And in many cases, they're going to increase limb range of motion in ways that are going to allow us better performance in certain physical endeavors, certainly better balance. All right, we haven't really talked about balance and stability, but range of motion can impair balance and stability in some extreme circumstances, but by and large, limb range of motion, lack of tightness, improved posture, improved physical performance, excuse me. And things of that sort is something that I think we can all benefit from, and that are key features of longevity. We don't often think of them because we so prioritize cardiovascular health and the relationship between the heart and brain health, and resistance training, and musculoskeletal hypertrophy, or strength, et cetera. But as I delved into this literature, it really highlighted for me the extent to which having really good limb range of motion, at least maintaining limb range of motion as we age from year to year, and maybe even improving limb range of motion can be immensely beneficial for reducing pain for, again, improving posture, improving our ability to perform, to walk, et cetera. And indeed, there's a whole literature that relates our limb range of motion to things like pain management of things related to headache and so on and so forth. So, limb range of motion is not just about becoming a contortionist or being able to complete the yoga class, it really is about maintaining the integrity and the health of the neuromuscular system, the connective tissue, and the neuromuscular connective network because those are indeed working as an ecosystem and a network. I'd like to just briefly touch on PNF stretching for a moment. Again, this is a vast landscape with many parameters and different practitioners, a lot of competing opinions out there, to put it lightly. Nonetheless, I do want to emphasize that the PNF training leverages those spindle mechanisms and GTO mechanisms that we talked about earlier, but I realize that in describing the quadricep contraction, hamstring stretch little mini-experiment that hopefully you did, that I didn't really highlight the role of the GTOs, the Golgi tendon organs that much. And I just would like to just briefly do that for a moment. The GTOs have multiple functions. In fact, I think even though GTOs are in every medical textbook, every physiology textbook, every first year neuroscientist learns about them when learning about the neuromuscular junctions and the mechanisms of interoception, et cetera, they're likely to have other functions as well. And one of the reasons why PNF stretching does work, whether or not you're doing that by using a strap to pull back a limb, or whether or not you're actively contracting your quadriceps to then release and emphasize stretch range of motion for your hamstrings and related muscle groups is that activation of those GTOs, meaning putting loads and tension into that system can inhibit the spindles in the opposite antagonistic muscle groups. Okay, so one of the reasons why flexing, or I should say contracting your quadriceps really intensely for some period of time allows your hamstrings to subsequently experience greater range of motion. And again, it's not just the hamstrings, but the related connective tissue and neural circuits, et cetera is because yes, it's quote-unquote relaxing the hamstrings and the spindle, but there's also a direct relationship between activation of the GTOs in the quadricep and release of the spindles in the hamstring and related muscles. This has a name, it's called autogenic inhibition, it's a fancy name for contraction of one muscle group providing a relaxation of the other muscle group that's antagonistic to it. And it relates back to this idea of interleaving sets in the gym. So, if you think back to that example, now it should make sense as to why, for instance, if you do, let's say, a set of bench presses or shoulder presses, and you let's say you get 10 repetitions and you fail on the 11th, that muscle is very, very fatigued. If you were to rest some period of time and then go back and do another set, well, during the rest, that muscle group has been relaxing, it's obviously not contracting the same way it was during the resistance set, but by going and doing a pulling exercise that involves the antagonistic muscle group, so strongly contracting the back muscles through a pull like a pull-down, or a chin-up, or a row-type exercise, you're activating or near activating the GTO system in those pulling muscles in a way that provides autogenic inhibition for the pushing muscles. Now, again, the physios out there are probably either screaming or banging their heads against whatever sound system this happens to be arriving through to them saying, "Wait, but in many cases, the GTOs aren't activated enough to provide that autogenic inhibition." That's true, but even the sub-threshold activation of those intraspinal circuits, so the place where the GTO circuit and the spindle circuit interact, can provide an additional replenishment of, say, the pushing muscles while you're activating those pulling muscles. And this is at least one, not the only, but at least one mechanism by which interleaving push and pull, push and pull for both strength and hypertrophy training, but also for range of motion stretching-type training can allow you to achieve better results in a shorter period of time. And I raise this because I want to keep in mind the efficiency of any training program. We just a moment ago established that doing, for example, three sets of 30 second static holds can be very useful for the hamstrings with let's just say for sake of simplicity and practicality a minute's rest in between. But during that minute's rest, you can stretch the opposite antagonistic muscle group, such as the quadriceps, or if you want to use PNF training, you could do loading of the quadriceps in between. So, there are a number of different ways in which you can start to interleave static stretching with PNF stretching, you can start to interleave even PNF-type protocols with resistance training, although that gets a bit more complicated. You can really start to construct and build protocols that are ideal for you. What we will do is for an upcoming Neural Network Newsletter. So, for those of you that aren't familiar, the Huberman Lab Podcast has a so-called Neural Network Newsletter, these are monthly newsletters where we put distilled points from the podcast and oftentimes protocols in a downloadable PDF form. You can access it by giving us your email, we don't share your email with anybody. If you want to see examples of these, you can go to hubermanlab.com and go to the menu and see Newsletter, you don't have to sign up for anything to see examples of what these are like. I'll provide a couple of different protocols, one that is pure static stretching, one that involves PNF-type stretching, and I'll also put down a protocol that involves the antagonistic interleaved muscle training of the sort that I've been describing a few times throughout this episode. And then, you can try and apply those either separately or maybe combine them in some way that's useful for your goals. There are a couple of key elements that are essential for building a safe and effective range of motion increasing program that arrived to us both through the peer-reviewed research and, admittedly, from people that have been involved in teaching and training range of motion for a very long period of time. Some of you may be familiar with the so-called Anderson method, it's been around for a long time. Actually have never met Anderson, I don't, I should know this, I don't even know if he's still alive, I hope he's still alive, but in any event, there are a lot of different features to the Anderson and other protocols. But one of the aspects of the Anderson protocol that I think is highly relevant. In fact, I know is relevant to the peer-reviewed research that we're going to talk about in a few moments is this notion of pushing through pain, and how active or how passive to be about static stretching. Now, this is somewhat subjective. Right, if you think about getting into a stretch, again, we'll just use the hamstrings for example. So, you're either reaching for your toes while seated, or maybe you're using a strap and you're raising your foot overhead while lying down, or maybe you're doing a toe touch-type exercise. How far should you reach? Where is the end range of motion? Should you balance? Should you not balance? We're going to talk a little bit more about that in a moment, but Anderson has an interesting idea and principle, which has thread through a lot of his teachings that I think are very much in keeping with the study that I'm about to describe next, where he emphasizes to yes, to stretch to the end of the range of motion, but not to focus so much on where that range of motion happens to be that day. So, for instance, not thinking, "Oh, I can always touch my toes, for instance. And therefore that's the starting place for my flexibility training today." But rather to take the entirety of your system into account each day and understand that, okay, provided your warmed up appropriately, that you're now going to stretch your hamstrings, for instance, and you're going to reach down for your toes, but that your range of motion might be adjusted that day by way of tension and stress, or by way of ambient temperature in the room. And to basically define the end range of motion as the place where you can feel the stretch in the relevant muscle groups. I think this is important because unlike resistance training or cardiovascular training, where we can measure distance traveled over time in the case of cardiovascular training, or how much weight is on the bar, and count repetitions, et cetera. With range of motion training, of course, range of motion is the feature that we're interested in, but there is likely to be a lot of variation from day-to-day based on a number of different internal and external factors. And so, the Anderson method is really about getting into static and other forms of stretching. I think today we've mainly been focusing on static stretching and holding the end range of motion, but really paying attention to the feel of the stretch and the muscles involved. And there are parallels in resistance and cardiovascular training too I realize, right? In the case of trying to build hypertrophy, or I should say improve hypertrophy, muscle size, oftentimes the best advice that one can give is to don't try to lift weights, but rather to challenge muscles. Now, of course, you need to provide adequate loads in order to get hypertrophy, but when you're training purely for strength, it's about moving weights. When you're training purely for hypertrophy or mainly for hypertrophy, it's really about challenging muscles using weights or other forms of resistance. And similarly, and in keeping with this Anderson method, when trying to build limb range of motion, doing static stretching at a place where it's difficult, but that you can experience the stretch of the muscle cognitively, consciously being able to focus on the muscles and their stretch is at least as useful as is evaluating the current range of motion you're able to achieve. So, what does this mean? This means feel the muscles as you stretch them, don't just go through the motions. And this means don't get so attached to being able to always achieve, for instance, a stretch of a given distance within a given session. You might actually find that by just finding the place where you can't get much further and holding the static stretch there, that on the second and third set that you happen to be doing that day, that your range of motion will be increased considerably. Maybe not, but very likely yes, you will. And, of course, evaluating range of motion over time is the key parameter because that's the goal of all this type of work. Now, along these lines, there is this variable that we've mentioned a few times of passive versus active stretching, and there's this even more nebulous variable, this even more kind of subjective thing of how much effort to put into it? Should you push into the stretch? Would you even want to balance a tiny bit? Would you want to reach into that end point and try and extend it within a given set and session? And for that reason, I was excited to find this paper entitled A Comparison of Two Stretching Modalities on Lower-Limb Range of Motion Measurements in Recreational Dancers. Happens to be done in recreational dancers, it's a six-week intervention program that compared low-intensity stretching, which they call Microstretching. They used a capital M, so I don't know if that means that it's proprietary, although I didn't see evidence of a conflict of interest, but they call it Microstretching. But to be very clear, Microstretching in the case of this manuscript is low-intensity stretching. And they compared that with moderate intensity static stretching on an active and passive ranges of motion. Okay, so there are a lot of different variables are here, but I'll just highlight a few of the things that are really most relevant to us, and I'll give you the take away at the outset and then return to it at the end so that if I lose any of your attention in the next couple of minutes, at least you have that key take away. Basically, what they found was that a six-week training program using very low-intensity stretching had a greater positive effect on lower limb range of motion than did moderate-intensity static stretching. I find that incredibly interesting, so very low intensity, and we'll define what that means in a moment. Here, I'm quoting them, "The most interesting aspect of the study was the greater increase in active range of motion compared to passive range of motion by the Microstretching group." So, this relates to what we were just talking about a few moments ago as it relates to the Anderson method, which is that very low-intensity stretching, meaning effort that feels not painful and in fact might even feel easy or at least not straining to exceed a given range of motion turns out to not just be as effective, but more effective than moderate-intensity stretching. So, what is low-intensity static stretching? Well, they define this as the stretches were completed at an intensity of 30-40% where 100% equals the point of pain, right? So, 30-40% in these individuals, and again, I'm paraphrasing, induced a relaxed state within the individual and the specific muscle. And here they were holding these static stretches I should mention for one minute, not 30 seconds. Now, the control group was doing the exact same overall protocol, so daily stretching for six weeks, the same exercises, holding each set for 60 seconds, but were using an intensity of stretch of 80% where, again, 100 represents the point of pain or the point where the person would want to stop stretching. I find these data incredibly interesting for, I think, what ought to be obvious reasons. If you're going to embark on a flexibility and stretching training program, you don't need to push to the point of pain. In fact, it seems that even just approaching the point of pain is going to be less effective than operating at this 30-40% of intensity prior to reaching that pain threshold. The pain threshold being 100%. Now, of course, this is pretty subjective, but I think all of us should be able to register within ourselves, so whether a given range of motion or extending a given range of motion brings us to that threshold of pain or near pain. And according to this study at least, operating or performing stretching at an intensity that's quite low, that's very relaxing turns out to be more beneficial in increasing range of motion than is doing exercises aimed at increasing range of motion at a higher intensity. Okay, so lower intensity stretching, I should say lower intensity static stretching appears to be the most beneficial way to approach stretching. And I think that's a relief probably to many of us because it also suggests that the injury risk is going to be lower than if one were pushing into the pain zone, so to speak. The authors offer a number of different explanations as to why this approach, this Microstretching approach, might be more effective. Here, I'm paraphrasing from their discussion where they mentioned that it could be hypothesized that they had improved reciprocal inhibition within the hamstring muscle group. So, this gets right back to the sorts of neural mechanisms that we talked about before, that somehow by doing this low-intensity stretching that they were able to access some of those spindle and GTO-type mechanisms that we were referring to earlier, and the inhibition of hamstring and quadricep stretches. They also offer a number of different ideas about how this could shift the activation of the so-called sympathetic, remember the kind of stress division of our nervous system, and to reduce that relative to activation of the parasympathetic arm of the nervous system. I confess, they have a couple of arguments around sympathetic, parasympathetic that are somewhat convoluted. I will just in fairness to the neuroscience on those systems, I wouldn't suggest putting too much weight on their arguments about sympathetic and parasympathetic. To my mind, they didn't really hold much water, but here I'm not trying to be disparaging of the overall work, which I think is really quite sound, which is that low intensity, so called Microstretching, is going to be the most effective way to increase limb range of movement over time. I want to just briefly return to this idea of whether or not to do ballistic or static stretching before some sort of skill training, or weight training, or any kind of sport, or even cardiovascular exercise like running. Again, the data are really split out there. There are even folks who suggest that doing any kind of stretching prior to running is going to lower running efficiency, it's going to require essentially more work and more oxygen uptake at a given speed for a variety of reasons, and runners and that community argue about this endlessly. There are papers in both sides, in both directions, I'm sure I'll hear about some of this in the comments. I'm not really going to take a stance on this as a consequence because the data are all over the place. However, I think there's a general logic that we can apply, and here I'm borrowing from some conversations and some information put out there by Dr. Andy Galpin, who I think is, of course, both an expert and thinks about these things in a really sound and flexible way, no pun intended. There are instances, for example, where an individual might want to do some static stretching to increase limb range of motion prior to doing weight training even if it's going to inhibit that person's ability to lift as much weight. Why would you want to do that? Well, for instance, if somebody has a tightness or a limitation in their neuromuscular connective tissue system someplace in their body and system that prevents them from using proper form, that they can overcome by doing some static stretching. Well, that would be a great idea as Dr. Galpin points out. Or for instance, if proper stability within the movement requires increasing limb range of motion in some way, well then compromising the use of greater loads could be greatly offset by doing some static stretching to improve, say, hamstring flexibility or another muscle group flexibility. So, we can't always think about just what's going to allow us or inhibit us from using the maximal amount of weight or from running as far as we want to run as fast as we want to run. There are instances where people are trying to overcome injuries where they're trying to come back from a repetitive surgery or something of that sort, coming back from a layoff where some additional static stretching prior to cardiovascular, or weight training, or skill training, or sport of some kind is going to be useful because it's going to put us in a position of greater safety and confidence and performance overall, even if it's adjusting down our speed or the total amount of loads that we use. So, it's you that needs to consider whether or not for you and within a given training session you want to do static training, I should say static stretching range of motion training prior to or after that training session. And similarly, there are a lot of data pointing to the fact that doing some dynamic or even ballistic stretching prior to skill training, or cardiovascular, or weight training can be beneficial in part to warm-up the relevant neural circuits, joints, and connective tissue, and muscles, and as well to perhaps improve range of motion or ability to perform those movements more accurately, with more stability, and therefore with more confidence. And while Dr. Andy Galpin would never name any protocol after himself, he's far too humble to do that, I've named a couple of protocols after him, particularly the Galpin equation for hydration, because he was willing to stick his neck out there and put down some specific numbers that people could follow in order to ensure proper hydration during training, you can look up the Galpin equation elsewhere. You can just Google it or look elsewhere and find it. And Dr. Galpin has also been very thoughtful and generous, and I think very accurate in offering a kind of a general organizational logic for how to think about the goals of a particular training session, and thereby to decide whether or not you're going to do ballistic, or static stretching, and so on and so forth. So, we can refer to this general approach as Galpinian. Galpinian, is that right? Galpin-ian logic, Galpinian logic. Thus far, we've been talking about stretching for sake of increasing limb flexibility and range of motion, but there are other reasons perhaps to embark on a stretching protocol that include both our ability to relax and access deep relaxation quickly, as well as even to reduce inflammation and perhaps even combat certain forms of cancer. And if that sounds really far-fetched, I want to emphasize that the study I'm about to share with you in a moment was actually carried out by one of the directors of a division of the National Institutes of Health. And this was the work of Helene Langevin, who's a medical doctor, has done really important work on the mechanisms underlying things like acupuncture and has approached all that from a very mechanistic viewpoint. Right, so not looking just at the effects of acupuncture, but really trying to understand what sorts of cytokines, inflammatory molecules, and pathways are activated? What sorts of neural mechanisms get engaged by things like acupuncture that impinges on the fascial tissues and so forth? And Dr. Langevin is currently Director of the National Institutes of Complementary Health and Medicine at the National Institutes of Health. So, this is a major division supported by tax dollars that support systematic mechanistic exploration of things like respiration, meditation, yoga, acupuncture. So, this is serious science applied to protocols and approaches that have been used for some period of time, but really aimed at trying to understand what would the best protocols be to evolve new protocols? So, there's a really interesting study done in animal models, but I think it's a powerful enough result that I think we all should pay attention to it. The title of this paper, and, again, the last author is Dr. Langevin herself, is Stretching Reduces Tumor Growth in a Mouse Breast Cancer Model. And yes, you can get mice to stretch, it turns out that if you gently lift up mice by their tail and they'll hold onto their cage, there's a way in which you can mechanically stretch them in a way that doesn't harm them. First, I should mention that Dr. Langevin and others have shown that just a brief whole body stretch of that sort induces an increase in activation of the parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, again, not arm, limb arm, but the aspect of the autonomic nervous system that creates a whole body, whole nervous system shift toward more relaxation. So, yes, indeed stretching induces relaxation at a systemic level, not just at a local level. And I think that's important, probably not surprising to those of you that use stretching regularly, but yes, it does indeed relax us. Yes, you can do this in mice and see that in mice as well. Here's what they did for this current study, or I should say this was a study published in 2018 in Scientific Reports. They write, "Recent studies have shown that gentle daily stretching for 10 minutes can reduce local connective tissue inflammation and fibrosis." Now, that's local tissue inflammation and fibrosis as well we now know as systemic inflammation and can induce relaxation systemically. In this case, they focused on mice, not humans. And mice were randomized to a stretch versus no stretch condition and were treated for 10 minutes once a day for four weeks. So, it's 10 minutes of this passive whole body stretching a day for four weeks. What's remarkable, I mean, just I have to say is just striking is that tumor volume in these mice, they were able to induce tumors in these mice and the tumor volume at the end point was 52% smaller in the stretch group compared to the no stretch group. This is a highly significant effect, and they point out in the absence of any other treatment. And they explored whether or not cytotoxic immune responses were activated and a number of other features. They weren't able to get too deeply into the underlying mechanisms, but this is pretty remarkable. Even three weeks into stretching protocol, this daily stretching protocol for these mice tumor volume was reduced, I mean, by it's almost halved, this is pretty incredible. So, they have these measures of tumor volume and the only difference in the way these animals were treated and handled was the introduction of this daily stretch. I find this result to be, of course, limited in to the extent that it's done in an animal model, not in humans, we have to point it out, but as they point out in their discussion, "Our results demonstrate a 52% reduction in mammary tumor growth over one month in mice undergoing stretching for 10 minutes a day without any other form of therapy." Do they think that stretching itself is changing the tumor size? No, in fact they raise the possibility that stretching because of its impact on the fascia might even create micro environments that are more permissive for tumor growth in certain instances, so they're careful to emphasize what I also believe to be the case, which is that it's unlikely that the stretching itself was directly acting to reduce tumor size, but rather that there's this possible link between inflammation and immune exhaustion mechanisms that if you can periodically relax a nervous system, here through stretching, that it can affect certain pathways related to the immune system that would allow the immune system to combat tumor growth to a significant degree. So, again, even though this is a study in mice, it argues that relaxation induced by stretching can have a powerful influence on mammary tumor growth. Again, a huge effect carried out by one of the premier labs and individuals who do this sort of work and think about this sort of thing. And, of course, I want to point out it wasn't just Dr. Langevin that did this study, there are a number of co-authors on the study we will provide a link to the co-authors, excuse me, we will provide a link to the study so that you can peruse it in more detail if you like. Now, as a related and somewhat final point, I'd like to return to this idea and this place, this real estate within our brain that we call the insular cortex, the insula. As you recall, way back at the beginning of this episode, we were talking about the von Economo neurons, that Constantin von Economo the Austrian scientist discovered. And the fact that we are able to make and perform interpretations of our internal landscape pain, our dedication to a practice, for instance, whether or not we are in pain because it's a practice that we are doing intentionally and want to improve ourselves, or whether or not it's pain that's arriving through some externally imposed demands or situations. Well, the insula is handling all that. And fortunately, there's a wonderful paper that was published, it was a few years ago now in the journal Cerebral Cortex, which is a fine journal. This is the year 2014 entitled Insular Cortex Mediates Increased Pain Tolerance in Yoga Practitioners. I'll tell you why I like this study. I'm personally not a practitioner of yoga, I've taken a few yoga classes over the years, I've done some of the hot yoga classes. Those rooms can get really, really warm, I confess, and I've done the kind of standard yoga every now and again. It's not something that I've kept up regularly. This study explored the effects on brain structure volume in yoga practitioners. And for those of you out there that are aficionados in yoga, they pulled subjects from having backgrounds in the... Here, I'm probably going to mispronounce these different things, and forgive me, the Vinysasa yogas, the Ashtanga yogas, the Iyengar yogas, the Sivananda yogas. Okay, so some people were new to these practices, some were experienced. That the important take aways were that they took these yoga practitioners and they didn't explore their brain structure in the context of yoga itself, they looked at things like pain tolerance. So, they used thermal stimulation, basically they put people into conditions where they gave them very hot or very cold stimuli and compared those yoga practitioners of varying levels of yoga experience to those that had no experience with yoga, so-called controls. And they found some really interesting things, there are a lot of data in this paper, but here's something I'd like to highlight. The pain tolerance of yoga practitioners was double or more to that of non-yoga practitioners, even for those that weren't doing this so-called hot yoga. Right, they also found that pain tolerance was significantly greater, both for heat pain and for cold pain. They also found significant increases in insula, again, the insula, this brain region, gray matter volume. Typically, when we talk about gray matter, we're talking about the so-called cell bodies, the location in neurons where the genome is housed and where the kind of all the housekeeping stuff is there. And then white matter volume tends to be the axons, the wires because they're ensheathed with this stuff that appears white in MRIs, and indeed is white under the microscope, and indeed is white, it's actually lipid, which is myelin. So, increased gray matter volume of the insula is a significant finding because what it suggests is that people that are doing yoga have an increased volume of these areas of the brain that are associated with interoceptive awareness and for being able to make judgements about pain and why one is experiencing pain, not just to lean away from pain, but to utilize or leverage or even overcome pain. So, there are many studies of yoga and meditation out there, few that have as much mechanistic detail as this one. And in fact, there's a beautiful figure, Figure 3 in this paper that shows that the gray matter volume of this particular brain region scales in a almost linear way with the duration of yoga practice that somebody has been taking on in years. So, people that had, well, hey had a few subjects that have up to 15 or 16 years of yoga practice had much larger left insula gray matter volume, bigger brain areas associated with these abilities. And I find this interesting because there are a lot of activities out there that don't create these kind of changes in brain volume, especially within the insula. So, it appears that it's not just the performance of the yogic movements, but the overcoming or the kind of pushing into the end ranges of motion and to push through discomfort to some extent, of course, we want people doing that in a healthy, safe way, but that allows yoga practitioners to build up the structure and function of these brain areas that allow them to cope with pain better than other individuals, and to cope with other kinds of interoceptive challenges, if you will, not just pain but cold, not just pain but discomfort of being in a particular position to do that. And again, we wouldn't want people placing themselves into a compromised position literally that would harm them, especially given that earlier we heard that Microstretching of the kind of non-painful sort low-intensity sort is actually going to be more effective for increasing end range of motion. But this study really emphasizes the extent to which practitioners of yoga don't just learn movements, they learn how to control their nervous system in ways that really reshapes their relationship to pain, to flexibility, and to the kinds of things that the neuromuscular system was designed to do. And as a final point, there's a beautiful graph in this paper, beautiful I think because it explores some of the more subjective dimensions of yoga and insula function, which is a here I'll read it out in the nerdy form and then I'll explain what it means, "This is a frequency histogram of categories of mental strategies used by yogis versus controls during the cold pain tolerance task." What they're describing here and showing is quantitatively how people are conceptualizing cold pain in order to get through it. And the different categories are, for instance, distraction, right? Some people just choose to distract themselves from pain or to attempt to, other people will try to ignore it, it's a lot like distraction, but nonetheless, to engage in a negative emotion, sort of like, "[growls] like I'm going to dig, I'm going to be in resistance to this." Control subjects tended to use those approaches, whereas practitioners of yoga tended to use other sorts of subjective approaches like positive imagery to some extent, the ability to relax despite the extreme cold, the ability to quote-unquote accept like, "This is just happening," despite the extreme cold, to observe, to third person themselves. And the greatest effect, of course, was to breathe, to focus on their respiration as a way to deal with this challenge, this cold challenge. Now, all of that are subjective data, but I want to remind you that the practitioners of yoga are not just using entirely different mental strategies, but they are far more effective at dealing with pain, their pain tolerance is much higher as evidenced by the other data in the previous graphs in the paper. So, while this podcast episode is most certainly not about yoga per se, it's about flexibility and stretching, flexibility and stretching are elements within yogic practices. And, of course, yogic practices involve breathing and mental work, and a lot of other things balance, et cetera. It's a vast landscape as as many of you know. But I think that if ever there was a manuscript that pointed to the utility of something like yoga for sake of tapping into a particular set of brain circuits and mechanisms that could wick out into multiple dimensions of life, so day-to-day life, stress, challenges in dealing with all sorts of external stressors, career-related, family-related, relationally, et cetera, et cetera, excuse me, but as well for increasing range of motion for increasing flexibility. So, if ever there was a practice that one could embark on that would not only increase flexibility and limb range of motion, but would also allow one to cultivate some improved mental functioning as it relates to pain tolerance and other features of stress management that no doubt wick out into other areas of life, appears that yoga is a quite useful practice. And so, for those of you that are interested in increasing limb range of motion and you're already a practitioner of yoga, great. I can imagine that someday there'll be another study like this one and you'll be in that 10 or 15-16 year practitioner graph. You'll be that dot way out on the far end of the graph that shows that your insula is that much bigger than the rest of ours, and therefore your internal awareness, and pain thresholds, and stress management will be that much better, but of course, yoga isn't the only way to increase limb range of motion and flexibility. Up until now, we've described a number of different ways to do that and we've arrived at some general themes and protocols. Again, those themes and protocols will be distilled into some specific and precise list in our Neural Network Newsletter, but we can revisit a couple of them now just in summary and synthesis. Static stretching appears to be at least among the more useful forms of stretching. So, low or zero momentum stretching typically at end range of motion. I love this concept of Microstretching, even though it's just a couple of studies that have addressed whether or not high-intensity or low-intensity static stretch holds are more beneficial. The idea and indeed the data that low-intensity, so 30-40% of what would one would consider painful appears to be more effective than 80% of that threshold. I find that incredibly interesting. And then, there's this idea of frequency, it really does appear that getting at least five minutes per week total of stretching for a given muscle group is important for creating meaningful, lasting changes in limb range of motion. And that is best achieved by five day a week, or six day a week, or even seven day a week protocols, but those can be very short protocols limited to, say, three sets of 30, maybe in 45 or 60 seconds of static hold. Although, 30 seconds seems to be a key threshold there that can get you maximum benefit. There is no need to do full 60-second holds unless you're doing fewer total sessions per week. And, of course, to always warm-up or to arrive at the stretching session warm. And then, of course, there are the other forms of stretching that we touched upon a bit, things like PNF. And we talked about why PNF works, things like the spindle and the Golgi tendon organ reflexes that are built into all of us that we arrive in this world with. And of course, the other forms of stretching that are known to be effective and important, such as dynamic and ballistic stretching. Again, stretching protocols that involve a lot of momentum in order to improve range of motion for performance of particular types of work that one is about to embark on. Typically, that would be physical work, but a whole interesting and unexplored landscape is the extent to which changing limb range of motion and different types of body movement actually shape our cognitive abilities, and that will be the topic of a future episode of this podcast. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Spotify and Apple. And at both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have feedback such as comments about the content of this or other episodes, or you have suggestions about topics that you'd like us to explore on the Huberman Lab Podcast or guests that you would like me to interview, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. That's the best place for us to find them, we do read them all, and we do take them into consideration when building out future programming. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. Not so much on today's episode, but in many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people deriv tremendous benefit from them for things like improving the transition time and depth of sleep, or for improving focus, or for a variety of other things including things like anxiety management. For that reason, the Huberman Lab Podcast has decided to partner with Momentous Supplements. First of all, Momentous Supplements are of the very highest quality, they're used at various professional sports teams and they have contracts with various government organizations exploring the role of particular supplements in human performance. Second of all, they ship internationally because we know a number of you are outside the country of the United States, we hope that will be useful to you. As well, we wanted to have a single location where people could go to access the most often discussed supplements here on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So, while the full catalog of those supplements isn't quite available yet, many of them are available, you can find them by going to livemomentous.com/huberman. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman to find supplements for sleep, for recovery from exercise, for focus, and many other features that impact mental health, physical health, and performance. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. At both places, I describe science and science-related tools that relate to some of the themes covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast. But oftentimes I'll do posts that include information and tools not detailed here on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We also have a newsletter, I've mentioned this a few times during today's episode, it is the Neural Network Newsletter. You can access that newsletter completely zero of cost by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and sign up for our newsletter. You supply your email, we do not share your email with anybody else, we have a very clear privacy policy that you can find there. If you want to see examples of previous newsletters, you can find them there without having to sign up. Again, that Neural Network Newsletter comes out about once a month and we use it to distill out essential protocols from the podcast, to synthesize information from the podcast. We do believe many people find them useful, so sign up for the Neural Network Newsletter if you're interested. So, thank you once again for joining me today for a discussion about the neural, and neuromuscular, and connective tissue, and skeletal aspects of flexibility and stretching. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 272 ---
Video ID: IOl28gj_RXw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IOl28gj_RXw
Title: Dr. Paul Conti: Therapy, Treating Trauma & Other Life Challenges | Huberman Lab Podcast #75
Published: 2022-06-06 12:00:08 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Paul Conti, M.D., a psychiatrist and expert in treating trauma, personality disorders and psychiatric illnesses and challenges of various kinds. Dr. Conti earned his MD at Stanford and did his residency at Harvard Medical School. He now runs the Pacific Premiere Group—a clinical practice helping people heal and grow from trauma and other life challenges. We discuss trauma: what it is and its far-reaching effects on the mind and body, as well as the best treatment approaches for trauma. We also explore how to choose a therapist and how to get the most out of therapy, as well as how to do self-directed therapy. We discuss the positive and negative effects of antidepressants, ADHD medications, alcohol, cannabis, and the therapeutic potential of psychedelics (e.g., psilocybin and LSD), ketamine and MDMA. This episode is must listen for anyone seeking or already doing therapy, processing trauma, and/or considering psychoactive medication. Both patients and practitioners ought to benefit from the information.

#HubermanLab #Trauma #Therapy

Thank you to our sponsors
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Blinkist: https://www.blinkist.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Dr. Paul Conti Links
Website: https://www.drpaulconti.com 
Pacific Premier Group, PC: https://www.pacificpremiergroup.com 
Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It: https://amzlink.to/az01KBLaUX3m6

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Paul Conti, Trauma & Recovery 
00:02:30 ROKA, InsideTracker, Blinkist 
00:07:00 Defining Trauma 
00:14:05 Guilt & Shame, Origins of Negative Emotions
00:21:38 Repeating Trauma, the Repetition Compulsion 
00:28:23 How to Deal with Trauma & Negative Emotions/Arousal 
00:37:17 Processing Trauma, Do You Always Need a Therapist?
00:45:30 Internal Self-talk, Punishing Narratives & Negative Fantasies 
00:51:10 Short-Term Coping Mechanisms vs. Long-Term Change
00:53:22 Tools: Processing Trauma on Your Own, Journaling 
00:57:00 Sublimination of Traumatic Experiences 
01:02:34 Tool: Finding a Good Therapist 
01:07:20 Optimizing the Therapy Process, Frequency, Intensity  
01:14:51 Tool: Self-Awareness of Therapy Needs, Mismatch of Needs
01:16:35 Self-talk & Journaling, Talking to Trusted Individuals 
01:19:00 Prescription Drugs & Treating Trauma, Antidepressants, Treating Core Issues  
01:28:35 Short-term vs. Long-Term Use of Prescription Drugs, Antidepressants
01:32:18 Attention Deficient Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) & Prescription Drugs 
01:37:31 Negative Effects of ADHD Prescription Drugs 
01:40:37 Alcohol, Cannabis – Positive & Negative Effects
01:44:53 Psychedelics: Psylocibin & LSD, Therapeutic Uses, Trauma Recovery    
01:54:32 Sentience, Language, Animals  
01:55:48 Psychedelic Hallucinations, Trauma Recovery 
02:00:01 MDMA (Therapeutic Uses)
02:04:47 Clinical Aspects of MDMA
02:07:28 Language, Processing Trauma, Social Media, Societal Divisions  
02:15:09 Defining “Taking Care of Oneself” 
02:21:13 Dr. Conti, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [upbeat rock music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Paul Conti. Dr. Conti is a psychiatrist who did his training at Stanford School of Medicine, and then went on to be chief resident at Harvard Medical School. He now runs the Pacific Premier Group, which is a collection of psychiatrists and therapists focusing on solving complex human problems, including trauma, addiction, personality, and psychiatric disorders. Today, we discuss trauma in detail and the therapeutic process in detail. For instance, we discuss what is trauma? How do you know if you have trauma? Dr. Conti shares with us, for instance, that not every experience that we think is traumatic is necessarily traumatic and yet many people might have trauma without even realizing it. We also talk about the therapeutic process generally, for instance, how to pick a therapist, how to best approach and go through therapy and how to evaluate whether or not therapy and your relationship to the therapist is working or not. We also talk about self therapies because we acknowledge that not everyone has access to or can afford therapy. And we talk about drug therapies, for instance, antidepressants, antipsychotics. We talk about alcohol, cannabis, ketamine and the psychedelics, including psilocybin, LSD. And we talk about the clinical use of MDMA and what the future of that looks like. The reason for bringing Dr. Conti onto this podcast is because I see him as the person who has the greatest and most holistic view of therapy, trauma, drug therapies, talk therapies, and how self therapy and work with others can be integrated for both healing and growing from difficult circumstances. Dr. Conti is also the author of an exceptional book, entitled "Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic, How trauma works and how we can heal from it." That book describes trauma and its many features and many tools, some of which we discuss on the podcast today. So whether or not you have trauma or not, by the end of today's episode, you will have a much deeper understanding about what trauma is. In fact, I'm confident that you will gain insight into whether or not you have trauma or not, whether or not people close to you have trauma or not and the various paths to recovering and indeed growing from trauma that we can all take. As you'll soon learn Dr. Conti is an exceptional communicator and has a unique window into the trauma and therapeutic process that I know that all of us can benefit from. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford and everything about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses was designed with performance in mind. I spent a lifetime working on the visual system and I can tell you that our visual system has to contend with a lot of different challenges. For instance, when you move from a shady area to a brightly lit area, your eyes in your brain have to adjust in order for you to be able to see clearly. ROKA, eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. So you never notice those transitions. They're very seamless. You always see things with perfect clarity. The other terrific thing about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is they are extremely lightweight. Most of the time, I can't even remember that I'm wearing them. I wear readers at night and I wear sunglasses sometimes in the daytime when it is very brighter or I'm driving and so on. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, go to roka.com, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off on your first order. Again, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by inside tracker. Inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term health can only be measured and assessed with a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, we can also get insight into, for instance, our biological age and see how that compares to our chronological age. And of course, despite what our birthday cake screams back at us, it is our biological age that really matters. If you're going to get blood tests or DNA tests, however, you need to be able to interpret the data. And that's really where inside tracker stands apart. A lot of companies will give you a DNA test or a blood test. They'll send you values of hormones, metabolic markers, etcetera, but you don't know what to do with those data. InsideTrackeris a very easy to use platform. So when you get the numbers back, you can click on any of the numbers that either are in range or out range, too low, too high, etcetera, and it will direct you towards specific behavioral tools, so lifestyle factors, nutritional tools, supplement tools, etcetera, that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are best for you, which is really an exceptional tool that makes all the blood tests and DNA tests really exceptionally powerful. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's inside tracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist. Blinkist is an app that has thousands of non-fiction books condensed down to just 15 minutes each of key takeaways that you can read or listen to, to extract the most important knowledge from those books. I love reading physical books, literally physical hard copies of books. And I like listening to audio books. However, I also like to revisit books that I've read or listened to, and sometimes I just want to get the key points or the key takeaways from a book that I've never read or listened to. Blinkist is terrific for all of that. For instance, when researching our episodes on sleep, one of the books that I read and found very valuable is Matt Walker, professor at UC Berkeley's book, "Why We Sleep," I've read that book, but then I wanted to also make sure that I hit the key takeaways. Blinkist was essential for that. Other books that I've read before and that I own and enjoy, but I listened to the Blinkist version of from time to time are things like Tim Ferris's "The 4-Hour Body" or Tim Ferris's The 4-Hour Chef book, both of which are excellent or Nassim Taleb's "The Black Swan" and there are many other titles as well. Blinkist is also a great way to finally get through many of the books that you've been meaning to read, but haven't had time for. With Blinkist, you get unlimited access to reader or listen to a massive library of condensed non-fiction books. Right now, Blinkist has a special offer just for our Huberman lab podcast audience. If you go to blinkist.com/huberman, you can get a free seven day trial and get 25% off a Blinkist premier membership. That's Blinkist spelled B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T, blinkist.com/huberman to get 25% off and a seven day free trial. And now for my discussion with Dr. Paul Conti. Paul, thank you so much for being here today. - Thank you so much for having me. - I've been looking forward to this and I've received a ton of questions about trauma, about therapy, about how to assess where one is in their own arc of problems and addressing familial issues and relationship issues and so forth. If we could just start off very basic and just get everyone oriented. - Sure. - How should we define trauma? We all have hard experiences. Some of them, we might ruminate on more than others, but what is trauma? - To make the definition relevant, I think we have to look at trauma as not anything negative that happens to us, right? But something that overwhelms our coping skills, then leaves us different as we move forward. So it changes the way that our brains function, right? And then that changes evident in us as we move forward through life. - So how do we know if we have trauma or not? I've heard before everyone has trauma. For instance, I've heard that if we are a child or when we are a child and we request love from a parent or attention from a parent, if they dismiss us that that's a microtrauma, is that overstating or unfair to the real issue of trauma? Do we all have trauma? What are micro traumas? What are macro traumas? - Right, I think traumas that we might categorize as disappointments, right? Or things that are are negative, but not deeply impactful, I think is not a helpful definition, right? I think the helpful definition is something that rises to the magnitude of really changing us and something that we can see both in how we behave. We can see it in mood, anxiety, behavior, sleep, physical health. So we can identify it and we can also see it in brain changes. So the fact that we become, say more hypervigilant, right? More vigilant, and then we can see that different parts of the brain are more active. So that definition, that definition captures how trauma, if it rises to a certain level, like what we would say, trauma that makes a post trauma syndrome, right? Leaves us different, I think is the helpful definition of trauma because it's a clinical definition, right? It's changes in us as people and we can map those changes to identifiable shifts in our brain function. - So how do we know if we've been changed by something? I mean, I can think back to childhood events where some kid on the playground or in the classroom said something, I didn't like, something negative about me. I think most people can do that. We have a great memory for the kid that said something awful, or the parent or teacher that said something awful that really felt like it hurt us or at least stuck with us. So clearly one's brain, my brain in this example has been changed by that event such that I remember it, but how do we know if something has actually changed the way that we are? Because of course we don't know how we would be otherwise. - Right, right. - That's difficult, right. It's doable, but it's difficult because the response, so if the trauma rises to the level of changing our brains and I don't just mean, like we have a new memory, right? So we can have memories of something that was negative, right? And in that sense, it changes the brain because now there's something we can call to mind, but it doesn't change the functioning of the brain, right? If trauma rises to the level of changing the functioning of our brains, then there's almost always a reflex of guilt and shame around the trauma that can lead us and often leads us to bury, right, to avoid it, right? To feel that now there's something negative inside of me and it feels shameful or it feels like no one else would accept it, right? So, what happens is people tend to avoid looking at the change in them, which is exactly the opposite of what needs to be done, right? The idea of in a viral pandemic, right? We want to stay away from one another and isolate, right? But with the trauma epidemic we need, we need to communicate with other people. We need to communicate and put words to what's going on inside of us. And very often a, a person knows, I mean, I've done so much clinical work over about 20 years, that has focused on trauma. And a lot of the times the person knows, right? But they're not admitting to themselves because they're afraid of it, right? They don't know what to do, but if they start talking, then they'll talk about the event or the situation. It could be something acute, or it could be something chronic, that really has been harmful to them, right? And then they feel different afterwards. Like, oh, after that, I started thinking differently, feeling differently, but that doesn't always happen. Sometimes it's a process of exploration through dialogue, right? Whether it's written or whether it's spoken of the person, so of exploring the changes inside of themselves, maybe changes to their self-talk inside, changes to their thoughts about the world and whether they can navigate safely and readily in it. And you know, it anchors as I talk about this, the example I'll use at times is the example of my own life, where, you know, when I was much younger in my early twenties, my younger brother took his life by suicide. And the response of guilt and shame and hiding all of it inside of me was, it's very dramatic, but I wasn't acknowledging it, right? 'Cause I didn't know what to do about it. And I felt guilty and I felt responsible and I felt ashamed. So there was an avoidance inside of me. And then I wasn't saying to myself, hey, before this, like you thought that you could be effective and you could make your way in the world. And you know, if you were a good person and you worked hard, you could make a difference, right? And then afterwards, I thought, I can't get anywhere. The world's against me. And I felt like, oh my, my options are all gone. And you know, I was like 24 years old, right? So, I didn't see that the change was in me, but I was taking care of myself poorly. Like there was enough going on that was unhealthy that I couldn't avoid the realization that like, hey, I'm different now and in these ways that are automatic. My reflex to, can I make my way in the world? Can I have a good life? Can I be happy? My reflex is to that we're all different. And they were coming through the lens of heightened anxiety, heightened vigilance, a sense of guilt, a sense of shame and a sense of non belonging in the world and was ultimately good and helpful people around me and my own realization. And hey, things are not going well, right? That led me to then get some help and to be able to talk about it and realize like, oh my gosh, I need to face these things that are going on inside of me. - From a psychoanalytic psychological, and maybe even a neuroscience perspective, two questions. Why do you think that when we experience trauma, these things that we call guilt and shame surface? Everything you're telling me is that in the end, that's not adaptive. - Hmm. - [Paul] Why would we be built that way? - Right, right. - So that's the first question. And then the second question is, how should we conceptualize guilt and shame? I think that we hear guilt. We hear shame. How should we think about it? I mean, those emotions must exist in us for some reason, but in this case, it seems like they, they don't serve us well. So maybe it that order or in reverse order, what is guilt, really? What is shame really? And why is it that we seem to be reflexively wired to feel guilty and feel ashamed when that's the exact opposite of what we need to do in the case of trauma? - Right, right. No, I think these are great questions. And I don't think anyone knows the answers for sure. But my read of all of that is that there's something adaptive that has happened in us through evolution that now becomes maladaptive in the way we live in the modern world, right? So if you think of through most of human development, people weren't living that long, right? And the idea was to survive and reproduce. So, traumatic things that happened to us, it would make sense for them to stay with us, right? So if you ate a new food and got really, really sick, you better remember that, right? If you see someone from the group of people, a couple miles away, right? And one of those people attacks you, right? It's like, you better remember that. So, the traumatic things that are sort of emblazoned in our brain are built to last, right? Things that are positive will generate some emotion inside of us, but things that are profoundly negative are much more likely to stay with us. And I think that that was adaptive, right? When all of that was about survival, right? And I think the same thing is true with say shame, right? So I think here, it makes sense to talk a little bit and actually I'm interested your thoughts about this, right? That the limbic system, right? So the system often is called the emotion system, right? In our brains has actually of course varying function, right? And one aspect is affect, right? So affect is aroused in us, which I think the meaning then is it's created in us without our choice, right? So if we're walking down the road and someone jumps in front of us or pushes us, right? Then there's a response of fear, anger, right? Heart starts beating faster, more blood to the muscles, we're getting ready to fight, right? Or run, right? And then we become aware of it, right? So, the aroused affect in us is also about survival and it has a very deep impact upon us and shame is an aroused affect. So it can be raised in us without our choice and it's very powerful, which if you think about that is an extremely strong deterrent, right? So if you had, you know, imagine a tribe or a group of people, right? That are sheltered together, and, you know, someone eats half the food at night or something, right? And like there's a very negative response, right? And that person feels shame because shame is so powerful to control behavior, right? So the way that trauma can change our brains and stay with us in a way that says, be more vigilant, look at the world in a different way, act more defensively, right? And how that links to shame and to guilt, and then guilt in, guilt becomes what gets called feeling technically where we relate the aroused affect to ourselves, right? So, shame the aroused affect and guilt, the next step, right? When the shame gets related to self are such profound behavioral interventions and deterrents, right? That you can see, I think how evolutionarily kind of all makes sense if we're fighting for survival and we're an elder statesman if we make it to 20, right? This makes sense. But it doesn't make sense in a world where we live much longer, right? We navigate in all sorts of different ways. And there's so much coming at us that can be traumatizing. I mean, if you think about the news, right? I mean, how many times have I written a prescription for someone that says no more news, right? - You've actually written those prescriptions? - Oh, yes, yes. So glance at the news, look at the news for news, anything going on I need to know, right? But what are people doing is looking at it and they're clicking and they're clicking. And there's a sense of being like enthralled in a very frightening way with the horrors that are in front of us. And it shows how yes, trauma can come through acute things that happen to us. Trauma can come through chronic things, chronic denigration, whether it's based upon socioeconomic status, immigration status, race, religion, sexuality, gender identity, these chronic traumas, right? Of being denigrated by the society around us, or treated as less than can change the brain. But vicarious experiences can too, right? And we know this is not theoretical. We know that the changes in the brain can come from vicarious experiences too, which is why people who are glued to the news and then feeling like, oh my goodness, like what is happening? The mothers in the Ukraine who've lost babies in the war. And like, there are things that are so terrifying that if we spend so much time with that, it has a similar effect. So our brains are built to change from trauma, but not in the way we experience trauma and not in the way that we live life in terms of the nature of living life and the duration of life in the modern world, where these traumas that happen to us are often so bad for us because they change how our brain is functioning. And then our entire orientation to the world is different and that could be for, years and years and decades and decades. It brings so much misery and suffering and at times it brings death. If you think about a hundred thousand overdose deaths in this country in a year, 100,000, I mean where is a, so much of that arising from is a person who's treated addiction very intensively over many years. I think that, well, I feel sure that the majority of addiction that I see and treat arises, ultimately the roots of it are in trauma and are in trying to soothe something that's stuck inside that the person isn't letting outside because of the guilt and shame, but it's running around in their head and tormented by it. And now there's a pool for, for these drugs or sometimes medicines to soothe. So, the opiates that were given after a minor surgery, right? Are like, okay, yeah, they help the pain for the minor surgery, but what they're really helping is the pain inside, right? But that very quickly turns into addiction, danger, risk. And we see that over and over again and not in a theoretical way. Like I see that in people who have been in my practice with addiction, arising from trauma who have subsequently died. So it's sort of, writ large in our existence, in the modern world. - Incredible to me that this is the way it works. What I mean by that is this idea that I've heard about before. I think it was a Freudian concept of a repetition compulsion. - Yes. - That this is what boggles my mind, as I'm hearing this, something happens to us or we observe something traumatic. And instead of acknowledging that and trying to distance from it, there seems to be a reflex of shame and guilt in many cases and stuffing it away and then a repetition of behaviors to continue to try and just stuff it away. - [Paul] Yes. - Like you're trying to pack, I don't know, recently I was packing a home and trying to get a sleeping bag back into the bag. it seems like it's always trying mushroom out the top, this kind of thing. It takes a lot of ongoing effort. And at the same time that if this thing really exists, this repetition compulsion, people will return over and over again to the kinds of scenarios or at least the kinds of emotional states that look just like the trauma. - [Paul] Yes. - Or resemble it in some way. So the question I have for you is, is the repetition compulsion a real thing? And why would we be wired that way? My understanding of this concept of the repetition compulsion is that we all want to solve our traumas. - [Paul] Yes. - And it allows us to put ourselves into micro or again, macro versions of that over and over again. We get to run the experiment again and again. - Right. - In an attempt to solve it. - Right. - In the case of taking a drug that it's clear certain drugs like opioids, it's clear how that would not allow us, to deal with it, right? - [Paul] Yeah. - It's just masking the emotional state. But why is it for instance that somebody who experiences sexual trauma, then places themselves into circumstances of more sexual trauma? Why is it that somebody who is in an abusive relationship goes on to have a second and third or fourth verbally, or physically abusive relationship? Yeah, I mean, on the face of it, you just go, that makes no sense. And yet we see this over and over and over again. - Yes, the first thing I would say about the validity of the repetition compulsion concept, right? Is a strong yes. Like, yes, we see that over and over. It's not necessarily in everyone, but boy, it is in a lot of people who have suffered trauma. And I think there's a very good reason on the face, on the surface of it, it's like, it makes no sense. But then if we think, well, how does the brain, how does our brains actually function, right? We're sort of trained at least in Western society, I think, to think of ourselves as logical creatures, right? That like, oh, we're logical. And ultimately everything in us can just boil down to logic. And if we think about it enough, we're going to understand how to make the right decisions, which is completely not true, right? The limbic system, right? The emotion system so to speak inside of us always Trump's logic, right? If you think about, does it ever make sense to run into a burning building? I mean, logic says no, right? But if someone you love is in the burning building, people run right in, right? Because the limbic system says, yes. So when logic and emotion come head to head, emotion wins all the time. If emotion is powerful enough, it will always win. And so the limbic system is so important and the limbic system does not care about the clock or the calendar, right? And that's the answer. And also, say why to the repetition compulsion. So the limbic system doesn't know like, oh, it's now, it's today. It's may, it's 2022. It just doesn't care at all, right? So how I would relate that to the repetition compulsion is when people are repeating, what they're trying to do is to make things right, right? With the idea that if we can repeat the situation and make it right, it will fix everything, right? Which makes perfect sense if we think, well, where is that concept coming from, right? It's coming from the emotional part of the brain that wants relief from suffering of the trauma and does not understand the clock or the calendar. So if I can solve something now, I will also solve something in the past, right? Which is why I can't tell you how many times I've sat with someone and say, we're starting to do therapy, right? And a person will say, oh gosh, like I know, look, you just can't help me, right? I mean, you know, my last seven relationships have been abusive, right? And I'll say back something sometimes like, well, if you tell me that you've had seven relationships that have been abusive in different ways, I'll agree with you. Like, I only say that, 'cause that's never what someone says, right? But I think what you're going to tell me is you've kind of had the same relationship seven times. It's not seven things, it's one, right? And that's always, I don't think one time yet that has failed to be the case. And that's how, so if you think about it, that's how we start to elucidate what's going on. So they make the light bulb that goes off. Like I have not had seven different abusive relationships. I have had one that I have repeated seven times and now we start getting to what's really going on and what needs to happen, that person needs to face what happened in that original abusive relationship and it always comes down to the same sort of concepts, of the person feeling terrified while the abuse was going on, feeling guilty, feeling ashamed, feeling like, oh, they brought it on themselves. They deserve it. They don't deserve anything better, right? Because the brain is trying to make sense of it, right? Or I thought I could make that okay, but I couldn't, right? And then there's more guilt and more shame. And if that's stuck inside of someone, like that's bundled up inside of someone, like a medical abscess inside a person, a walled off infection inside the body, this is the same concept in the brain, then of course the limb system is going to want to fix that. And it fixes it by trying to let's recreate that situation and make it right this time and that's, I mean, I think that one of the best examples of how the right approach of how like, let's look at that, let's talk about that, right? What's really going on there, wait, who should feel guilty and ashamed is the person who is a abused or the person who is abusing, right? And we can get it what's going on inside the person. And that's what changes that. And then the eighth relationship can be entirely different than the first seven, right? And I see that all the time. I mean, this isn't esoteric or soft. Like I see that play out clinically over and over again. And why do things get better? Because we go to the trauma and we unlock it. It's not hidden inside where it can control things, right? We bring it to the surface and we can take away its power. - I keep hearing in this narrative that so much of our reflexive response to trauma, both emotional and in the repetition compulsion in terms of behaviors is about some very deep attempt to change the past. - Yes. - And in fact, in an offline conversation, I recall you saying something about this, that, the number of behaviors and thoughts and avoidance of behaviors and avoidance of thoughts that human beings put in to trying and change the past. - [Paul] Right. - Is remarkable and eerie and maladaptive, it sounds like. - [Paul] Yes. - And that really stuck with me because I think we all want to feel like we're in control of our future and how we feel in the moment. And to some extent, it works for a brief while. There's this thing that happened and it's just, it evokes some internal arousal and then you have to know what to do with that arousal. And I think for many people, including myself, there's this fundamental question. Okay, the thought about the thing, the event or events, plural, evokes this arousal, this internal states, makes some people feel sleepy and exhausted. Other people feel really anxious. Other people feel angry. I mean that arousal has all these different dimensions as you know, and then there's this question of like what to do with it. - [Paul] Yes. And I'd love to hear a maybe even just a top contour prescriptive of what do I, what does one do? I'll even just put myself in it, what do I do? So I'm feeling upset about something. Should I feel like my options are healthy catharsis. I could tell the story, feel it. I could. I can pack it down. We hear that it's bad to pack it down. But of course one has to be functional in life and deal with things. And we have responsibilities at work and relational responsibilities, etcetera. We need to sleep at night. So catharsis, healthy catharsis, packing it down at the other extreme. Telling the story. And yet I think a lot of people are afraid to tell the story because in that telling there is perhaps a reemergence of the arousal. - Yes. - The arousal can become greater, I mean. - Yes. - Is that what people mean when they say things are going to get worse before they get better? I mean, so I guess, the simple version of this long-winded question is, it's clear we need to confront these things. We can't change the past by, a reflexive response isn't going to do that efficiently. And so how do we deal with arousal? How does one take what they feel inside about something shameful? What do you do with it in a moment? And does that have to be done in the presence of a skilled trained therapist or as I'm driving to work in the morning and something comes up, I can't deal with this right now comes to mind, what do I do? Do I deal with it right then? I know this is a big multidimensional question. - Yes. - But I think it's the one that a lot of people grapple with. We want to deal with things. How do we deal with that internal arousal? - Yeah, yeah. We so often try and change the trauma of the past in order to control the future and what that really adds up to is the trauma of the past dominates our present, right? And it doesn't have to be that way. And remember, we're talking about traumas that rise to the level of changing the brain. So as you're saying, that involves re-experience, it involves hyper vigilance, increased arousal. It changes in mood states, changes in anxiety, changes in sleep, changes in behavior. So these are all changes that in a sense, push towards dominating our present, right? And then we're not really living in the present, right. As we're trying to control the future. We're not going to do a great job of controlling our future if we're not really living in the present, right? And so the way to come at that again in the moment, if we're saying, okay, in the moment, if I need to fall asleep, right? I might say, okay, let me try and put that out of my mind. Let me try and thought redirect. So there's short term strategies that can let us be functional in the context of these changes. But the answer is to go look directly at that thing, right? Look at that trauma, explore that trauma, and sure. That can be done with a professional. And sometimes that's what makes sense, but not always, right? Sometimes it can be done by talking to another person, right? Writing it down, right? Look at what's going on inside of me, that my mind is so stuck to this. Let's explore that because it's almost as if we're, we're so afraid, so often of looking at the trauma that has changed us, that we'll look anywhere. But at that, right? It's like hidden in a closet and we'll shine the light everywhere else, but we're not going to open that door. And that's where people will say that same as I've heard over and over. And I myself have thought this at times like, oh, if I talk about that, I'm going to start crying and never stop, right? Or I'm going to just fall apart, right? Which is never what happens. No one ever starts crying and never stops, right? What ends up happening is when the person puts words to it, right? It could be in writing, it could be talking to a trusted other or with a therapist, right? Things start to change. I mean, just the fact that you can talk about it, you can put words to it and other people don't recoil, right? I mean, how many times has someone said something for the first time, right? And when they're telling me about the trauma, there's such an anxious, like looking like as if I'm going to be, I'm going to recoil from it, right? Meaning I'm going to recoil from them, right? And then there's a sense of surprise if the person says, well, you know, I was abused by this coach when I was a kid, right? And there's not a, okay, there's not a response of recoiling. You can see the change and people will say a lot, like, wow. Like, I can't believe like you can like, hear me say that and be okay with it, right? I mean, so you think about what's going on inside of them. Like how, what a sense of shame, a sense of, this is something awful about me for people to recoil from and it's just not true, but here's where trauma is, it's insidious, right? And it's pervasive, right? Because if that convinces us to continually hide it away, then how do we explore it? That example of the person who says, okay, I was abused by a coach when I was a child. I mean, I'm thinking of a couple, very real cases, right? People that I've taken care of. And once they start talking about it, then they start talking about how, , they were just innocent kids, right? And like, they didn't know. And like, they really wanted to be on the team where this coach was treating them as special. And now they can look at themselves from the outside, right? They can look at themselves like they would look at someone else, right? You think it's so easy for us to see what's real and true, if it's someone else, right? If you ask someone, what do you think of someone who's 10, 11 years old, who's abused and manipulated and abused by an adult? And you say, oh my goodness, I feel compassion for that person, right? But if it's us right then, oh no, it's guilt and shame and we have to hide it away. And when the person starts looking at it, they can sort of see it from the outside. And it starts to take the energy out of it, right? Then, well, who should feel guilty about that? Who's done something wrong? And like, so now the conceptions come together, which is often a reflexive, that was my fault. Oh, I did it. I went back to it. I still stayed on the team. I went back next season, right? I let it happen again, right? All the guilt and shame inside the person gets juxtaposed to like, what really happened there? And then they say, right. I was a terrified child, right? I didn't understand at all. And they can come to a place of compassion. And now we are working against the guilt and shame. And if the person cries about it, then it's great, right? I mean, crying is one of the best coping mechanisms we have. It doesn't hurt us. And it lets us grieve things. Yeah, we can't grieve if there's guilt and shame inside of us, it just blocks grief, right? We have to, there has to be a clean slate in a sense in order to feel sadness. And then you see that it shifts from anxiety, anger, and frustration, usually directed towards the self, the guilt and shame towards, towards being able to process it and being able to bring to bear some compassion and being able to direct the negative emotions, so to speak where they're warranted and my goodness, the changes that happen. I mean, it's not like people are miraculously cured, right? But it's remarkable how just getting it out there and having like one hour of talking like that, like what we're talking about now can leave a person feeling immensely better. - It seems to me in hearing this, that there's this weird wiring that we have, because what I'm hearing is when traumas happen to us or we observe them, what we need to do most is to confront those and the emotions around that directly. - [Paul] Yes. But instead our system defaults to guilt, shame. - [Paul] Yes. - And trying to hide it. - [Paul] Yes. And this repetition compulsion of placing us back into things similar to those traumas. Or even maybe even worse traumas. - [Paul] Yes. - In an attempt to resolve it. It's like the most maladaptive. - [Andrew] Wiring diagram. I could possibly think of. - Yes. - Emotional and presumably physiological wiring diagram. - [Paul] Yes. And this notion of trying to change the past by doing things now, when the exact opposite is what's going to be beneficial also seems like the complete, the whole system seems completely backwards. And I'm, I'm chuckling as I say this, not because I'm amused it's because I'm just baffled once again at how our wiring can often not serve us well. But it raises an, what I think is an important and interesting question, which is earlier, you were talking about how people will seek out media that's really disturbing. They'll traumatize and re-traumatize themselves on a daily basis. So that could be viewed as the repetition compulsion or the person will have the same relationship with seven different, same abusive relationship with seven different partners in sequence seems terrible. And yet, as I say this, it also is becoming clear to me how this almost seems like a poor, but desperate attempt to resolve it in some way. - Yes. - And so the fork in the road, if I understand correctly, is to really get to the seed incident, really get to the thing that started it all, as opposed to repeating it all. - [Paul] Yes. - Does that have to be done in the presence of a therapist? Is there a benefit to taking a walk and thinking about these things, breaking down and crying, if that's what's necessary or feeling angrier, if that's what comes up? The reason I ask it this way is because I worry, I'll just speak to my own experience, I worry that in reactivating or touching into the emotions around something that is itself a form of the repetition compulsion, because you're feeling it all over again. - [Paul] Right. - You're not seeking out something to evoke that feeling. So I realize this is a little bit of a circular argument, right? Or question. But I think it's one that I really struggle with in trying to parse all the, the outcome based therapies that I hear about and the recommendations that people make. I mean, how should we conceptualize this? Something happens. Sounds like we need to deal with that thing directly. Do we need to do that with somebody else? Can we do that on our own? If we're, we don't have resources and we have to do it on our own, can't hire someone, can't pay someone to work with us. - [Paul] Right. - How do we do that in a way that isn't retraumatizing ourself in a major way, or in a minor way. How do we know where we are in that landscape? - Right. Again, those are, I think, great questions. And I think it starts with real introspection. When things are bouncing around in our minds, often, it's very, non-productive right? It's the same thing over and over again, and that's not helpful for us, right? So there's an idea which sometimes gets called an observing ego, right? The ability to stop and look at what's going on inside of ourselves. And so if we're just thinking about it and we're thinking in the same way, we sort of, in a sense, always think about it, then all we're doing is reinforcing the trauma, right? But if we can distance enough to be like, huh, it's, I'm interested in what's going on inside of me, right? I can think of a certain person who really loves music. I mean, and at some point in our therapy work, I learned like she was taking long drives, but the, the radio wasn't on. And I was like, well, what what's going on, right? And I asked, and what was going on is she was running over and over again in her head, like, I'm a loser, I'm a loser, right? And she didn't want the music on because the music would drown out what she felt she had to say to herself, right? And it was that like, wow, that's interesting, right? And then her ability to observe that and to think, why am I doing that when it comes into her mind? Like, what does that trace to, when did I start doing that? Like I say, you know, I'm saying it for a point of exaggeration, we're like, nobody comes out of the womb programmed to think I'm a loser, right? So we don't think that when we're born, right? So where does that come from? Then, we can think in ways that allow us to have new thoughts, right? That we weren't having, It's not just bouncing around in our minds. And if we speak or write, there are even more mechanisms that come online in our brains, right? That are then sort of monitoring mechanisms. We think in a different way, if we're using words, right? And we are better able often to bring in that observing ego, like what's going on inside of me? So it can be very helpful to think, it can be helpful to talk to someone, to a trusted other, you know, friend, family, clergy to write, I mean, these are things that can be done without expending any resources, right? And sometimes it can make really a big difference, right? It was a way, when did I start thinking that? And like, interestingly, in this case, okay, we did it in therapy, but it became very clear what that was rooted to, right? And then in the therapy, which was still relatively young, but we'd done several sessions and we weren't talking at all about what we needed to talk about, right? But that's what got us to what we needed to talk about. And when did that start, and now we're in that same place of exploring that and what was the reflex to it and the sense of guilt and sense of shame. And it's where all of that came from that just got boiled down to I'm a loser, right? Which this person didn't even have in their mind. Like, I didn't think about myself that way, right? And that's is so interesting, right? That our memories don't in and of themselves have meaning it's like they're flat or colorless, right? And they're colored in by the emotions that we attach to them, right? So, the idea that certain memories now, before the trauma were changed, right? By the trauma. So I tell the story, sometimes of a person who like won an award when they were in high school that they thought was, oh my gosh, like it shows, like I can do it, right? I get out there, that after trauma, they saw the award with the negative emotion attached to it. That was like, oh, it was given to me and I didn't deserve it. And almost it was mocking. Like, it was going to be the greatest achievement in my life and I was 17 or so, and to have someone think like, that's not how they felt about that at the time. It's the trauma that changed, the self talk, the internal state going forward and talking about miraculous in a negative way, also changed that going backward, right? And when we can really look at that, like where did that come from? And we can start unraveling it, it changes. So in those cases, you know, often it's helpful to have a good therapist, it's not always necessary. And it certainly, it's not always possible, right? So we need other strategies. And some of those, I write about some of those in the book of how can we sort of get at trauma without those formalized mechanisms. And sometimes if the symptoms are significant enough, like we really do need to talk to somebody professional who can help us get to the root of the trauma. And there's so many times, that's the answer to what's going on with people. People I've seen have had five residential stays. I'm not exaggerating this, for mental health reasons, for substance reasons, and no one's ever taken a trauma history, right? And then when you take a trauma history, you say, well, that's obviously where this is all coming from, right? Like that's when the drug use started truly thereafter, the negative self talk and the negative feelings that led to the drug use. Then you go after the trauma and you can change things. Whereas trying to change things without looking, introspecting, talking about the trauma, I think of course was futile. - Do you think that people can start to have negative fantasies? I mean, you mentioned this woman who would take these long drives to berate herself. I'm not familiar with that, but I'll, I'll give a little bit of personal disclosure here. I've felt several times in my life that I will start to create a narrative about something that truly hasn't happened about something terrible that somebody is going to do. - [Paul] Yes. - That's going to upset me. - [Paul] Yes. - And for the longest time, I wonder why am I doing this? And I have a couple ideas about why, one, is that I was attempting to just avoid thinking about other things. It's just, you know, anger is such an attractive emotional force in this. It's an attracting, it's not attractive. We don't like it. And yet, oftentimes anger is a great way to replace feeling something else. - [Paul] Yes. - Feeling sad or having to come up or to do work or to do something useful. So it has this kind of a like gravitational force to it. That was one idea. The other idea was in imagining kind of worst outcomes, then actually that relationship were, could actually seem a lot better in reality. - Hm hm. - [Andrew] It's almost like creating this negative contrast. - Yes. It's like, oh, well then it's not that bad. And then the third possibility is I have no idea why, but it seemed like a reflex. And I spent some time thinking about it. I can't say I've resolved it completely, but why would somebody have a narrative or a default narrative when driving or when walking of I'm just going to spend some time and think about how terrible this thing is going to turn out or how someone's going to upset me or harm me or how terrible I am. It seems, again, like maladaptive thinking, maladaptive wiring. And yet I have to assume that it serves some purpose. - Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think there are three factors there and they're all bad. And I think you spoke to at least two of them, right? They I think speak so powerfully to how insidious trauma is and how these are real brain changes inside of us. So I would say that the three factors, punishment, avoidance and control, right? So the trauma inside of us, that makes guilt and shame. So often, so often leads to a desire to punish oneself, right? And the idea that, oh, that was my fault. Or I deserve that. Well, what do we do if something is someone's fault and someone now deserves punishment, right? I mean, we we punish them, right? We send 'em to jail, we give them a fine, right? We punish them. And so what, what we do is punish ourselves, right? And if we tell ourselves we're a loser or this awful thing is going to happen, right? Then part of what we're doing is saying to ourselves, see, right, you deserve that. You're not going to have anything better, right? It's a negative. It's a very negative way that the brain tries to make us in a sense, to do better by hurting us more for the things that we couldn't and shouldn't have been able to, weren't expected to control in the first place, right? The second is distraction. As you said, anger, that kind of fantasy can distract us from affect feeling and emotion. That can be much more negative. Anger, it can be more gratifying than certainly than guilt or shame, although guilt or shame can serve a punishment purpose. But if anger is directed also towards ourselves, right, then it can serve punishment too. So punishment, avoidance, and the sense of control that if you think ahead to something awful, that you're imagining is going to happen, well, maybe that will let you avoid it, right? I mean, you can see the brain here in a sense, really confused. I mean, part of the brain wants to punish. part of the brain doesn't want to think about it at all and part of the brain wants to make it better. And then how all of that resolves, if we're not aware that, hey, this is in the context of our brains being deeply impacted by trauma. So what's going on here is all maladaptive, right? 'Cause these negative fantasies of the future, they may help us feel better about something in the present, but they don't help us make anything better, right? They don't help us make anything better. So this is kind of the sequela. This is where trauma and all this reflexive stuff that happens after trauma ultimately lead us. And you can see how we get lost, how I've seen over and over again in my own life, in the lives of other people, how man we get stuck in those situations and that's why I see people sometimes. This has been going on for 30 years, 40 years, right? And it's just been going on over and over and over again because there's no natural end to any of this, right? Unless we, we look at it in a different way, that we have knowledge and information like, whoa, this isn't the way it has to be. Let me bring a novel perspective to this. It doesn't change on its own. - I'm struck by your statement that these thoughts or behaviors can make us feel better, but they don't actually make anything better. In that way, this mode of imagining terrible outcomes starts to immediately seem like taking opioids. You feel better in the moment, but it doesn't actually make anything better. And it probably makes things worse. - Yes. - And just a question of how much worse and in what direction, yes. And so I just want to just pause on that concept, because I think that concept of makes us feel better, but doesn't make anything better. I think it answers an earlier question about what seems to be a totally maladaptive wiring diagram. We need to confront the thing, but we don't want to go into the repetition compulsion. So it's a knife edge there, to navigate through trauma. - [Paul] Yes. - Working with a very skilled clinician like yourself, I think is the ideal circumstance for people. And of course there are people who can't access support from somebody, for whatever reason. You've talked about journaling. - Hmm, yes. - As a useful tool. Could you maybe highlight some of the other things that people can do on their own. And then I'd also like to talk about what makes for a good therapist. What should people look for for those that are seeking therapy, especially nowadays when a lot of therapy is being done remotely, but let's just start with the, let's just call them self-generated or zero cost sorts of things, journaling being the first and then what are some of the others and what kind of structure would you recommend someone put around journaling, carry a journal around all day and jot things down as they come up or sit down and spend an hour writing in complete sentences, for instance. - Yeah. If I could add something to what you had just said before the question, right? That we have these short-term coping mechanisms in us, right? And in a way it makes sense, right? If we find ourselves in just terrible situations, then a short-term coping mechanism can get us through them, right? So our brains are built that way and that's part of survival too, right? And whether now in the modern world, whether it's food, it's drugs, it's sex, it's alcohol, right? Or it's negative thoughts, right? This is short-term soothing. Even the negative thoughts, And anger is short-term soothing at the expense of long-term change, right? And that's where addictive pathways can come into play. And that's where, again, our, how we're built evolutionarily for survival, doesn't help us, you know, in the way humans have evolved. Like we haven't lived this way throughout, 99.9% something percent of human history, right? So we're not adapted to this. So I want to just make a point of saying that about the short-term soothing at the expense of any of long-term change, And then the question you had asked about say journaling or what can we do that's outside of professional. I think the hallmark of it has to be bringing new eyes to it, right? Like thinking about self with a curiosity, instead of just a simple automaticity or repetition, right? Like, why am I thinking about this? When did this start? Why is this in me? Right? Whether it's words or whether we're writing, that's so important. So I think for journaling, it depends on the person. I mean, we don't want somebody carrying around a journal all day, if then there's a compulsion to, I need to write about everything that's going on in my mind, right? Like that might be good to okay. Write a little bit at night, right? Or someone who might think, sometimes this really comes into my mind in a strong way and it could be unpredictable, right? I want to have the journal with me. So, ah, that thing is back in my mind now, let me write about it, right? Because then putting words to it and then being able to read those words, right? And when people read, even do a little bit of journaling and they read like, oh, I thought again about how I'm a terrible person who can't have a good life, because I was in such a bad car accident or because that person attacked me or because when I was in school, I was bullied because I looked different than everyone else, right? Or acted different from everyone else. Wow, to actually see that written out. It's a little bit of that, it's a little bit of that. Like when you're saying it to someone as if it were someone else, right? Because now there's enough distance from it. Like I'm looking at the words I wrote, right? That we get some distance and we can start to integrate some of the, not just the compassion, but integrating compassion and logic, right? Of like, okay. I feel a sense of compassion now, wait, what does this mean? What really happened here, right? And gosh, I did start thinking differently after that. I started, that's where this came from, right? That's why I'm saying this, it's those kind of revelations that we can have through again, the written or spoken word. And I think again, that involves a trusted other, or writing, right? And I think that those are ways we can do this, where we bring some de novo perspective to something that often has been bouncing around inside of us. And it's amazing to me that, I can see such intelligent empathically, attuned people who've had the same thing running over and over again in their mind for years. And it just points out that our brains don't automatically say, hey, wait a second. I've been spinning wheels here for a long, long time. Like, was there another way to look at this? We need something from the outside, which can just be knowledge, right? Which is why I think what we're doing here or the reason I wrote the book that I wrote was like, apprehending this like amazing surprise to me, right? Which is like, wow, like some huge percentage of everything I'm treating is rooted in trauma and the opacity of trauma, right? Which is why we don't see that, oh, the depression, the panic attacks, the life change, the addiction, the maladaptive choices like, oh, this is all coming from trauma because it hides itself in that opacity. So we need a de novo perspective if we're doing it on our own. And we need that if we're doing it in therapy, which might link like finding the right therapist, right? Which is also part of your question. - Yeah, yeah I definitely want to know about how to assess and find the right therapist. Before we cover that, however, something came up in the course of your answer. I can immediately relate to this idea that certain behaviors are really maladaptive and are stuffing things down or avoiding the topic is problematic and bringing a curiosity and an introspection and almost a third personing of the experience that we've had in order to try and address it from a new, truly from a new perspective. It occurred to me as we were discussing this, however that some people, and yes, maybe I'm talking a little bit about my own experience. We have a sense of our own identity and how people view us and our ability to be functional in the world in ways that we like, effective at work or a good brother or a good mother or father, human being in the world. We have relationships. And I think that one thing that I have heard, and maybe I've experienced is that sometimes those maladaptive thoughts or behaviors, the things that generate a kind of a repetition of anger or of arousal or activation or sadness, that we have some internal process where we funnel that into a functionality in the world. So we I'll give a more concrete example. So in thinking about things that have upset me in the past and in imagining bad outcomes in the future, there's a certain internal state of arousal that comes about. And for many years, I was able to use that, not to feel angry, but rather to work an extra three hours a day - [Paul] Right. - Or to pack my schedule with work and social engagement. So I could show up in a way that I, hopefully was a very good brother to my sister for instance. - [Paul] Right. - So in a way it was a, it was a transformation of something negative inside of me. - [Paul] Yes. - Into a functionality in the world that was actually very rewarding and beneficial. - [Paul] Yes. - And yet in describing it, I can immediately see how it would be wonderful if I could source from something else. - [Paul] Hm- hm. - And yet I, you can imagine, and I can imagine how one would be reluctant, maybe even terrified of giving up that source. - Yes. - [ Andrew] It's a fuel. - Yes. and I think in knowing some of the traumas of other people and their reluctance to work through those, obviously I'm not a therapist, I sense this over and over again, that one's positive identity can often be linked to something difficult in their past. - [Paul] Yes. - And so people are reluctant to give up this fuel. - [Paul] Yes. - Because it it's in that sense, it's functional. The only thing that allowed me to kind of start to address this and why I'm still so curious about this, 'cause I don't think I've worked through this process completely, again, a little more self-disclosure there, is that I was told that these words, just imagine how much better it would be if you could source from a different fuel, a fuel that felt better. - Right. - Maybe it was on the, it was on this, this sentence. It was, maybe you could actually be much more effective. - [Paul] Yes. - Maybe you could be 10 times the better brother. - [Paul] Yes. - Maybe you could have 10 times more insight or work capacity, etcetera. So it's on that hint of a promise that I, at least I was inspired to start looking into these things and reading about trauma in your book and elsewhere, and start to think about this. So again, I realize this is a long winded question and a somewhat complex idea, but I think, or I hope that people will be able to resonate with this idea that sometimes we want to stay attached to this short term soothing that the punishment distraction or control because it evokes this arousal and then we can apply that arousal. - Yes, yes. I think what you're describing maps I think clinically to what gets called sublimation. So there's something negative inside of us, but we sort of transfer that energy, we transfer that into something that is adaptive or that is positive, right? So the idea of the anger, right? When I think of that thing and it makes anger in me, I channel that into harder work, right? Or I channel that into like, I'm going to go be nicer to my brothers, some right, something like that. And there's validity to that, right? But it can become like self justifying if a person thinks, well, look at what this is doing for me, right? I wouldn't work as hard without it. Right now we start to become attached to the trauma. Whereas I think what you had said is absolutely true that just because we can sublimate some of the negative affect, feeling, emotion that comes from trauma into something productive doesn't mean that that's best, right? I mean we can get to our destination by taking a very circuitous route, right? We might waste an hour getting there, but we get there. That doesn't mean that that's best. And it also doesn't look at all the negative, right? In this example, the wasted fuel, the wasted time, right? We get somewhere, but we are not optimizing. And I have yet to see one person who has addressed the trauma and become less functional, right? It's always either, they're just as functional, but they're happier, right? Or more functional because as you said, like, just because we may be able to sublimate, well, maybe what's going on will be 10 times better, right? If we weren't sublimating because the sublimation limits us, right? It limits our perspective to only what we can see and do through the lens of the trauma. And that is never better than the alternative. - Thank you for that. - Yeah, you're welcome, yeah. - Let's discuss how one could or should go about finding a really good therapist. Typically in my experience, this is done by word of mouth. There's this person you might want to work with them and they're really great, but what are some of the characteristics that one should look for? And should we take into account whether or not we are a person who for instance, I've heard this from listeners, although I'm clearly, I'm definitely not talking about myself here in cloaking something. Some people will say, I want to work with a somatic therapist because I've actually heard someone say, I think in fields, I feel stuff in my body. So I want to work with someone who can really acknowledge that or someone else will say, I want to work with somebody who has this orientation or that orientation or is open to my particular lifestyle, or isn't going to tell me that I have to leave my relationship. I feel like people already show up to the question of who to work with with all these, you know, things internally, some of which are voiced and some of which aren't. So I'd love for you to talk about maybe some of the, the core features of a really good therapist and then how to look for a therapist. And also how to think about oneself in looking for a therapist. - [Paul] Right. - Because of these kind of predispositions. - [Paul] Right, right. Well, there's a lot of data about this over the years, if you look at what are the top 10 important factors to find in a therapist, just repeat rapport 10 times, right? I mean, that's the key. And if you think about that, it's pretty amazing, right? Because therapeutic modalities can be so different, right? And I think what that's telling us is, in a way, something very obvious, right? Like what does rapport mean? Like, you know, it's somebody that's paying attention, right? It's trust, it's a back and forth. It's like, yeah. even though I'm doing something difficult, I'm doing it with someone who's really helping me, someone who's in it with me, right? Someone who's really paying attention. Wants me to be better. That's indispensable, I mean, it's just indispensable. And I write in the book is someone, a therapist not making eye contact or this is the way they do it, right? And you know, you got to fit into the box of the way they do it. That is not going to be helpful. And then what I, what I think about that is the different modalities. It doesn't actually tell us that, oh, the modalities are irrelevant. I think that's not true. I think that good therapists are not pigeonholed by a certain modality. They may come at the world largely through a psychodynamic or a CBT or a DBT lens. There's lots of different, ways to do therapy. But when you really talk to those people, really good experience therapists, it's all coming through the vehicle of the rapport, but they're practically shifting to what the person needs. I don't understand the idea that like, oh, I just do this, right? I don't do that. And when people are pigeonholed that way, I don't think they help their patients very well, right? We have to be diverse enough to say, hey, I want all the arrows in the quiver, right? And even though there might be one that I favor and that's the lens I see things through, no, I can be versatile, I can shift, I can adapt to what this person needs. And I think if you have that, you've got to, if you have that, you've got a winning combination. - Great, so people should perhaps try a few therapists and maybe have a session or two or three to see if they, the rapport feels like it's taking root. Is that? - [Paul] Yeah. - Do you have that right? - Yeah, and I think that's why word of mouth is important, right? If someone you trust tells you, hey, this is a good person that says a lot, right? It already makes the pretest probability, is quite high. But yes, it's interesting to see when like people have a therapist or they called their insurance and they're assigned a therapist. This thought that like, oh, that's the person I have to have now. And it's like, no, you should look at that like anyone you'd be interviewing, right, for a job, right? But you got to bring again, the right set of thoughts to that to be helped, right? Which is that I want someone who has rapport with me. I don't want someone who's going to make it easy, right? Who's like, well, it's, gosh, it's kind of pleasant, because then that means they're not talking about the difficult things, right? So if one brings, like, I know this isn't going to be easy. I got to talk about difficult things, right? Even if one doesn't recognize or I got to talk about the trauma in me, right? But to go to therapy thinking, no, it's, I mean, sometimes it's enjoyable, but a lot of times, right, it's not, right? It's hard work. It can be excruciating. We can cry during it, but to say, right, that that's how I'm going to be helped. And I want someone who's going to do that with me, who's really looking at, what's going on inside of me, how do we help me? And I can feel sort of the robustness of that. If one brings that approach and then looks at the therapist through that lens, you're very likely to then move on from someone who's not a good choice, right? And really stick with someone who is, even though that doesn't mean it's always like pleasant and enjoyable. I mean, it has to not be that sometimes. - Right. Maybe we could drill a little deeper into the mechanics of therapy. I put out a few questions to audience asking what they want to know about therapy and it was amazing. I got hundreds, if not thousands of responses saying, how should I show up to therapy? So for instance, should people take a five minute meditative drop in before? Or should they just show up cold and let it emerge. During therapy, is it a good idea to take notes or to not take notes and then post therapy, how should clients, patients as they're sometimes called, one or the other, I never know which, how should they process that information? Should they take some designated time afterwards and in an ideal world, take a 30 minute walk afterwards and think about the material or should they set it aside and come back to it? Of course there are constraints, work and family, etcetera. But you know we, there's a lot of knowledge out there about how to best show up to a workout, warm up for five, 10 minutes, then do this, etcetera and then the cool down. I mean, here, we're talking about hard psychological work aimed at bettering oneself. So to my knowledge, I've not ever seen this information anywhere. It'd be very useful to hear, hear your thoughts on this. - Yeah. Well, I'm not trying to duck the question, but I think it varies so much by person. So if you think about the first part of your question, I think was how to show up to therapy, right? And I think the answer would be whatever lets you be fully present when you're in therapy. Now for some people that's going to be, I show up early, I say it, I call myself, I meditate a little bit. I mean, that's how then they're present, right? For other people, you know, they just, they show up, walk into the room, they can stop another present, right? So it's whatever works for that person. So that they're really there, their thoughts, their energy is really in what's going on. And the same thing applies on the other end. There are people who are really well served by, going for a walk if they can, or sitting quietly after therapy, kind of putting that in order, right? Otherwise they lose some of it, right? Or like some of the ahas, right? Or the, oh, that's an interesting thought that they really need to put it in order. Maybe that involves taking some notes during therapy, right? For other people, they need to do the exact opposite. They need to like leave, not think about that at all. And then they can reflect on it later and learn from it. So we're so different. Human beings, there's such a diversity in us that there's no hard answer to that, but it's like being present when it's happening, then being able to sort of consolidate and retain what's been gained is most important. And I think we have to figure that out person by person. I mean, I try and do that in the work of like what's serving this person best. And sometimes we, sometimes it evolves and sometimes we talk about it, but it varies so much. - Hmm. - If someone were thinking about embarking on therapy or more therapy to address trauma or just general issues of life, what is the frequency that you recommend? I could imagine two extreme models. One is, okay, I'm going to finally tackle this trauma. I'm going to do therapy three times a week, but for a shorter period of time, six months, over and out versus this open ended model of once a week, typically for as long as it takes. - Right, right. I think that also varies. And I work with people in varied ways from oh, someone who's doing well and like we meet for a half hour every six months, right? To doing week long, hourly sessions, to spending three intense days with someone in a row, right? So I think as far as like kind of guiding principles, what I have found in my own life, 'cause I value my own therapy tremendously. So I found in my own life and in my own clinical work that if it's less than once a week, then it's hard for us to retain really. We spend a lot of time kind of catching up, okay, what's happened? Let's get back to the place we were at before, right? Which is why I think if we're really going to get somewhere, we're not just trying to maintain something, right? Then I think once a week for an hour is really kind of the minimum, right? But more intensive work. It's like the more I intense it is, it's not linear, right? It's an exponential gain. Like we do a lot of intensive work, right? where someone will come and do 30 clinical hours with us over the course of a week. So five or six different clinicians, 30 clinical hours. And you know, we've found that the benefits of doing that are immense. It's like let's say a year's worth of therapy consolidated and you take well, 30 hours, let's say, we go almost every week, maybe that's 45 or 50 hours, but 30 hours with that kind of intensity is worth probably 60 hours, done in a different way, because then it's in us in an active way, right? It's in the therapist in an active way, it becomes very, very dynamic. So I think turning up the intensity, if there's something that we really need to process, absolutely makes sense. And I do that in my own life is something now's like, whoa, it's really, somebody is really distressing me and it's linking into prior trauma and I can see what's going on in me. Now I start to have ruminative thoughts, you know, with negativity, I'm like, I got to go more, right? Because I got to do that processing. So I can get to the place that I am, which is not that, it's not that the trauma has no impact on me, right? It' that the impact is much less than it was before the therapy and that I most often and more often than not have an ability to see when it's now intruding into my thoughts. And it's taking me away from like what I really think and believe, or being able to draw logic and emotion together and make good decisions. Turning up the intensity then absolutely makes sense. - This very deep, intensive work of 30 hours in a week. What brings somebody to some, the type of work of that sort? Is it a suicide risk or a severe addiction situation? I mean, how does one gauge how much therapy they ought to be doing and should it always be on the therapist to decide that frequency? What would bring someone to a situation of five therapists in 30 hours a week in one week? - Right, right. Yeah, it's usually a person who is really distressed by something whether that's, it's so negatively impacting their life or sometimes a person comes to realization. I just can't take this anymore, right? I'm sick of the cyclical depression. I got to stop having panic attacks. I need help, right? But it's usually some, crisis point with the idea of crisis in the meaning of, okay, something comes to a head and after it, things are going to be different, right? Not a crisis and things are going to be negative afterwards, but a point where, where then that cognitive flexibility comes to the fore of like, well, I need to do something different, right? So that's often what brings us. Sometimes it's other people pointing it out or somebody's had an intervention somewhere or yes, that person's been hospitalized after a suicide attempt or they've gone back to rehab again for the third or fourth time. And their life is really in danger. Sometimes it's that. And sometimes it's a person realizing, yeah, I just want to, I want to look at myself, I want to understand myself better. I know that what's going on in me, isn't as good as it can be, right? So I think people can come to it for all sorts of different ways. And I think, yes, I think a lot of times it would be the therapist to say, more work, more intensive work or can make a difference. But I think the person also needs to, take ownership, right? Of their own therapy and say, if I don't feel helped enough, well, I have to think about that, right? And talk to the therapist about that, 'cause it, maybe that therapist isn't a match, right? Or maybe you talk to the therapist and the therapist can change his or her approach, right? Or maybe you talk to the therapist and increase the frequency, right? But the idea is to be aware of it, right? And if one's needs, aren't being met to acknowledge that, right? 'Cause people can get into a rhythm of therapy where it's really not helping them, right? But they either feel sort of nihilistic about it. Like, oh, I'm no better and I'm going to therapy, right? Or sometimes there's a sense that while I'm in therapy, so I'm kind of checking that box of doing something for myself, but it's not really getting me anywhere. And then the part of the brain that's controlled by the guilt and shame and avoidance thinks that's a great idea, right? So again, this ability to observe ourselves and like what's going on, am I being helped in the way, do I feel helped, right? Am I in some ways, even like happy that I'm not feeling helped. 'Cause I don't have to face this thing I don't want to face, right? Or am I too afraid to say I need more help, right? Do we really need to look at ourselves? And this is where the insurance systems often are very difficult, 'cause it's hard sometimes for a person to say, I need more therapy 'cause that may not be possible, right? So there are sort of negative factors in the world around us. But ultimately I think the answer to the question comes down to observing ourselves and taking ownership of like what's going on in us and how we're feeling. And then feeling that, that commitment to self or to self-care to say, I need to go change this. - And for those that maybe don't have the means or insurance or access to do even one day a week therapy in the journaling model. - [Paul] Yes. - Could one perhaps take an entire day as awful as it might seem, to do a lot of journaling and thinking and walking, do a self-generated intensive. Do you think there's utility to that? - I mean there could be, but again it depends by person 'cause there could also be something negative about that if it's someone who's not at the point, not ready for that, right? I mean we don't come at, we don't come directly at the trauma immediately, at least most of the time we don't do that, right? And we often don't explore it in depth. Like this idea that, oh, that person now has to go through every second of the trauma is actually not true. I mean sometimes it is, but that's, that's not the common situation, right? So more often that person has to acknowledge like the example of like I was sexually abused and have to acknowledge that and to, and say, okay, like, gosh, what has that done to me? That doesn't mean, well let's parse out every moment of like how that was and the terror of that, right? So that can lead people to a worse place, right? So, I think the idea of biting off small pieces, so to speak where a person is writing, right? Or is talking. But I think if one is writing, it is good to communicate with another, right? Another trusted person. And if there's not someone in one's personal life, there are clergy members, even if one isn't a affiliated with an organized religion, you could probably go places and get clergy to want to help you, right? I mean, there are people out there who want to help other people. So we say, what if someone has no one, I mean, almost never do we have no one here, right? 'Cause we could probably go find someone, but we need to kind of take that in pieces. So there's some risk like trying to do the intensive thing, you know, on one's own. And that's where I would put in, if a person's having suicidal thoughts or even thoughts of death, of not wanting to be alive, I don't deserve to be alive. I mean, these are warning signs for really getting help. So there are some signs that say, hey, don't try and do that on your own, right? Go try and find a resource. And it's things that get to that level of severity of, and often a person knows that. I mean, am I in a place where I know I'm not healthy and I'm having kind of scary thoughts, then we need, that's a person who really shouldn't be doing that on their own. - Great, thank you for that. - Yeah, you're welcome. - So we've been talking a lot about talking. - Huhm. - And now I'd like to talk a little bit about chemistry. - Yes. - Drugs. - [Paul] Yes. - So maybe first we could talk prescription drugs. I mean you're a psychiatrist, so you're approved to, and presumably do prescribe medication where appropriate. I mean, this is a vast landscape of course. We've got ADHD and I should just tell you, I get more questions about ADHD and the drugs related to ADHD and dopamine than any other topic, any other topic. So there's ADHD, there's OCD, there's depression, there's antidepressants and so forth. Is there some way that we can, wrap our arms around all of that as a way of waiting into this, this drug question and just address, how does one decide when medication is useful? Because in the end, the dissection tool that the psychiatrist or therapist has is language. And at some point, one has to make an assessment about dopamine or serotonin or whether or not a given drug would help. And most therapies, I believe don't involve putting someone in a brain scanner. And to my knowledge, there still is not a very good blood test to assess, oh, is this person's dopamine low or high, correct me if I'm wrong. And ultimately that, and I know there are companies out there, so I'm not trying to undermine those companies. But if I happen to do that in this statement, if you take a blood test and find that your serotonin metabolites are low, my understanding is it's possible that you are too low in serotonin in the brain, but that's a very indirect window into what's really going on. So how does, how do you think about prescription drugs in the context of treating trauma and other conditions and then maybe we'll drill into some of the more specific conditions? - Sure, I mean, I would first comment that right there aren't tests for these things. And I think the tests for metabolites, I mean, things are so different. By the time, what we're talking about has been metabolized, often to some very significant extent. Left the brain, now it's in the peripheral blood that we really don't learn from that, right? I think that we tend to over utilize medicines in this country because we have a healthcare system that often that's so based on throughput that we want to polish the hood when there's a problem in the engine, right? So we overutilize medicines often as an end point, right? Oh, we're going to make that person's depression better with an antidepressant. Well, I mean maybe, right? But most of the time for the person's depression to really get better and stay better, they need to unravel what's driving the depression, right' So the first step is I think they're cut two steps to it, right? The first assessment step is, is there a diagnosis that, that the vast majority of the time, if not sometimes, all the time, really warrants a medicine? So the bipolar disorder, OCD, ADD, right? These are diagnoses that we, we understand more about them and what's going on in the brain and how medicines can treat or stabilize them, which doesn't mean the medicine is necessarily, it's not a substitute for therapy, right? But sometimes the medicine and therapy can go hand in hand. So for OCD, for example, warrants therapy, but it almost, not always, but it almost always warrants medicine too, so that you can ease the systems that are making the rigidity and the repetition in the brain. So the first kind of branch point can be, what is the diagnosis? What is the level of severity, right? And I think that's very, very important where I think it's a little more, maybe even interesting is using medicines to help the person engage in the therapy as productively as possible. And here's where I think we're so limited by how we categorize medicines and this sort of pharmaceutical insurance driven medical system we have that I think throws us off in tremendous ways. So you think about how medicines are categorized, so antidepressants. And the vast majority of people who are helped by antidepressants, they're not, they don't have clinically severe depression, right? Those medicines create more distress tolerance in us, right? And if you think about how helpful that can be, if you're going to go, now you're going to do something difficult, right? You're going to bring that trauma or the stressors to the surface and you're going to process and you're going to try and make life change. If we can make more distress tolerance in us, that can be so, so much better, right? And think about the category of medicines that are called antipsychotics, which really puts people off, right? But most of the prescriptions for antipsychotics are not for psychosis, right? And there are ways in which low dosing of some of those medicines can help intervene in negative pathways, right? In pathways that are about distress. And sending out those tendrils of neurons that are about hyper vigilance and avoidance, right? In in our brain. And we can often get at that. And if you can improve someone's distress tolerance and you can use medicines that take away what clinically is rumination, right? Not the standard meaning of that word, but the clinical meaning of it, where there are distress centers in our brain that are overactive. And then we get stuck in these maladaptive negative pathways where we think about something over and over and over again, with no real chance of solving it because that's not what's going on inside of us. So medicines can help that, but we have to have some flexibility around their conception and the modern medical system of like 15 minute visits, to a psychiatrist that are weeks apart. I mean, I don't understand how that goes well, right? In the vast majority of times, I think it doesn't go well because it's not enough time to do the therapy, even generate the understanding. So then medicines get thrown into the person. This is how, we use, I think approximately five times as much medicine, I think across the board as say the Dutch population, right? Then you think, well, why is five times more, is a lot more medicine, right? And you know, they have a healthcare system and a cultural system that to the best of my understanding is more rooted in taking responsibility for oneself, right? So if a person comes in and cholesterol is high, right? The first order of business is, hey, you could take better care of yourself, right? Like this person really needs to lose some weight exercise more, right' They're not just jumping to like, let me give you a medicine and you know, and shift you through the healthcare system and out the other side of the door, right? And the same thing is true in mental health, and I'm not trying to be critical to the psychiatrists or the nurse practitioners or people who are practicing in that way, because oftentimes there is no choice, right? If they're working in a healthcare system that, that the standard is highly spaced or spaced apart, 15 minute visits, what alternative is there, right. But to look at, okay, I'm going to use medicines because I don't have another tool to bring to bear. So I think the healthcare system and its focus on throughput and it's short term talk about, we talk about short term response, right? Short term soothing at the expense of long-term health. And I think that is the metaphor for, that applies to our healthcare system, right? Where if we, if we are going to try and treat a symptom in a short term, we're going to do it in a 15 minute visit, that we're going to do it in a way that maybe it soothes a symptom, maybe it doesn't, but it does not get at the problem. We need to invest more resources to get at the problem and I think that's where a sort of protest, if people, as a society, we say, look, we don't like the way our healthcare is going. Like, we need more focus on what the actual problems are that yes, we would spend more money, to treating people and taking care of people 'cause it's more human time, but ultimately about less suffering, less death, right? And ultimately more productivity. I think as an economy, we would save so much money if we spend money on the human aspects of mental healthcare, because people would be more functional. They're spending less time in the hospital, right? They're more productive when they're working. There's less entry into the criminal justice system. So I think medicines get overused in part for systemic reasons, in large part, for systemic reasons. And also for some of these categorization reasons, oh, that person meets some technical criteria for depression. We got to give them this medicine instead of really thinking, wait, what's going on in this person. And I see this over and over again. I see one who is on seven medicines and they're on seven medicines to treat seven different symptoms. And now they have side effects from all those seven medicines. Maybe two of them are to treat the side effects from the other five, right? And that's bad, right? And if you really get at what's going on in them, now they're doing much better and maybe they're on two medicines, right? So I dunno if that's a helpful answer to that. - It is, it's a very helpful answer. I mean, I think at least in the spheres that I run these days, I hear a lot of negative statements about antidepressants. I think, I'm old enough to remember the book, "Listening to Prozac." I remember when Prozac and its and things like it first started showing up and the excitement. And then nowadays I hear more about the problems with all these drugs and maybe that's just, 'cause I have arms in the, both the scientific, but also in the kind of wellness community where people think a lot about behavioral change. Fortunately I think that's that they do that. But of course these drugs, as you mentioned, can have enormous utility as well. - [Paul] Yes. - I'd like to just pick up on one theme that I haven't heard a lot about anywhere else, which is the short term versus the long term use of these drugs. 'Cause I could imagine, someone feeling like they're finally going to tackle something that's been inside them for a long time either because they're really struggling or because they're just done with not working it through and they decide to start a medication that would give them higher levels of distress tolerance for a short while. I mean, is there anything to say that someone couldn't take a properly prescribed medication for a week or for the first three months of the work? - Yes. - And then know that they can come off it because I think that the black and white model of, okay, you're either going to start this drug and stay on it forever or be taking some drugs forever. - [Paul] Right. - Or you're not going to take anything. I mean, that just seems to, life doesn't have, does life have to work that way? - [Paul] Right. Is there a short term use that can be effective? - Yeah, absolutely, yes. In American medicine we are so much better at starting medicines than we are at taking them away, right? And part of that I think is driven by such a strong presence of the pharmaceutical industry and the pharmaceutical industry does a lot of very good things, right? But you know, there's such thing as too much of a good thing, right? And then as a society, when something seems positive, this I think also is human nature. We can overinvest in it, right? So you think about when Prozac and those kinds of medicines came out, they were safer medicines, they're billed as antidepressants and the thought was, well, they're going to fix depression, right? And it's not how that works, right? So if we look at them as tools, right, then we can deploy them sometimes for the longer term 'cause sometimes that's necessary. But absolutely for the shorter term, absolutely. If we thought of Prozac and those kind of medicines, not as, oh they're antidepressants, we think, look, what they do is they, they seem to make there be more serotonin in certain circuits that are important for mood regulation, anxiety regulation, distress tolerance. So those medicines can really help somebody if they're very severely depressed and we want to sort of get them feeling better. They can also help someone if they could use more distress tolerance in a discrete period of time, right? When we think about them that way, we think about them as tools that we could apply for short term or long term. We don't see them as fixes, right? And we don't see them as then substitutes for the human to human work that needs to be done. I mean, I've been sort of in my training at times in healthcare systems and I've seen in many other circumstances that look at medicines as answers and this idea that, that person is a, and a lot of times there'll be a number, right, right? And the number is the diagnosis and that number gets this medicine. And I'm not sure we could be more misguided than that and that's what leads to adding medicines, adding medicines, it's not working. Of course it's not working, because no one's really paying attention to what's going on. So add more medicines and then medicines for the medicines. And I mean, we know this is true. We know this is true, but we haven't had the wherewithal as a society to say like with a lot of things in society, to say like this isn't okay, right? I mean, we need more. Like give these people who are trying to help us. They need more latitude to help us. We need more human to human contact to get at what's really going on, and yes, that's an investment of time and energy and money in the short term and sometimes that's money from the systems, right? But if we do that, my goodness, look at the, look at the payoff of that. - What is your thought about anxiety and ADHD as a separate phenomena, in terms of medication. Again, ADHD is the thing that seems to come up most in questions. I can't tell you the number of especially students, but also young working professionals and even people who are outside those categories who are interested or taking Ritalin, Adderall, Modafinil or Armodafinil or Vyvanse, because they seem to struggle focusing without it. Or, and I don't know, 'cause I'm not one of those individuals, or because they seem to just like how well they can focus when they do take those compounds. And so my understanding is these compounds mainly increase dopaminergic transmission in the brain, also adrenaline, epinephrine in the brain. So they're more or less stimulants. They look a lot like, at least chemically, they look a lot like cocaine and amphetamine, although they're not quite cocaine and amphetamine. So should we be concerned about this? Is this a different sort of epidemic? Can these drugs be used to train the brain to focus and then people can withdraw from these drugs? I mean, I think this is a huge topic and one that maybe warrants its own episode entirely, but as long as we're on the topic, what are your thoughts about medication for ADHD? - Sure, I think medication for ADHD can be extremely effective and the studies show us that, right? They show us that if there is ADD, then medication for ADD, is very, very helpful and that's true in youths, it seems to be true if adults have adult ADHD or ADD, we kind of know that's true, but all attention deficit is not Attention Deficit Disorder, right? And there we go to the reflexive 15 minute visits, throw medicines at things, right? Attention deficit can come from many, many places. And one of them is anxiety, right? There's so many other reasons depression affects attention, poor sleep affects attention, poor diet can affect attention, stress in life can affect attention. So, and, and certainly trauma. And the thing, the problems that trauma spins off can affect attention. So this is really the, this is really the truth that while teaching once about medicines and pharmacology, I was frustrated about how the answer to everything was like, what medicine do we use? What medicine do we use, as opposed to like, this is just one piece of the puzzle. And I told an anecdote, which, I think it was a clinical anecdote, like what do you think is going on? And I think that if I told that to, I dunno, middle school students or something, they would probably say, you just told a story of a person with a rock in their shoe, which is what I, the story that I was actually telling, right? But several people I was talking to, they're physicians, right? ADD, right? It's like, no, every time the person steps down the rock hurts and they're not able to maintain attention, right? Like that's what's going on. But we're so programmed to think about medicines and inappropriate use of ADD medicines, as you said, there's dopaminergic impact. There's epinephrine, norepinephrine impact. We're affecting what are called prefrontal alpha 2 receptors that like really need to be helped if there's real ADD but if there isn't, that is not a good thing to do, which is why it is quite fascinating that when people have ADD, they tolerate generally stimulants very well, without the other problems that can come of stimulants. And again, I don't know, I don't claim to know why that is, but we see that phenomenon. But when people are being treated for ADD and they don't have ADD, which sometimes they know they don't have ADD, but the stimulants make them function better. So they go to somebody and get the stimulants. That's not a good thing to do, right? 'Cause stimulants, when they're not needed over time, they do affect our physical function. They affect our judgment, right? There are a lot of negative things that come from that. They can affect the vigilance inside of us. So, yes, it's a valid diagnosis, but it gets made when it's not present very often, which we see with a lot of diagnoses that you can throw medicine at. We see the same thing with bipolar disorder. True bipolar disorder is extremely important to utilize medicines effectively, but how many people are diagnosed with bipolar disorder who have, they absolutely don't have bipolar disorder, but it can be a catchall diagnosis because there is in a sense, "something to do for it," right? And you can throw medicine at it, right? So I mean, what do we expect, right? If we have a healthcare system where you get 15 minute visits with your psychiatrist, of course we're going to throw medicines at everything. And then the training paradigms are going to look at it through that lens. And then very often again, I give the example of seeing somebody on seven medicines. I mean the first thought I have is how many of those medicines are actually counterproductive? And a lot of the time it's not like, oh, every now and then one is counterproductive. No, that's the case. That's the case a lot of the time. And again, I come back to, if we're not putting thought into it, what other result would we expect? - Thank you for that answer. I'm very curious what constitutes negative effects of stimulants. So if somebody's taking Adderall or Ritalin in order to work longer hours or focus because they have attention deficit, but not necessarily ADHD. And again, I'm not recommending anyone do this. I've just heard the numbers that have come back at least from surveys and discussions with colleagues at Stanford and elsewhere, other college campuses that upwards of 75% of college students use semi regularly, these drugs off, not by prescription, just to study and to learn. - [Paul] Yes. - I can imagine sleep issues because people, because these are stimulants, what sorts of other issues can they create for people problems that they can create? - Sure, I mean, I think a touchstone maybe that's running through our conversation, right, is prioritizing the short term benefit over solving a long-term problem, right? Which we might say is a human tendency and we see it across the topics that we're discussing. So, short-term use of stimulants. Sure, people are more alert. They can stay awake more, they can study more intensely and longer. Okay, there's some short-term benefit of that, over there, even there, there can be problems, right? But we can say, let's just say for sake of argument that in the short term, there's something to be gained by doing that, right? But oh my goodness, there's so much that is, there's so much risk to that, right? And how many times have I seen someone who they're doing that and they're just doing that to study, right? And now they're addicted to the amphetamines and their behavior changes and they don't know it. Talk about shifting our brain towards a more defensive, sort of suspicious, outward look, view of the world that we see a lot of that. So we see judgment impairment, we see heightened levels of anxiety. We see more impulsivity in decision-making. And sometimes we, it can get to the point of seeing Frank psychosis. Now, that's not common, but have I seen young people who've done exactly what you're describing, right? They're using Adderall or they're using Ritalin to study. And then I see them when they're coming into the hospital, they're screaming about how someone's trying to hurt them. Boy, it's the worst case scenario, but it shows like that's where that can go. And how much is there between the, oh, I'm just using it to study and that severe, outcome that is actually quite negative for a person and it might change how they think about that friendship or that relationship, right? A lot negative happens when we change our brains without an ability to see like, what is it actually doing to us? So, which is part of my whole theme about trauma, right? It changes our brains and we don't know it, right? Well the same can be, the same is often true of amphetamines used inappropriately. It shifts our brain. And we don't realize that we're a little bit more impulsive in our decision making, a little bit less trusting. These are significant negative things that if we don't know it, the person will just say, yeah, oh, I'm just using it to study. I'm using it to work more. That's not, you know, that's not without it's high level of risk. - What are your thoughts on cannabis? I've said it many times on this podcast before and I'll say again, I feel fortunate that I've never really been attracted to alcohol or drugs of any kind , so much so that if all the alcohol and all the marijuana and all the cocaine amphetamine disappeared, I wouldn't notice any change in my life, right? And I feel lucky in that way, 'cause I know a lot of people feel an attraction to these things that it is almost a gravitational force. - [Paul] Yes. - From their first drink, they just feel, I once heard it described in this, I think it was an Augusten Burroughs book, "Dry" where he was an alcoholic. He said that the first drink he had, it felt like this magic elixir that meshed with the physiology of his blood in the most seamless way and as I was reading this, I thought, oh my goodness, first of all, that's the most foreign experience for me in terms of alcohol. And second gosh, that must be terrible. And you can, but at the same time you could really understand why someone would be drawn to that. - Yes. So cannabis nowadays is legal or decriminalized in many areas of the U.S. A lot of people seem to use the argument, it's better than drinking or they only do it for sleep or anxiety management. I'm not looking to demonize or support the cannabis. So what are your thoughts about cannabis for anxiety management, depression? And maybe even for ADHD for that matter. Sure. - If I could make an alcohol comment, right? The number of times I've seen alcohol like having been a good idea for coping with something approaches zero, right? Like the alcohol for coping is just never good. And there's an additional risk factor that there's certain genetic profiles where people respond strongly to alcohol. Like, as you're saying, it's not just, oh, there's a little bit of short term relief of distress, but there's this sort of euphoric response and those genetics, we don't understand them completely. They seem to be in Northern European populations, more prevalent as you head west in Northern Europe. So we understand where risk factors are demographically, but we can't pinpoint that for any one person. And there's a tremendous risk of that, when a person responds so strongly to alcohol or habituates coping to alcohol. Cannabis is a little bit of a different story. I mean, how I have seen that play out, and again, this isn't coming from any expertise around the neuro the neuropharmacology of it, like how is this really working in the brain? But it comes from an observation that what it seems to do is to narrow our attentional perspective, right? So it's why people will say, well, they want to, they want to use cannabis before like watching a movie with friends or something, right? And, and I think, okay, I think why people are doing that is because our cognitive spectrum narrows. And then instead of worrying about that thing at work or that relationship issue, one can just be present, right? It gates out other attentional intrusions, right? So in some ways, I mean, I've absolutely seen it be helpful to people. I mean, it's been legalized in Oregon, which is where my, I spent a lot of my time and it's not where all of my practice is, but what I have seen is it is at times helpful, safe around sleep, right? Because a person can gate out other intrusive thoughts and they can just relax and go to sleep. But there can be another side of that too, that at higher levels of distress, at higher levels of tension, what it can do is narrow the focus of cognition to the thing that is negative, right? So the idea that, oh, like, oh, this is a treatment for, depression, anxiety, trauma, is not true, right? Can it be helpful under certain circumstances? Like I think the answer to that is, yeah. I mean, I know the answer to that is yes. 'Cause I've seen it play out clinically that way, but think it can also be harmful too. So there, again, like anything that has any power, power to influence our brains, we want to be thoughtful and careful about it. I mean, do I think that it's safer than alcohol? Yes, I mean, I mean, like we, we so clearly see that. Does that mean? Or it's just uniformly safe? No, right. So we want to be respectful of anything that can change how our brain is working and I think that includes, certainly includes alcohol. And I think it certainly includes cannabis too. - I'd love to talk about psychedelics for two reasons. One, there seems to be a tremendous amount of interest in psychedelics as a therapeutic clinical tool. I know there's also recreational use and I'll just preface all this by saying that my stance is we absolutely know for sure that these are controlled substances, they're illegal to possess, sell or use in most of the country. There are few areas where it, they are decriminalized. - [Paul] Yes. And psychedelics is a broad category, of course. And we can touch on some of the different, different ones, but whereas five years or so, five years ago or so I was truly afraid to say the word psychedelics in any kind of public venue, there are laboratories at Stanford working on ketamine, psilocybin, MDMA, mostly in animal models. There's terrific work going on at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Matthew Johnson's Lab, and others looking at the clinical applications, mainly of high dose psilocybin and LSD. There's the maps trials with MDMA. - [Paul] Yes. - So nowadays it's safe for an academic like me to say the word psychedelics. And I'm, I'd love to approach this question of psychedelics from a place of true exploration and curiosity. But with the preface that we're talking about this in a legal clinical setting. - [Paul] Yes. - And the legality is something that's now in process. I don't think it's completed, but that's my understanding, but there are trials. You can go to clinical trials.gov and put in MDMA, and you'll see a bunch of clinical trials that are happening in the recruiting subjects. So I think it's safe to have the conversation now, and I'd love your thoughts about psychedelics. Maybe we could start with psilocybin and LSD as a broad category of drugs, that at least my understanding is they touch on mainly the serotonin system, some specific receptor activation and modulation, tend to change notions of space and time, adjust internal state. Maybe we would start there. - [Paul] Yes. - And then maybe venture into some of the other ones. So what are your thoughts on these drugs for therapeutic potential also potential hazards, etcetera. - Yeah, I think if we look at the true psychedelics, so psilocybin and LSD, right? Because ketamine and MDMA, they're different categories of medicine. They're these sort of novel tools to bring to bear. But if we start with psilocybin, LSD, true psychedelics, I think why it is, why they have gained so much momentum over the last several years is because the data coming from the labs and the academic centers is so powerfully positive. And as someone who's, I'm interested in anything that's potentially helpful, right? And I want to learn and understand that because a lot of things that are potentially helpful, you know, you go and look at the data and you see that that's not helpful, that's harmful. I think what we have seen with psychedelics is that they're so helpful, right? And the trials are bearing that out. And of course these are used in professional hands and with the right kind of guidance are extremely powerful tools, but used in the right way by someone who knows how to utilize them in the right setting can have an immense positive impact. And that's why I think that the thought is there across people and more and more people feel comfortable saying it and talking about it, I mean we're in the state of Oregon now where the thought is, we're moving towards legalization of psilocybin early in 2023. And it's part the new data, right? And how it meshes with the older data, right? How it meshes with data from the 60s and 70s that showed such a strong, powerful impact of these medicines. And I have a whole set of thoughts about what's happening there and they're just their conjectures, right? But my read of, you know, as best I can try and understand the neuroscience and the clinical applicability and the changes is, what happens is we see less communication or less chatter in the outer parts of the brain, right? the the outer parts of the cortex. And I think that as human beings, we sort of glorify the parts of the brain that only we have. I mean, certainly in my growing up, right? I mean, what did I learn? Even if you think about like, learning about the brain in high school, right? I learned that like, wow, we're great as humans 'cause we have language and other animals don't and we can use tools and like aren't we so great because we have this part of the brain that other animals don't and it lets us function, right? Okay, there's some truth to that. That we can do things others can't do. But we get lost often in the outer parts of the cortex, which I think are about survival, right? So we come back to the things you and I talked about early on of like, why are these trauma mechanisms in us, right? So like so much of what's going on in our brains is about survival. And I think living so to speak in the cortex, right? And the outer part of the brain is consistent with a focus on survival. So if you think that's where language is, that's where vision is, that's where executive function is. So planning and task execution, so much of that is about making our way in the world around us. So we tend to glorify that and think, well, that's in a sense where our existence is, right? And I believe that is not true, right? And again, can I say that for sure, of course not, right? But my read of 20 years of doing clinical work and thinking about all sorts of medicines and thinking about the psychedelics in a lot of depth, I think that what they do is they take us out of the cortex, right? Because that's where we run into these problems. That's where we bounce things over and over again that the distress centers deepen our brain and the brain stem kind of align with the outer parts of the cortex and they say, right, we we're in distress. We want to stay alive. Often a lot of us have had trauma that makes these changes in the brain and then we're thinking all the time, like what would I do if, if there were war, what would I do if there's civil war, if someone bombs us, what will I do if the economy collapses, right? What will I do if somebody gets sick? We're thinking all this future projection that is all coming from a place of fear, right? It's all coming from a desire to think about things and control the future with this part of the brain that is so uniquely human, right? And I think when we take the neuro transmission out of those places, right? And we set it in a part of the brain and say the insular cortex, right? The parts of the brain that are sort of in the middle, right? Which I think, I believe is where our humanness really is. So the psychedelics make there be less chatter communication in these other parts of the brain. And then we become seated in the part of the brain that I believe is most about our experience of true humanness, which is why, when you read about, people who have experiences and I've heard about them and people talk to me about this, right? They've utilized it. They talk with me. So whether it's someone telling me their story or it's coming from research data, it's why people can sort of see with clarity that, oh, that trauma, that thing is not my fault, right? Like we feel a sense of compassion for ourselves. We relieve ourselves, release ourselves from guilt and you say, why is this so helpful to people? And I think it's because it can do what we are trying to get at in good therapy, but it can really catalyze that by just putting a person in that part of the brain that can see it for what it is, without all that chatter in the cortex about, hey, got to think it's your father, you won't avoid it again and that makes the repetition compulsion. How do I think ahead to the next thing that might happen and what else bad might happen? I mean, we don't get anywhere doing that. And I think where we get somewhere is when we seed ourselves deeper in the brain, which I think we do if, if we're like doing really good therapy and we're, we're in the deep parts of the brain, but these, these psychedelics, the medicinal value I believe is putting us in that part of the brain where a person can really find truth. And that's why I think that, that's come so far in these few years because I think that is very clinically evident. And I think we're going to see more and more of the value of that and how, what the psychedelics do can become, I believe a heuristic for understanding like wait, how are our brains really functioning? And what are the parts that really matter to our experience of being human? It's those parts of the brain, right? The deep parts of the brain, the insular cortex and the areas around it that say light up when a person has an experience of spiritual ecstasy or an experience of connection with another person, right? We kind of have these telltale markers that something is going on there that's very important and very special. And I think we're more attracted to the outer parts of the brain in part 'cause they're easier to study, right? I mean, as you know, better than I do, we started studying the brain through lesion studies, right? 'Cause it was easy to, or to see if a person got hurt in this part of the brain or had a stroke in that part of the brain, what changes? So we look at the cortex 'cause one, it's easier to study and we tend to glorify it. And I think that has been misguided. And I think that we're learning. about how that's been misguided through the study of these novel modalities from Western perspectives, would of course they've been used for a long, long time in other cultures, but novel from our perspective. - Yeah, I'm fascinated by this idea that in these middle brain structures is, is where our humanity lies and as you said, I also wonder whether or not other animals experience life more from that orientation with less chatter. We can only guess, but. - [Paul] right. You know, that a dog lover and being in the presence of animals that seem to just be present in what's happening in their immediate environment, not too much anticipation. - Right, I mean, through sentient right? I mean what you're talking about is sentience, it's important. And sentience is extremely important, right? And if we're going to overvalue say language, then I think we undervalue sentience, right? Which is why I think we tend to undervalue animals, right? And their suffering, we say, well, they're not saying anything about it, right? And you know, they're not writing about it, so, okay. It's easy to ignore and we think about, again the hubris of that right though, because we can think and talk and write, like we must be feeling more than species that don't do that. I mean I think, I think that that is so true and that we're going to understand more about sentience in other species and how, that's at the core of existence. And my hope would be that we value more humans and animals, right? Through the evolution of that understanding. - The hallucinations that accompany psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin have such an attractive force to them as a concept and as an experience. And so I think most often when people hear hallucinogens, they think, and psychedelics, they think about hallucinating. - [Paul] Right. - It makes sense why they would. - [Paul] Right. - But what's so interesting to me is nothing in your answer about psychedelics, psilocybin and LSD focused on hallucinations, per se. It was more about feeling states, accessing a feeling state or a relation to an event or to a person or to oneself. Maybe even I, I caught hints of maybe even empathy for one's self. - Yes. - [Andrew] For the first time. - Yes. - None of that had to do with seeing sounds or hearing colors and these kind of cliche statements about hallucination. So I am aware of laboratories, one at a University of California Davis in particular, but a few others that are trying to generate chemical variance of psychedelics that lack the hallucinogenic properties, but maintain these other properties as therapeutic tools. And as I say that, I realize that I, people in the psychedelic community are probably thinking, oh, that's horrible. That's the dismantling of the core thing. But the simple question is, do you think the hallucinations are valuable for anything? - And I think we're really getting into the philosophical, right, the ontological, right? There's this sort of trying to understand being, right? And I don't claim to know the answer to that. I think that at times it seems like the hallucinations have a metaphorical or a symbolic way of being helpful, right? Because people will come to understand things that they hold dear and true after the experience, right? That often, not always, come through the lens of the hallucinations. So are the hallucinations necessary? Are those hallucinations sometimes important sometimes not? I mean, I think we don't understand that. And I think we want to be respectful of the sort of mystery of that. But what I think is fascinating is when you think about like substance abuse and what that means is, well, one aspect of that is that a person has experiences, thoughts, conceptions of self in the world with the substance that without the substance, they know are wrong, right? People talk about, you know, liquid courage, right? And okay, I feel better about myself and I feel courageous 'cause I've had a couple of drinks. Now, when I, when I, after that, I feel like normal about myself and that was false, right? And we see that like, that's part of what substance intoxication means, right? But what we see with the psychedelic medicines is something that's incredibly different, right? That people are having experiences that are so delinked from our normal experience of reality. And then when they come in a sense back online with right, in a normal cognitive way, they realize like, wow, now I'm applying all those mechanisms of trying to understand truth and to that, and what I see is that it's true and wow, it's true. Like, I mean, we hear that all the time, which tells me, hey, something different is going on there. And of course these are powerful tools so misused like very bad things can happen. But you think about the clinical utility and what does it mean that so many people change for the healthier or even change their lives after an experience because it so resonates as like, oh, now I understand something that's true. And it's not something bizarre. It's like, I wasn't responsible for being raped that time or I'm not less than even though my sexuality or my gender identity's different from some silly binary concept, right? Like people kind of often get it and they feel differently about themselves and guilt and shame are impacted. So I think we're likely to see that they are powerful anti-trauma mechanisms again, used clinically in the right hands. And I think that we're also going to see that they're heuristic for understanding our brain that goes against what I see as some of the reflexive hubris of, well, the outer parts must be the best because that's what makes us human and other animals don't have it. And we're better because we're human. I mean, it makes no sense, you know? - I'd like to talk about MDMA and I'll preface this by saying I was a participant actually, technically I'm still a participant in a clinical trial. So I have experience of doing it twice at the trial involves three separate dosings of this. I was reluctant to do it outside of a clinical trial, mostly because I was aware there can be some cardiac effects. And I liked the idea there would be a clinician on hand. And I'll just say that I found the experiences to be profound, beneficial and very different from one session to the next. The first one felt a whole collection of ideas and relational things came up that felt very powerful and transformative. And I do think that I learned there, I exported a number of things, my particular experience isn't relevant here, but the second time I expected it to be the same way. And it was very mellow and relaxing and was deeply tied to kind of notions of acceptance. So there weren't all these revelations and wow new insights. It was very much about sort of grounding into a kind of a calmer state. So I have the personal experience of benefiting from these in ways that I think still benefit me and was very struck by the power of MDMA. And my very crude understanding of the pharmacology and the state that is being under MDMA is that it encourages or increases dopaminergic transmission, but also serotonergic transmission. - Yeah. - Which is to my knowledge, a kind of a rare state for the brain to be in that typically it's more of a seesaw dopaminergic drive towards external goals or more serotonergic drive towards more plasticity or comfort with what one already has. And so with both those systems amplified, the only way I can describe it subjectively is that it, everything sort of funneled back in, and it was almost like a pursuit of inner landscape. And I can only imagine what it would be like in the context of doing this with somebody else also taking MDMA. I have no idea what that's like. That's my report of the experience. I know that the experience can vary. What are your thoughts about the chemistry and what sorts of states do you think MDMA is creating that can explain why it's a useful therapeutic tool in some cases and what sorts of cases those might be. - Sure, sure. To clarify, I think part of what we're starting with is this is very different than the psychedelics, right? Which are seeding our consciousness in these deep centers of the brain, right? Whereas what MDMA is doing is sort of flooding with positive neurotransmitters, right? In certain parts of the brain. And I think what that creates is a greater permissiveness inside to entertain or approach different things, right? So I think where we see it's tremend, my read of the data is around potentially and we're seeing in some of the trials, right? Tremendous benefit for trauma, right? And you think about what we were talking about earlier, how this reflexive, guilt, shame, hypervigilance, avoidance, right? And when these systems are flooded with these neurotransmitters, it's more permissive to sort of think about that, right? And to think about that without again, all the chatter of that's your fault, or you're never going to get anywhere because of that, or you know what that means, right? They could kind of go away and then we can think about it in a way that isn't through the lens of fear, right? And I think that's, the power there is that it's permissive of approaching something, contemplating something, a different, a novelty as we talk about a de novo approach. And I think that's also why the experience can vary because you could also see how, if you're not thinking about something, right? So there's not a clinical guidance to it, you could be in a state where like, hey, I just feel good, right? And I'm thinking about good things. And like, that can feel good, right? But it, but that's not necessarily problem solving, right? So the clinical guidance says, hey, let's take that state and do something with it, right? Let's Now that you're in this state, let's make hay while the sun is shinning, right? You're in a state where we can look at things that are traumatic, right? We can approach them from a de novo perspective. And I think it's part, I think that explains why you had these different experiences from one to the other, because your brain is just in a state that's conducive to something, right? But if there's not the mechanism to have that thing happen, like conducive to something therapeutic, then you might go there on your own. Or you might just be in a state where you have a sense of wellbeing and you sit with that. - Which sort of seems like a waste to me. I mean, this is what I tell people when they ask about MDMA. I said, at least from my experience that the potential hazard there is that in that very high dopaminergic, serotonergic state, there were moments where I felt like I could get excited about any one specific concept that I might even just think about, for instance, water and how nourishing it is, and really just go down the path of water and the world and all the water and you can, you're in a state that is very prone to suggestion. - [Paul] Yes. - Internal suggestion. And so the guidance turned out, the guidance from the clinician turned out to be immensely valuable in allowing me to go into my own heads for bits of time, but then also to resurface and share and exchange in a way to, I'm trying really get something out of it that was useful and that I could export because of course water is wonderful, but I'm not really interested in growing my relationship to water. - [Paul] Yes. And I really felt like in, I could understand for the, I never went to raves or anything growing up. I never did MDMA recreationally, but I understood for the first time how people could get really attached to an environment and feel connected to things. Because I think with all that serotonin, you just feel connected to everything around you. So I think it's a slippery slope there. - Yes. - And I don't know what the future of the clinical use of MDMA looks like, but I would hope that whoever's thinking about I'm guiding these sessions is really thinking carefully, also about evolving the practice to help people really move through in a sequential way so they can leave with something valuable. - Yes, 100%, 100%. These are such powerful tools. And again, if they're powerful tools and we're using them without respect for them, right? Without clinical guidance, we incur risk, right? I mean, you know, getting obsessed with water while it probably isn't going to hurt you, right? But if someone is out using it, they're around other people, what one can feel positively about or become sort of obsessed in the short term about can be very counterproductive, right? It can be a lot of risk to that. So I think it anchors back to these are very powerful tools. We're coming to understand them much, much more. And we're coming to understand that they have immense potential to be helpful to us. But I think and hope that that only also increases our respect for those modalities and what can come, what negative can happen if we're not respectful. - It's going to be very interesting to see where all of this goes in the next few years, not just in Oregon, but elsewhere. One way or another it's happening. It seems to have a momentum that is not going to stop. So very exciting area to be sure. - I agree. - I have a question about language. In your book, you talk about how we need to be careful about the use of language around trauma. - [Paul] Yes. - Maybe problem solving and problem describing in general. At one extreme, you hear that your brain and your body hear every word you say, and, you know, we have to be so careful with language. And that actually frightened me for a number of years, 'cause I would hear that and I thought, gosh, if I just think that something is bad now it's going to hurt me worse, which itself is part of that whole, packing down of an issue. Very hard to avoid thoughts without distraction. - [Paul] Yes. - So that's one extreme, on the other hand, I can say, I can tell somebody, I love them with a tone of hatred. I can tell somebody I hate them with a tone of love. - [Paul] Yes. - So how should we think about language in parsing trauma? And in your book you talk about, you give some cautionary notes about talking about depression, trauma and PTSD in terms that that might diminish their real severity in some cases. And I was really struck by that. So maybe just touch on how should we talk about these things in a way that doesn't diminish them for ourselves or for other people. And at the same time honors the fact that there's a lot of trauma out there. - [Paul] Right - And there's a lot of depression out there and we need to talk about it. - Yeah. I think this a very complicated and in many ways convoluted topic, like I think it's wonderful that we have language, but boy, language leads us astray often too. You think about how we, how people define words? Someone says a word, what is it? Does that person know what that word means? What nuance are they taking from? it We just have to be very careful what we're saying and what we're communicating. And I think this doesn't mean because, there's a sort of phenomenon now where people are trying to control language I think too much, like you can't say anything that someone else might find hurtful or you have to refer to people in ways they choose to be referred to, even if those are ways that others don't understand, or ways they themselves have decided or ways that might be psychologically or clinically unhelpful. So I think the over control of language is not good, but I think the specificity of language of what are we trying to say, how are we defining it? Or even the word trauma, right? We're talking about trauma. So we want to define what that means, right? It doesn't just mean like, oh, anything kind of negative, right? Because then that dilutes it down to meaning nothing, right? It also doesn't just mean, injury and combat, right? Like we have to talk about what that is. So I think anchoring it to something that rises to the magnitude of overwhelming our coping skills and changing us, like then at least I define it that way and I can communicate that to you and we can understand what we're talking about, right? I think that another aspect of language, while again, we need this middle ground and I don't think that it is okay for the over control of language to shut down expression, but we also have to acknowledge, how we're so much less distanced from each other through social media. And I think social media can do very, very good things as hopefully we're doing now, right? But it can also be used to harm people from a distance, right? And how much hatefulness is there out there that I think comes from anger and frustration in people, back to trauma, right? Where people just want to be angry and it's not really issues that they're talking about, but then there's a target of that anger and people feel beleaguered by that. And the words that people use sometimes are so awful that someone reading that, like if you're in the demographic that's being targeted, right? And you're reading that, I mean, how does a person not feel, not feel, be set upon vulnerable, right? And then I think that also fuels, things like we just had this terrible shooting in Buffalo, right? Like just hate motivated, right? And I think that, because that kind of language becomes very real to people who may take it in, it fuels their hate and then they do something to enact it, which of course creates greater feel and fear and vulnerability. And I think there was some civility and decorum that was in our world, not that long ago, right? I mean, you know, I'm in my early fifties, I'm not that old, right? But I remember a time when in political discourse, say people were civil to one another, right? Now so much, I mean, it's not all of it, right? But there's an acceptance of things that are just bombastic, right? It's a circus side show sometimes of people being just angry and aggressive and it's not really linked to anything, although it's allegedly linked to something, but then other people's anger can attach to it. And it's not about what it's about, but it's about aligning with the anger and I think that there is so much damage that comes from that. And I think, should we have, should it be okay that people sometimes are talking, communicating, using language in ways that would like get us suspended from middle school, right? Ways I don't want my eight year old to see, I mean, is that really okay? Or do we need to take a stand for like rational use of language? I don't want my use of language to be over controlled by someone who thinks they sort of understand better than the rest of us how to communicate with us. Okay, I don't want that. What's stereotypically a sort of idea of the left say, right? At least in our society, but I also don't want, language, it can be so angry and so aggressive that it is perpetuating or spreading vulnerability and that it facilitates trauma. And I think we could set standards as a society where we say, look, I don't want anybody in power who's going to behave that way, right? I don't care if their whole agenda is like, make Paul Conti's life better. I'm still not going to vote for you, right? If you're behaving towards others in a way that's denigrating, you're behaving in a way that I feel essentially ashamed of, right? And I feel that a lot, right? I see the politics, you know, I see things play out. It's not always political, of course not always political, but I see things play out and I think, oh my gosh, I feel embarrassed. Like we we're somehow okay with this. Well, it doesn't matter which side of the political spectrum it's coming to. And I think that's an indicator that what we're doing is really hurtful to us. People become more angry. They attach to the anger. People feel more beleaguered. There's more divisions between us. And it seems more and more like, well, we can only really identify with people who are just like us and like, what does that really mean? I mean, the divisions that it creates between us and that promotes so many negative things, right? I mean, think about ways in which it promotes white supremacy, right? It's just one example, right? And we've seen that play out that this is really bad for us. And we've got to look at that. I mean, if we don't look at that, I don't think something is going to happen. Like something is happening, right? It's happening now. - Yeah, and I'm, it really, to my mind, it really seeps down into the soil of everything that we're talking about. - Yes. - On all sides. - [Paul] Yes. - People are activated. People are upset about one thing or the other. - Right. - No one is immune from upset regardless of political affiliation. - [Paul] Right. - Everybody seems to be upset nowadays. - [Paul] Right. - As I was hearing you talk about this, I feel a lot of resonance with what you said and I also am hoping you run for office. - Thank you. I don't think I have the gumption for that but thank you for. - [Andrew] Well, that would be wonderful. - Thank you. I'd like to talk about a concept of taking care of one's self. This comes up in the book. - [Paul] Yes. - This is something we talk a lot about on this podcast. I mean, I think people have heard me blab endlessly, and I'll probably go into the grave telling people to get sunlight in their eyes when they can and to try and get proper sleep and to have a few tools for reducing their anxiety in real time and on and on and on. - [Paul] Right. - We hear about this concept of taking care of oneself and I think at a surface level, it can sound a little bit light, you know, oh, take care, take care, take good care. But to me it's a deep and powerful concept. - [Paul] Yes. - And I was very happy to see it in your book and also to learn a lot of ideas about what that really looks like, because whether or not somebody is in the early stages of considering whether or not they have trauma or is in the deep stages of working that through or has made it through the tunnel some distance taking care of oneself is an ongoing process. - [Paul] Yes. - I'd love for you to just describe what taking care of oneself means to you as a clinician. And of course the practices and things that you encourage people to do. But how should we think about taking care of oneself because on one extreme, you could imagine massages or treats vacations and chefs for hire that take care of everything for ourselves. And on the other extreme, you could say, leaning into life in a way that you're paying attention to small things while working very, very hard. So it's such a big concept, how do you think about taking care of one's self? How should I take care of myself? - [Paul] Sure. - How should people take care of themselves? - Sure. - I see here, what I think is a very fascinating dichotomy, right? That in some ways, like, think about how complex our brains are, right? How complex our psyches, our unconscious minds are. There's so much complexity there, but on the other hand, psychological concepts that are consistent with health are often very simple, right? Which I don't mean light, right? But simple, straightforward, right? And I think self-care is absolutely one of them. I mean, how much is talked about, how to take care of one self that just skips over the basics that are necessary as a building block for all else. So it doesn't matter how many chefs or vacations or whatever a person has if the basics of self-care aren't squared away. And it's not a light concept to say like, are you sleeping enough, right? Are you eating well? Are you getting natural light? Are you interacting with people who are good to interact with, right? Are you accepting negative interactions in your life? Are you living in circumstances that make you feel okay or not? They're very basic premises, but so often we're not looking at them at all, right? We're not looking at them at all because we tend to skip over them and we tend to skip over them either, because, again, in some automatic way that sometimes is trauma driven or we're not going to look at that, right? And often not taking care of ourselves can have the punishment distraction, right? There's so much that can come into that. Or our sense of power is, is tied to not taking care of ourselves. I mean, I'll give you an example is I tend to, for whatever reason do reasonably well with very poor self care, right? And like, that was very adaptive when I was into medical training, right? And I'm like, okay, I can eat a lot today. I can not eat, right? I can sleep two hours. I can sleep eight, right? I mean, overall, that's not good. And it hasn't been good for me as I've aged. But then I realized some look, I'm doing all these things to make myself healthier, but like what, I ignored that, right? And why am I ignoring it? That was a key question. Why am I ignoring it? Because somewhere inside of me, as it was, and still to some extent is, this idea that my ability to be really functional, right? To generate success in the world around me is tied to my ability to do that, right? That, oh, but if I stop doing that and now I'm like, I'm eating and sleeping regularly, then I'm going to lose some edge. So even I think about this all the time, but I realize, hey, I'm also, I'm not doing it inside, you know? And I think it's really grounding to the basics that really help us of like, what are the basics of what I'm doing and not doing in my life, diet, exercise, sleep, people, circumstances, leisure activities. I mean, sunlight. I think immensely important and dramatically undervalued. - Well, I want to thank you for that. And I want to thank you for today's discussion. I found it to be incredibly informative and I know our listeners will also. I also want to thank you for the work you do. I mean, you obviously run an incredibly robust clinical practice that I'm aware that you're constantly trying to improve, even though it's operating at the highest levels already. - I appreciate that. - I really, the reason why you're here today is because I've done a wide and deep search for people in these areas. And there are so few who have the background in medical training and physiology, in the psychoanalytic and psychiatric realm and also have a grounding toward the future, of what's coming and who can encapsulate so many different orientations and bring them together into a coherent piece. So I really thank you. - I so appreciate that. - Yeah, and for your book, which is incredible, I will go on record saying, I think this is the definitive book on trauma. - Wow, thank you. - And I really encourage people to read it and will continue to encourage people to read it. It has so many valuable takeaways and insights and tools there. So on behalf of the listeners and myself, thank you so much for joining us today. - You're very welcome. And I take that to heart and I'm very appreciative of being here, so you're very welcome and thank you as well. - Thank you. Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Paul Conti. I also highly recommend that you explore his new book, which is "Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic, How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It." It's an exceptional resource, both for those that have trauma and those that don't have trauma or those that suspect they might have trauma. Again, it's a deep dive into what trauma is and offers many simple tools that anyone can apply with a therapist or not, in order to heal from trauma. And if you'd like to learn more about Dr. Conti and the work he does directly with patients, please check out his website, pacificpremieregroup.com. We've also provided a link to both the book and pacificpremieregroup.com in the show note captions. If you are learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple and on both Spotify and Apple, you can also leave us up to a five star review. On YouTube, you can leave us comments or suggestions about content that you'd like us to cover as well as suggestions of future guests that you'd like us to host on the podcast. We do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That is the best way to support this podcast. Not so much in today's episode, but in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like improving the transition time and the depth of sleep each night, for improving focus, for managing anxiety and for many other aspects of mental health, physical health and performance. For that reason, the Huberman Lab Podcast has partnered with Momentous supplements because first off, they are of the very highest quality. They also ship internationally, which many other supplement companies do not. And we wanted to have a one stop location where people could find and access the supplements that are discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So if you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you'll find many of the supplements that are commonly discussed on the Huberman Lab Podcast. I should just mention that the catalog of supplements there will be expanding in the weeks and months to follow, but already a number of them for sleep and focus and other aspects of mental health, physical health and performance are already there at livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I cover science and science based tools, some of which overlaps with the content to the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the information covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We also have a newsletter called the Neural Network Newsletter, where we offer distilled information. So lists of protocols and key takeaways from podcast episodes. If you want to sign up for the newsletter, all it requires is your email. Please know that we do not share your email with anybody. We have a very clear privacy policy. You can find all that by going to hubermanlab.com. There's a menu there where you can sign up for the Neural Network Newsletter. You can also immediately get access to some example newsletters. So you know what the newsletter is all about. So thank you once again for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Paul Conti and last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat rock music]

========================================

--- Video 273 ---
Video ID: dzOvi0Aa2EA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dzOvi0Aa2EA
Title: The Science & Process of Healing from Grief | Huberman Lab Podcast #74
Published: 2022-05-30 12:00:17 UTC
Description:
This episode, I discuss grief and the challenges of processing losses of different kinds. I explain the biological mechanisms of grief, including how neural circuits for emotional and factual memory combine with those for love and attachment, to create feelings of absence and yearning. I discuss how grief is distinct from depression, yet why they can feel so similar. I also provide science-based tools to assist with the grieving process, including how to reframe and remap the relationship with those we have lost while still maintaining a strong emotional connection to them. I also explain the importance of having and building strong foundational psychological and biological states so that we can better cope with grief when it happens. Finally, I describe tools to adjust those states, including those for accessing sleep, managing stress and emotional swings. This episode is for those suffering from grief but also for everyone, given that we all experience grief at some point in our lives.

We recorded this episode before the recent mass shooting tragedies in the United States. While we hope the information in this episode will be of use to anyone suffering from grief of any kind and at any time, we are also careful to acknowledge that many people require additional support and resources. For that reason, we include mention of such resources and we generally hope people will access them if needed.

#HubermanLab #Grief

Thank you to our sponsors
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809

Articles
Craving love? Enduring grief activates brain's reward center: https://bit.ly/3wSLIa1
Catecholamine predictors of complicated grief treatment outcomes: https://bit.ly/3wU1jHw
Emotional disclosure for whom? A study of vagal tone in bereavement: https://bit.ly/3aob9bL
Diurnal cortisol in Complicated and Non-Complicated Grief: slope differences across the day: https://bit.ly/3t2Jvra

Books
On Death and Dying: What the Dying have to Teach Doctors, Clergy and Their Own Families: https://amzn.to/3t4oYCK

Grief Resources
Dr. Frances O’Connor’s grief questionnaires: https://www.maryfrancesoconnor.com/ysl-scale 
Complicated grief questionnaire: https://bit.ly/3LXYxFs

Participate in Dr. Frances O’Connor’s grief studies:
https://www.maryfrancesoconnor.com/research-participation 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Grief & Bereavement 
00:03:44 Eight Sleep, InsideTracker, ROKA  
00:08:35 Grief vs. Depression, Complicated Grief 
00:12:20 Stages of Grief, Individual Variation for Grieving 
00:16:05 Grief: Lack & Motivation, Dopamine
00:23:15 Three Dimensions of Relationships
00:29:52 Tool: Remapping Relationships
00:37:15 Grief, Maintaining Emotional Closeness & Remapping 
00:44:40 Memories of Loved Ones & Remapping Attachments 
00:48:04 Yearning for Loved Ones: Memories vs. Reality, Episodic Memory 
00:51:40 Tools: Adaptively Processing Grief, Counterfactual Thinking, Phantom Limbs
01:00:32 Tool: Remembering Emotional Connection & Processing Grief
01:04:03 Memories, Hippocampal Trace Cells & Feeling An Absence 
01:10:14 Yearning & Oxytocin, Individualized Grief Cycles 
01:18:24 Tool: Complicated Grief & Adrenaline (Epinephrine)
01:24:37 Sentimental Attachment to Objects  
01:26:13 Why do Some People Grieve More Quickly? Individual Attachment Capacity  
01:29:42 “Vagal Tone,” Heart Rate, Breathwork & Grief Recovery 
01:42:32 Complicated Grief & Cortisol Patterns
01:48:50 Tool: Improving Sleep & Grieving 
01:54:28 Tools: Grief Processing & Adaptive Recovery 
02:03:36 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing grief. Grief is a natural emotion that most everybody experiences at some point in their life. However, grief is something that still mystifies most people. For instance, we often wonder why getting over the loss of somebody, or a pet, is so absolutely crushing. In some cases it's obvious, because we had a very close relationship to that person or animal, but in other cases, it's bewildering, because somehow, despite our best efforts, we are unable to reframe and shift our mind to the idea that the person or animal that at one point was here, and so very present, is now gone. Today we are going to discuss how we conceptualize grief, both at an emotional and at a logical level. I'm going to teach you about the neuroscience and the psychology of grief, and incredible findings that have been made in just a few key laboratories, that point to the fact that we essentially map our experience of people in three dimensions. I'll just give you a little hint of what those dimensions are. They relate to space, where people are, time, when people are, I'll explain what that means, and a dimension called closeness, and how those three dimensions of space, time, and closeness are what establish very close bonds with people, and are what require remapping, reorganization within our emotional framework and our logical framework, when we lose somebody, for whatever reason. Within that understanding, I'm confident that you will have greater insight into the grief process. And should you ever find yourself within the grief process, as I imagine most everyone will at some point, you will be able to navigate that process in what psychologists and neuroscientists deem to be the most healthy way of going through grief. Indeed, moving through grief requires a specific form of neuroplasticity, a reordering of brain connections, and also the connections between the brain and body. I'm going to teach you about all of that today, so you're going to learn a lot of scientific information. You will also learn a lot of tools that you can put in your kit of emotional and really, emotional physical tools, that will allow you to move through grief in this healthy way that I referred to earlier. I'll also point out some of the myths about grief. For instance, many of you have probably heard that there are designated stages of grief that everybody moves through. Turns out that recent research refutes that idea. There are different stages of grief, but not everybody experiences all of them, and hardly ever does somebody move through all of those linearly, meaning in the same order. I also want to point out that for many of you that are not experiencing grief in this moment, there's an important scientific literature that teaches us that how we show up to grief, meaning our psychological and our biological state that we happen to be in when a loss occurs, strongly dictates whether or not we end up in what's called complicated or non-complicated grief. And non-complicated grief is a form of grief that is very prolonged, and in fact often requires that people get substantial professional help. So whether or not you're experiencing grief that's mild, moderate, or very intense right now, or whether or not you are not experiencing any grief at all, you're going to learn scientific information and tools that will help you navigate through this process that we call grief. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers that have cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capabilities. I recently started sleeping with an Eight Sleep mattress cover, and I am so glad that I did, because the sleep that I'm getting is superb compared to the sleep I was getting previously. I always thought that I slept pretty well, especially since I apply a number of different tools in order to sleep well, things like supplements, things like keeping the room cool, et cetera. But I have had a repeating problem over the years, which is that I would wake up in the middle of the night often, and sometimes have a bit of trouble or a lot of trouble getting back to sleep. I would have to apply other tools in order to get back to sleep. Eight Sleep allows me to adjust the temperature of my mattress and my sleeping environment, so that I fall asleep easily, and stay asleep throughout the night, which as many of you know is a game changer. Temperature is a powerful regulator of sleep and the ability to get into sleep. We know, for instance, that the body needs to drop by one to three degrees in order to get into sleep and to stay asleep. And with Eight Sleep, I can program the temperature of my bed so that it gets cooler as I fall asleep, gets even colder as I enter deep sleep, and at the transition to REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, it can get even cooler if I like. I actually like to maintain the same temperature through deep and REM sleep. And then it heats up slightly as I head towards morning, because of course heating up of the body is one way in which we wake up. So I have this nice contour of cooling and heating that puts me through a beautiful arc of falling and staying asleep, and waking up when I want to. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman, and check out the Pod Pro Cover, and save more than $150 with an exclusive Memorial Day discount, now through June 6th, 2022. Eight Sleep currently ships within the USA, Canada and the UK. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman, to save over $150 with an exclusive Memorial Day discount, now through June 6th. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA, to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done, for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insight into, for instance, what your biological age is, and compare that to your chronological age. And of course your biological age is the number that truly matters. One issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get values back about metabolic factors, hormones, and lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker solves that problem. They have a very easy-to-use personalized platform. It's a website where you can literally place your cursor over a given value, say for a hormone or metabolic factor or lipid, and it will tell you what you can do in terms of nutrition, behaviors, and supplementation in order to bring those values into the range that are optimal for you and your health. Find this immensely useful and very easy to use. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are the absolute highest quality and have extreme versatility in terms of what they can be used for, and when you wear them. What do I mean by that? Well, the company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and their goal was to develop eyeglasses for performance, things like running and biking and so forth. And you can certainly wear them for those activities. And I do wear them for those activities. I wear readers at night. I also wear sunglasses sometimes, when it's very bright out. One of the things that's terrific about ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses, however, is that they're not just designed for sport. They have a terrific aesthetic, and you can also wear them out to dinner, to work, and so on. I say this because at least in my opinion, a lot of so-called sport eyeglasses or high-performance eyeglasses and sunglasses make people look like cyborgs. ROKA, the aesthetic is really terrific. They're extremely lightweight and they don't slip off, even when you're sweaty. So you can indeed wear them on a hot day, or when running or cycling. They're not going to slip off your face. They're so lightweight, in fact, that I often forget that they're on my face. If you'd like to try ROKA sunglasses or eyeglasses, go to roka.com, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off on your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about grief. I just want to remind you that everybody, at some point in their life, experiences grief, either mild grief, moderate grief, or extreme grief, and it's somewhat obvious, but worth stating nonetheless, that how intense grief feels, and how long it lasts, scales with how close we were with somebody. And if you learn that the person who works at the coffee shop or that you see at the coffee shop on a regular basis, happened to pass away or tragically get killed in a car accident, that can be quite upsetting. It can be somewhat disorienting to you if you, for instance, just saw them yesterday or they seemed perfectly fine when you saw them last. But of course the grief that results from the loss of somebody to whom you have that level of attachment is far and away different than the level of grief that you would experience from the death of a very close loved one, a sibling, a parent, God forbid a child. When that type of loss occurs, it's often the case that our entire relationship to life feels different. Places and things that at once brought us joy and laughter now bring the opposite. They bring us intense feelings of sadness and loss. Psychologists and neuroscientists distinguish between complicated grief and non-complicated grief. They are very similar at the outset. One of the fundamental differences between them, however, is that complicated grief, which occurs in about one in 10 people, is a situation in which grief does not seem to resolve itself, even after a prolonged period of time. Later in the episode, I'll point you to the actual tests that are used. I've provided links to those in the show note captions, that will allow you to distinguish between complicated and non-complicated grief. These arrive through the important research of the world-class grief researchers that are out there and the psychologists that treat grief. The important thing to point out is that grief is a process. Like any biological or psychological event, it has a beginning, a middle and an end. And I do believe that being able to orient in terms of where you are in that process can be immensely beneficial, not just for predicting how long it's going to last, but in order to conceptualize the person or animal that you lost, in a way that allows you to best preserve their memory while maintaining your own functional capacity in life. Along those lines, I want to point out that grief and depression, while they can feel quite similar in certain ways, and have overlapping symptomatology, loss of appetite, challenges sleeping, crying in the middle of the day for no apparent reason, et cetera, they are distinctly different processes. The modern research teaches us for instance, that grief rarely responds well to antidepressants, whereas depression can often respond well to antidepressants. Everything we know and understand about grief is that it is a distinct psychological and physiological event in the brain and body from depression. Rather, perhaps the best way to think about grief is that it is actually a motivational state. It is a yearning. It is a desire for something, and somewhat surprisingly, it's not just a desire to have that person back, or to have that animal back. You might think, "Well, that's crazy, of course it is." But of course, there are instances in which someone passing away or an animal passing away is actually providing relief for that person, because of where they happen to be in their life. Today, I'll teach you about grief as a motivational process, because grief as a motivational process really is the way that scientists and psychologists now conceptualize grief, and the treatments for grief, so that people can move through them effectively. As we wade into this important topic, I'd like to emphasize some of the common myths and misunderstandings about grief. Some of the myths and misunderstanding arrive from the beautiful work of Elisabeth Kubler-Ross, a psychologist who wrote the famous book on death and dying. And I should emphasize that while Kubler-Ross was a real pioneer in establishing that there are indeed different stages of grief, the modern science, both psychology and neuroscience, point to the fact that not everybody experiences all of the stages that Kubler-Ross defined, nor do they move through those stages in a linear manner. Sometimes they're out of sequence. I'll just highlight the five stages that Kubler-Ross illustrated, because some people really do experience all of them, sometimes in the order I'll read them. But again, oftentimes they don't. The different stages of grief, very quickly, are denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance. In the Kubler-Ross model, denial is always the first stage, and denial is just as it sounds, this disbelief, it cannot be, there's no way, a refusal to accept the new reality that the person or animal is gone. The second stage, anger, is one in which the individual recognizes that the person is indeed gone, or the animal is gone, but their body and their mind go into a motivated state. This is important. We're going to return to this idea of grief as a motivated state that involves action plans, in more depth as we go further. And then the third stage is bargaining, what's sometimes called the negotiating phase, this idea that, well, if I had just done this, or if they had just done that, or if I had called more, or somehow refusing to accept the reality. So in a way this can be blended with denial in thinking, "Well, if I just don't think about it, it won't be real," this kind of thing. So again, stages can be blended or braided together, because emotions are complex, right? Even though there are different stages to this process, they can sometimes be melded together. The fourth stage of depression that Kubler-Ross described is one of, why go on living? Why should I go on living? Why should I continue in this grief-stricken state that seems to deprive me of all the richness of life that I experienced when the person or animal was still here. And then the fifth stage is acceptance. This internalization, not just cognitively, not just thinking, but emotionally that it's going to be okay, that not just this too shall pass, but that it has passed. So again, the five stages of grief that Kubler-Ross defined were immensely important as a critical parsing of the different stages that one could move through. But unfortunately those five stages were sort of taken to be gospel for a long time. And we now know, based on neuroimaging, based on more in-depth psychological evaluation, and frankly, more researchers and clinicians moving into this area and observing that while much of what Kubler-Ross described does hold true, it's not always the case. And in fact, the contour of the grief process actually has a lot of dimensions that are not encapsulated by those five stages. There's also a lot of variation, depending on whether or not the loss is due to old age, disease, whether or not there was suffering prior or not, suicide or non-suicide type deaths and losses, and even grief about non-death losses, a relationship breakup, or something of that sort, or even homesickness and things of that sort. So I do want to tip our hats to the incredible work of Elisabeth Kubler-Ross. By no means am I or do other researchers try and discount her incredible contributions. But I think nowadays we have a different and frankly, a better understanding of what the grief process is like, and as a consequence, better tools to move through grief. In order to really understand what grief is in your brain and body, and how to best navigate grief, I'd like you to do an experiment with me. For the next five minutes or so, I'd like you to at least try to discard of all prior notions of grief as just a state of sadness. I want to acknowledge that it is and does involve sadness, but for right now, let's think about grief as a motivational state, as a desire for something specific. In fact, I'd like you to think about grief as an attempt to reach out and get something that you very much want. Imagine yourself extremely thirsty, for instance, on a very hot day, and a glass of water is right in front of you. And it's a beautiful, clean glass of water, and it's completely full, and you so badly want to drink that water. But no matter how intensely you want it, and no matter how hard you try and reach it, it always shifts just outside your reach. So if you can imagine that, even just a little bit, you are touching into the experience of grief. How do I know this? Well, I know this because brain imaging studies involving what's called functional magnetic resonance imaging, FMRI, in which you can evaluate which brain areas are more active than others, according to blood flow, which correlates with neural activity and so forth, teaches us that the brain areas that are associated with motivation and craving and pursuit are some of the primary brain areas and circuits that are activated in states of grief. I'd like to share an important paper with you, as one of the first to illustrate the fact that grief is not just a state of sadness and pain. It is indeed a state of yearning and desire of something that is just outside your reach, and unfortunately will always be just outside your reach until you remap your relationship to that person or thing. The title of this paper is posed first as a question, so that's why I'll read it as such. The title is "Craving Love? Enduring Grief Activates Brain's Reward Center." And the first author of this paper is Mary-Frances O'Connor. She's a professor of psychology at the University of Arizona, and one of the world leaders in the study of grief from a neuroscience perspective. With some luck, we'll get her here on the podcast as a guest. Now this paper has several important features. I'll just highlight a few. One of the features of this paper that's not surprising is they found that people who are in a state of grief are in a state of pain. That is, brain areas associated with pain, actual physical pain, are more active than in non-grieving individuals. However, they also found that people who are experiencing what's called complicated grief showed reward-related activity in a brain area called the nucleus accumbens. What is reward-related activity? Reward-related activity is activity of neurons that's associated with motivational states. And the nucleus accumbens is a brain center in which dopamine has the effect of creating a motivated state. If ever you thought that dopamine was only associated with feeling good, you hear about dopamine hits, well, this paper and papers like it, firmly tell us that dopamine is not about feeling good. Dopamine is about placing us into a state of desiring things and seeking things. This is true in addiction. This is true when we're hungry and we want to eat. This is true when we want to reproduce. This is true in every state in which we are reaching for something outside our immediate ability to give that thing to ourselves. This is very important to understand, if you want to understand grief and how to move through grief. Grief is not just about sadness. It is a state of sadness, hence the activation of brain areas associated with pain, and it is a state of desire and reaching for something. And for those of you that have experienced grief, I think that will resonate with you. In that understanding that grief is both a state of pain, but also a state of wanting, and in the understanding that when we lose somebody, either because of breakup or because of death, or if an animal dies or gets taken away or is missing, that state of wanting and desire drives an activation state within us. Now, the key thing to understand is that the activation of those reward centers, and the involvement of dopamine puts us into an anticipatory state, a state of waiting for something to happen. It also puts us into a state of action or desiring action. Our body and our mind are what I like to refer to as center of mass forward. We are seeking how to resolve the craving, even if we know that is impossible. Why do I say that? Well, we understand, also on the basis of brain imaging studies, and also some studies in animals that I'll describe in a moment, that in order to understand grief, we have to understand how attachments are represented in our brain. And it turns out that both attachments and the breaking of attachments in healthy ways are governed by three important, what we call dimensions. A dimension is just some feature of the world that's represented in our brain. So for instance, the color red doesn't exist in your brain. You happen to have cells, neurons, in your eye that respond best to long wavelengths of light. And those long wavelengths of light happen to be what are reflected off things that are perceived as red. So in your mind, you have a notion of red. I know this is a little bit abstract, but you're not actually lighting up red neurons in your brain, and that's why you see red. You are lighting up neurons in your brain that represent the presence of red things in your environment. Similarly, we have neurons and maps, or we say representations of other dimensions. We have dimensions of touch. We have dimensions of sound. And as I'll now teach you, we have three dimensions that define our relationship to people and animals and things. And when those people, animals and things are within our immediate vicinity, or if we know how we could access them, right? If somebody's still alive, there's generally some way to access them, unless they're refusing to interact with us. Well, when we understand that, our motivational states can operate in a way that's logical. We know that, for instance, if we want to find our mother, brother, sister, significant other, dog, cat, parrot, et cetera, we have to go through a certain set of steps. What are those three dimensions and how do they work? And that's what I'm going to teach you now. So at risk of sounding a little bit too reductionist, we are now going to describe your relationship to anything, everything, and anyone, in these three dimensions. How can we do that? Why would we even want to do that? Why would we want to rob the complexity of relationships of their contour and their detail? Well, if we can understand the dimensions in which we map our relationship to people, animals, and things, then we can understand why it is that when those people, animals, or things are not accessible to us, why it hurts so much, and why it takes a certain amount of time in order to re-understand, if you will, or remap our association to them. I promise that in grasping the information I'm about to give you, you will be able to better orient in the grief process, and you'll be able to move through it more effectively. The three dimensions of relating to someone, or an animal, or a thing, are space, time, and closeness. And in order to illustrate each one and how they work together to support relationships and their involvement in the grieving process, I'm going to tell you about an experiment. This experiment was actually done. The experiment involves putting people into a brain scanner that allows the researcher to evaluate brain activity in different areas. In fact, can look in a very non-biased way, not make any predictions about which brain areas are going to be involved. And the experiment is the following. The person, we should say the research subject, first sees images of things that reside at different distances from one another. And when I say things, these are objects. So in one case it's a beach or a parking lot with bowling balls set at different distances from one another. Their brain is imaged, and as their brain is imaged, they see different pictures of different scenes, the beach, the parking lot, et cetera, bowling balls spaced in different ways, close together, far apart, regularly spaced, non-regularly spaced. When one does this sort of experiment, you see a lot of brain areas activated. Not surprisingly, the visual cortex, the area of the brain that is responsible for creating visual perceptions, but also a brain area that seems uniquely tuned to the distance between you and the objects. So whether or not the bowling balls are far away or close together from one another, and whether or not they are far away or close to you physically, so literally the distance between you and these objects. We'll refer to that measure, that dimension, as we call it, as proximity, okay? Whether or not it's very close to you, high degree of proximity, or far away, low proximity. But it's simply physical space. Then subjects listened to tones. Those tones also are spaced from one another. So it could be something as simple as my hand meeting the table top that I'm happen to be sitting in front of. So it's [hand hits]. They image the brain. Of course, areas of the brain that are associated with auditory perception are active, not surprisingly, but as they evaluate different types of sounds and patterns of sounds, for instance, [hand hits] they can start to parse brain areas that seem uniquely tuned to the spacing of sounds, independent of what sounds are coming in. So whether or not it's musical notes, or my hand hitting the table, or human speech, they identified a brain region that is uniquely tuned. That is, it becomes active specifically in response to changes in the spacing between sounds, much in the same way as they could identify brain regions that were only activated when there were changes in the distance between objects, such as the bowling balls that I used in the previous example. And then the subjects saw a different set of images. The images that they saw were of people, and of faces. And some of the images that they saw were of people's faces right up close, and other images were of people at a distance, where you could see the whole body of the person. Now, they also varied the emotional relationship to those people. That is, they were able to get photographs from these research subjects' lives, so they could show them pictures of, for instance, their sister or some random person off the street. They could show them pictures of a parent, or of a neighbor, or of a celebrity that's well known, or of somebody that they didn't know at all. So they were able to vary both the position of the person, close or far, and they were able to vary the emotional distance to the person, which is this dimension that I'm referring to as closeness, which is not physical closeness, but how attached, or how well you know somebody. Now, this is maybe sounding like a somewhat complicated experiment, but the takeaway from this experiment is exquisitely simple, and exquisitely important. The result was, that in all three conditions, changes in the physical spacing of these objects, changes in the temporal, that is, the time spacing of these sounds, and changes in the emotional distance between the subject and different people, the same brain area was uniquely activated. Now that is an incredible thing to find, because what it suggests is that, yes, of course there are brain areas that are associated with representation of visual objects, and that yes, of course there are brain areas associated with representation of different sounds. And of course, there are brain areas associated with faces. We now know this. In fact, there's something called the fusiform face area, which is uniquely tuned to faces. But at the same time, there is a unique brain region that is activated in all three of the conditions I described, that has to do with how far you are from somebody, both in space, in time, and in terms of emotional closeness. And that brain area, it turns out, is a brain area called the inferior parietal lobule, the inferior parietal lobule. Now, you don't need to know where the inferior parietal lobule is. In fact, you don't even need to know the name of this brain area. What you do need to know, however, if you want to understand grief and how to move through grief, is that your map of people is not a map of emotional closeness per se. It is a map of emotional closeness, what we call attachment, that is interwoven, that is braided in, in a very intimate way, with your map of where they are in physical space, and where they are in time, when you saw them last, when you're likely to see them again, and if you were to want to see them, how much time it would take to reach them, or for them to reach you. Now earlier, I said that one of the key functions of our nervous system is to be able to make predictions. And so it's somewhat obvious, but nonetheless important to state and restate that one of the most powerful aspects of our attachments to people, animals, and things is our ability to predict what it would take to see them again, and when we are going to see them again. In fact, we could say that our ability to locate someone, or an animal, or a thing in space and time, right, where they are and how long it would take for us to reach them or them to reach us, is a prediction of the requirements to engage in the attachment. In order to illustrate this at a little bit more depth, let's just do a fill in the blank experiment. You can do this now in real time. I want you to think of somebody that you either rely on or that you care about very, very much. And I'll just allow you to fill in the blank on this sentence. "If I want to see blank," the person or animal, "I could see them within blank amount of time," right? If right now you wanted to see this person or animal, or maybe even a thing, how long would it take you to reach them? Could be a day, could be a second, could be they're right next to you. All you'd have to do is turn your head. Now answer this. "If this person were to travel halfway around the world, and land in their plane, I would expect to hear from them within blank minutes of them landing." Okay, the answers of this of course, will differ. Now, I'd like you to answer this question. "If I'd like to find myself, it would take me X amount of time." And of course, if you're listening to this and you're understanding it and you're of a rational mind, the answer to that should be zero seconds, instantaneous. You are always able to locate yourself in space and time, provided you are in the appropriate state of mind, meaning not asleep, for instance. That last question might seem somewhat silly, but it's a fundamentally important one, because it illustrates the extremes at which we map our relationship to ourselves relative to other people and things. Now, if all of this sounds like a bunch of neuropsycho babble, parsing of the obvious, I'd encourage you to suspend that belief for the moment. Because if you understand that all relationships are mapped in the brain and body through these three dimensions, space, time, and closeness, or proximity of space, proximity in time, and proximity of attachment, how close or rich or bonded you are to someone, well, if you can understand that, then it almost becomes obvious, or at least it becomes intuitive, as to why, after the loss of somebody, in particular, a death, or the loss of an animal, this map has to be reordered. Why, because if we are attached to someone, or an animal, at a deep level, it is almost always on the basis of a lot of what we call episodic experience, a lot of episodic memories, memories of things that happen. Episodic memories are literally the conscious recollection of your experience of somebody, or an animal, or a thing. And within that memory, you have an understanding of what has happened with them in association to you, what's going on with them, where it happened, when it happened. You have a rich knowledge database that we call implicit knowledge, right? You might not be aware of it all the time, but it's within you, of what this person is like and what they're doing in their life. When somebody is taken away from us, for whatever reason, episodic memories persist for some period of time, and they are still linked to our feelings of attachment. Grief is the process of uncoupling, unbraiding, and untangling that relationship between where people are in space, in time, and our attachment to them. What I mean by this is when somebody or an animal or a thing is taken from us, either by decision or by death, or by circumstance, well, in that case, our entire memory bank and our ability to predict where and when they will be, and therefore when we can feed our attachment to them again, that whole map is obliterated, except that the attachment itself has not been disrupted. Assuming that you are deeply attached to someone or an animal or a thing, that attachment persists, and the grief process is one in which you have to reorder your understanding of them in space and in time. This is very, very hard to do, and for some people it's almost impossible to do, at least at the outset of grief. This, in a very neurosciencey way, explains this stage that Kubler-Ross described, which many, again, not all, but many people experience, which is one of denial. How could it be, why? Well, when we have a rich catalog of experiences with somebody or of them, right, ideas about them and what they do, how they spend their day, what they do and don't do, where they do it, et cetera, well, that memory bank is not just flushed out the moment that we learn that they're no longer with us. What happens is, the brain continues to make these predictions that they will be in a certain place or a certain time, right, that they'll be in a certain time zone or they'll walk in the door any moment. All of those predictions still hold. The neural activity continues. We call this reverberatory activity. That explains the yearning for, and the desire to interact, and yet it's just beyond our reach. Because once they're gone, our brain still functions in a way, these neural circuits still function in a way that put us into an action state of seeking them, looking for them in the same location, expecting them to contact us at whatever frequency that we were used to hearing from them, or that we could reach out to them and reliably get a response. It is immensely disorienting, in other words, to maintain a close attachment, and at the same time to not be able to make predictions about where that person, animal, or thing is in space and time. Now, if this seems somewhat abstract, I'm going to continue to flesh it out. And actually right now, I'd like to flesh it out with a real-world example of grief and loss that comes to us from perhaps one of the greatest minds in human history, and somebody who was intensely grounded in reality and logic, and indeed the physics of the world. And the person I'm referring to is none other than the Nobel Prize-winning physicist, Richard Feynman. Many of you are probably familiar with Richard Feynman. Some of you perhaps are not. Richard Feynman was a Nobel Prize-winning physicist, known for his thick New York accent. He was actually not from Brooklyn, as many people think. He was actually from Far Rockaway in Long Island. Thick New York accent, very personable, exceptional teacher, brilliant mind, hence the Nobel Prize in physics. Also a quite funny and amusing person, told great anecdotes, et cetera. Feynman had a childhood sweetheart who turned out to be his first wife. Her name was Arline, and it was well known that Feynman was absolutely in love with her. He would talk about her all the time. She had a profound influence on him and his thinking, and ultimately on his public education efforts later. If you haven't already read books such as "Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman," or "What Do You Care What Other People Think," I encourage you to do so. And in fact, that quote, "What do you care what other people think," is actually a quote, not of Feynman, but of his first wife, Arline, who sadly, died at a very young age from tuberculosis. Why am I sharing Feynman's story of loss of his first bride? Well, the reason is, Feynman continued to write letters to Arline for a long period of time. This is well known only because after Feynman died, it was discovered that he kept an archive of letters to his deceased first wife. And even though he did eventually marry, and in fact had many relationships with many people, and I think was married twice more, maybe it was once, maybe it was twice, the intensity of his grief, but also his lack of ability to transition his mind to a place where he understood that Arline had died, is one of the more profound examples of this inability to reconcile the logical world and the emotional world. And I'm now going to read to you a letter that Feynman wrote to Arline. This was discovered after Feynman's death, when they went through his desk and his belongings. And as I read this, you're going to hear some of the typical narrative of grief that is not unique to Feynman and his dead wife, but there are also some elements in there that I think you'll recognize as highlighting this disbelief and this dissociation between the reality of somebody's location in space and time, and the emotional attachment that they hold for us. And therein lies the information about how to better navigate grief. So now I'm reading from the letter. This was a letter dated October 17th, 1946. It's not terribly long, but bear with me. "Dear Arline, I adore you, sweetheart. I know how much you like to hear that, but I don't only write it because you like it. I write it because it makes me warm all over inside to write it to you. It is such a terribly long time since I last wrote to you, almost two years, but I know you'll excuse me, because you understand how I am, stubborn and realistic, and I thought there was no sense to writing. But now I know, my darling wife, that it is the right thing to do, what I have delayed in doing, and that I have done so much in the past. I wanted to tell you I love you. I want to love you. I will always love you." So here we can hear the intense emotional attachment that clearly has persisted. "I find it hard to understand in my mind what it means to love you after you are dead, but I still want to comfort and take care of you. And I want you to love me and care for me. I want to have problems to discuss with you. I want to do little projects with you. I never thought until just now that we can do that. What should we do? We started to learn to make clothes together, or learn Chinese, or getting a movie projector. Can't I do something now? No, I am alone without you, and you were the idea woman and the general instigator of all our wild adventures. When you were sick, you worried because you could not give me something that you wanted, and you thought I needed. You needn't have worried. Just as I told you then, there was no real need, because I loved you in so many ways so much. And now it is clearly even more true. You can give me nothing now, yet I love you so that you stand in the way of my loving anything else. But I wanted you to stand there. You, dead, are so much better than anyone else alive." So you can really appreciate the depth and intensity of the attachment. Despite two years' time, it clearly has not waned. I'll read the final paragraph now. "I know you'll assure me that I am foolish, and that you want me to have full happiness, and don't want to be in my way. I bet you are surprised that I don't even have a girlfriend, except you sweetheart, after two years, but you can't help it, darling, nor can I. I don't understand it, for I've met many girls, and very nice ones, and I don't want to remain alone. But in two or three meetings, they all seem ashes. You only are left to me. You are real. My darling wife, I do adore you. I love my wife. My wife is dead. Rich. P.S., please excuse my not mailing this, but I don't know your new address." So there's a lot contained in this letter. We could parse it line by line, but I think it's fair to say that clearly, there's an immense attachment that's been maintained. So that's that dimension of closeness of attachment. Clearly, there's an understanding that she's dead. In fact, the last line of this love letter is, "My wife is dead," right? He now moves her into the third person, in fact, in that final line. So he understands this, and yet he maintains the attachment. And the very last portion of the letter, the P.S., the postscript, "I don't know your new address," right? Somewhat humorous in the typical vein of a Feynman writing or speech. He always had a intensely amusing and playful sense of humor. And yet there's something really contained in this. I don't think we're reading into this too much, in that he doesn't know where to find her. He feels her as very real, and yet he doesn't know where to find her. He doesn't know her address. He obviously knows she's dead, so there's nowhere to mail it to. The reason I shared this letter with you, as opposed to one of the almost infinite number of other letters that have been written by poets and authors and scientists and everyday people, is that it really encapsulates all three dimensions of attachment and grief. These notions of space, where is something or somebody, time, this dimension of, how long would it take me to reach them or for them to reach me? What would it take, in terms of time, to be reunited? And then that last dimension of closeness, and the letter beautifully illustrates the fact that, in grief, we maintain that sense of closeness. And yet we have to uncouple it from these other two dimensions, as we're referring to, space and time. So with this current understanding in mind, a few things start to become obvious and entirely normal to us, in the best and most healthy sense of the word normal. For instance, if you've lost somebody, or an animal, or even a thing that was vitally important to you, it should make perfect sense to you as to why you keep looking for that person. I recall this in my own life. I had the unfortunate circumstance of my graduate advisor, who I was very close with, died quite young of breast cancer. And her daughter, she actually has two daughters, kept her cellphone and would occasionally call me. I had a quite close relationship to their family. And when it would come in, the number would pop up on my phone of not the daughter, but the name that showed up was of my graduate advisor. So for years after she died, my initial impulse, when the phone would ring was, "Oh my goodness, she's calling." It was a reflexive excitement because I truly always enjoyed hearing from her. She was a wonderful, incredibly wonderful person, I should say. Similarly, when somebody passes away, we will find ourselves looking into a room expecting to see them there, or expecting them to knock on the door any moment, or to call on Sunday morning, as it were. Those expectations, those predictions that the brain is making, are entirely normal, because they are based on that deep catalog of episodic memory that you maintain about that person. Again, the depth and richness of that catalog scaling, of course, in direct relation to how close you were with that person, right? Closer to somebody means more information about them. More information about them means your brain has a lot of implicit, unconscious notions of when and where and how they show up. So the fact that your brain, and indeed, sometimes your body reacts to the expectation that they'll be there is entirely normal. It's simply an activation of this map that involves closeness, space, and time. Not surprisingly, then, the reordering of that map that's required in order to move through the grieving process, is going to involve some remapping. And you, as the person grieving, have the opportunity to ask which node as it's called, which element or dimension within that map, are you going to focus on? Some people really try hard to disengage with and remap their sense of emotional closeness to the person. That is, it's so unbelievably overwhelming to them, that the person is no longer accessible, that they try and change their ideas about how close they really were. They try and change their emotional attachment to the person after they've died. Clearly in the example that I gave in the Feynman letter, that's not the case. The attachment seems indeed quite fixed and not going anywhere. Psychologists and neuroscientists generally agree that the best way to approach moving through grief is actually to remap these dimensions while maintaining the close sense of attachment to the person, by not in any way trying to undermine the intensity of the attachment or how important it was to you. So we'll now talk about how that process works, and the different entry points, as they're called, to engaging in that process. So one straightforward way to think about this state of mind and body that we call grief, is that the idea that someone, or an animal, or a thing, simply does not exist anymore is not something that the brain can easily conceptualize. And the reason for that is that we, as beings that have a brain, and a brain, as an organ that makes predictions, tends to rely more on experience than knowledge. In other words, the knowledge that someone, or an animal or a thing, is gone, that it doesn't exist, at least not in the dimensionality that we were accustomed to relating to them in, is something that we can understand logically, but that emotionally is very hard to undo, and from a memory perspective is very hard to undo. So it's not just that we are in a state of emotional disbelief. It's that we have neurons, literally nerve cells and neural circuits, connections between nerve cells, that are dedicated to this vast, implicit knowledge of all the things we know about that person, animal, or thing. And just because they are no longer in the dimensionality, meaning in the configuration, alive or present in our life that they were before, doesn't eliminate those memories. Those memories persist. And so anytime we call to mind the person's name, or we call to mind things that remind us of them, or we suddenly feel the desire to engage with them, the memories, those episodic implicit memories, as they're called, all that menu and library of knowledge, slams us straight in the face, and pushes us into a mode of wanting to act in a way that's consistent with them still being here in the way that all that knowledge told us they were when we acquired it. That's a very long-winded way of saying that there's nothing wrong about the emotional state when we are in a state of grief, in fact, quite the opposite. But there is something wrong about the memories, because the memories are based on our prior knowledge of them, and those memories actually do not apply to our current knowledge of them. And again, even though our brain is a prediction machine and it's a very good one, it's not perfect. In fact, it's far from perfect. So really, moving through grief is a process of understanding how relationships are mapped in the brain, space, time, and closeness, also called attachment, understanding those three dimensions, understanding that they are closely linked, and then understanding that simply the knowledge that somebody or something or an animal isn't accessible to us, does not allow us to discard of all the knowledge that we have. And as a consequence, our brain is constantly generating expectations of how to access them, even if we know that's completely irrational. Now this should, I would hope, assist you in moving through grief. It's not a tool of the sort of, like a switch that you can flip and suddenly not feel grief, but it does point to a specific set of mechanisms or a specific set of steps that you can engage in order to start to move through the grieving process in the most adaptive and effective way, and in a way that still holds in mind, your close attachment to the person. So let's talk about some of the tools for adaptively moving through grief. These are tools gleaned from the research psychology, the clinical psychology, and the neuroscience literature. So I've synthesized my understanding of those three literatures, to provide the tools that I'm about to describe. The first one involves the acknowledgement and really the understanding that you don't want to disengage or dismantle your real attachment to someone, an animal, or a thing. That's a real thing, and there is actually no adaptive reason to try and persuade yourself or numb yourself, or somehow avoid the thinking of just how much they meant to you. What is important, however, is that you make some effort to shift your mindset and your understanding of that person, in a way that holds in mind that yes, indeed, the attachment is very real, and in some cases is very, very intense, but is now going to be uncoupled from the other two dimensions of the map, namely space and time. So again, just to make absolutely clear, there's no reason to try and convince yourself that you weren't actually that close to this person or them to you. There's no reason to try and reduce the intensity of that attachment. To the contrary, you want to anchor yourself to that attachment, but you want to make sure that your thoughts about the person, and your feelings about the person, are not oriented toward or in reference to, I should say, that map, that deep catalog of memories that you had. Now, this is not simply a fancy way of saying, don't live in the past. This is saying, you need to maintain your sense of attachment, but you need to start making predictions and understanding about how you're going to engage with that attachment, how you're going to feel those things, without the expectation that things that once happened before are going to happen again. So it's a complicated process, you can imagine, but you really want to hold and register two things at once. It's sort of like spinning two plates at once, and therefore it's going to feel like effort. One way to do this is to set aside a dedicated period of time, of maybe five or 10, maybe even as much as 30 minutes, or depending on your capacity, 30 to 45 minutes, in which you are going to feel deeply into your closeness and your attachment to that person, animal, or thing. But you are consciously going to try and prevent yourself from thinking about a couple of categories of things. First of all, you want to actively try and disengage from any attempt to engage in what's called counterfactual thinking, the what ifs. What if I had called them a day earlier? What if they had taken a different route home? What if I had taken a different route home? These counterfactual modes of thinking are an infinite landscape of possibility, and they are very closely tied to guilt. Guilt is an interesting emotion. We should probably do an entire episode about guilt, but guilt as defined by psychologists and neuroscientists is actually a way of assigning ourselves more agency, more capability of controlling reality than actually exists. And it's a very slippery slope. And I want to be clear. It's not the case that guilt is never an appropriate response, but in the context of grieving, guilt is very precarious, because in thinking "I could have done this," or "if I had only done that," you are essentially exploring an infinite landscape of things that you can never refute. You will never know that had you not gone down a different path or they had not taken a particular path in life, that things would've turned out different, but you can't know that it would've worked as well, meaning you actually don't know that your what ifs are true, and you don't know that they're not true. And so as an infinite space, it's a very precarious one, and it will not allow you to uncouple that intense emotional attachment that I'm telling you is actually vital to hold onto, from that catalog of episodic memory that you've established. In fact, it's going to strengthen those bonds. So in this dedicated five or 10 or 30, whatever period of time you can tolerate and maintain focus, the idea is to think about your attachment in a rich way, and to perhaps even experience that in your brain and body. I think if you're in a stage of grief, that actually will be fairly reflexive to do, but to try as much as possible to hold that grief in the present and to be connected to your immediate physical environment. So you want to orient yourself in current space and time, rather than focus on memories, or what you would've liked to see happen, or the wish that they were still there, while at the same time, thinking about the depth and richness of that attachment. This is a obviously a tightrope walk, so to speak. It's an emotionally challenging, and sometimes even will be experienced as a physically challenging tool or experience, but in our understanding of how attachments and grief are represented in the brain, this can be an immensely beneficial practice, because it is the first step, and indeed, it represents many of the steps in the voyage from the initial shock of loss, to our ability to hold in mind somebody or an animal or a thing in a way that still allows us to feel the depth and fullness of connection to them, without feeling the yearning, that reaching for the glass of water that unfortunately will never be resolved. Keep in mind that as you embark on this process, it is entirely normal for your mind to flip into various states of expectation that they're suddenly going to be there. In fact, because of the closeness of these three dimensions in the map, space, time, and attachment, it's entirely normal that when you start to think about your attachment to somebody, or an animal, or a thing, that you almost start to experience them as present in that environment. I'll share with you a somewhat bizarre, or it sounds bizarre to articulate out loud, but many of you perhaps will resonate with this. For years after my graduate advisor died, I would get an experience of someone touching the back of my neck when I would think about her. And that was not an experience I ever had with her, right? It was a professional relationship. I don't ever recall her touching me on the back of my neck, or me touching the back of my neck in her presence, at least not on any regular basis. So it was very perplexing to me. And then I encountered this incredible literature on grief, which said the following. "Grief in many ways is like a phantom limb." For those of you that aren't familiar, many people who experience amputation of a limb, either through surgery or accident or otherwise, will feel in a very genuine way that the limb is still present, even though when they look for the limb, it's not there. So they can feel pain in limbs. They can feel the sensation of touch. There's some famous experiments from the neurologists and my former colleague at University of California, San Diego, who goes by his last name, Ramachandran. Some people just call him Rama. He's an incredible scientist, and has done a lot of really important work, in particular on phantom limb, among other things, and has done some beautiful experiments showing that people who have phantom limb pain or that are experiencing different sensations in their phantom limb, that can be very intrusive, much in the same way that expecting someone to walk through the door, who you happen to know is deceased, can be very intrusive. Ramachandran's done beautiful experiments, showing that if you give people what's called a mirror box, this is a box in which you insert an intact limb, and there are some mirrors that give you the visual impression that the other limb is still present, and you move the intact limb and you get a mirror image of the non-existent, but nonetheless a visual image of the phantom limb moving, that you can resolve some of the pain of a limb that feels otherwise cramped up. In other words, the visual perception can reverse some of these phantom sensations. In many ways, the phantom limb scenario, and what I described about a sensation of being touched on the back of the neck, or this feeling that we have when we engage in the thinking and the emotions of our attachment to someone, an animal, or a thing is very much like a phantom limb, only it exists in the emotional space, and it exists because it is reactivation of these maps about space, time, and person. And so if the process of moving through grief, adaptively in a healthy way, involves maintaining the attachment, but uncoupling that attachment from the space and time representation of that person, animal, or thing that we had before, well, then the question becomes, where should we place our expectation of them, right? Now, that of course will vary from person to person. Some people with particular religious beliefs will indeed believe that the soul of the person, the molecules of the person have been reordered and exist in some sort of either distributed domain, right? That they are in everything, or they are in one location. I'm not here to speak to that one way or the other. There's no good experiment I know either to prove or disprove that, nor would I want to. It's not the job of science, frankly. However, allowing ourselves to place notions of where that person, animal, or thing is in their current new configuration, whatever that might be, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, or that the person's soul comes out of their body. These are all the different variations that people hear. Or some people think, "Well, it's just molecules and they disintegrate and are reordered, and come up as the plants and the trees." Again, a near infinite number of possibilities, and it depends a lot on personal belief. It is, however, essential that no matter what you believe, that you have some firm representation of where that person, animal, or thing is so that you can plug it into this map, this three-dimensional map of space, time, and attachment. The process of moving through grief can't simply be that we hold onto the attachment and we discard with any understanding of where they are in space and time. And actually, the letter that Feynman wrote to his deceased wife Arline, again, so beautifully and really poignantly illustrates the fact that he doesn't really know where to find her. On the one hand, he really understands that she's gone. And on the other hand, he understands that he still very much expects her to be there, that he would like to mail the letter. But then of course, in this final, somewhat humorous line, he doesn't know where to send the letter, he tells us. What's very clear, and I think is very healthy, is the fact that the emotional bond is still there, that that is maintained. And so this tool, if you will, of dedicated blocks of time for really spending some effort, and it is indeed effort to access the emotional connection while starting to uncouple the other nodes of the map, as it were, is something that is hard. You should expect it to be hard, but in terms of the options one has in order to deal with grief, it is indeed the most adaptive way to go about it. You're not trying to avoid thinking about it. You're not engaging in this counterfactual thinking, the what if, what if, what if. You're not drowning it out with substances or delusion or with other ways of distracting yourself. So in that sense, it is truly adaptive. Now, of course, I don't want to imply that I'm a clinical psychologist. I'm certainly not. There is absolutely a place for working with a trained professional to move through grief, especially these situations, these one in 10 people who deal with what's called complicated grief, or very prolonged grief. Those are somewhat different things, but in general, point to the fact that there are people who have an exceptionally hard time moving through grief. We'll talk about who those people are and ways to move through them, with or without a professional to assist you. But nonetheless, we're starting to understand on the basis of neuroscience, what some of the more adaptive and functional ways of moving through grief are. In order to really understand how a tool of the sort that we're describing to work, and what it's designed to accomplish at a mechanistic level, I'd like to teach you about a very important aspect of your brain function that has everything to do with grief and the process of moving through grief, but has a lot to do with other aspects of our life experience as well. Some of you are probably familiar with a brain area called the hippocampus. The hippocampus is a structure that's involved in the formation of new memories, but not the maintenance of memories. I discussed the hippocampus in detail in our episode on memory, and our episode with our guest, Dr. Wendy Suzuki from New York University, an expert on learning and memory. During those two discussions, I did not however, touch into what the different cell types are in the hippocampus, and the different roles they perform. And it turns out that there are indeed different cell types in the hippocampus, and they perform very different roles that are absolutely central to the grief process. We have cells in our hippocampus, meaning you have cells in your hippocampus. These cells are neurons, nerve cells that fire any time, or, and when we say fire, I should just remind you, I mean, have electrical activity, any time that we enter a particular familiar location. So for instance, think about your bedroom, and think about where the bed is. As you're doing that, these so-called place cells are firing, not necessarily to represent that it's a bed at that location, but to represent the location itself. We also have neurons in our hippocampus and elsewhere in our brain, I should say, that represent proximity. So for instance, if you were to wake up in the middle of the night and walk into the kitchen, and it's somewhat dark, and you orient toward the sink to get yourself a glass of water, or to the refrigerator to get yourself something to drink or to eat, as you get close to the sink or the refrigerator, there are neurons in your hippocampus that are going to start engaging electrical activity, because you are in the mirror expected proximity of the sink or refrigerator, and you know where they are, hence the word expected. Now that all seems fine and good. You've got neurons that represent where things are, and it sort of goes without saying that those same neurons map to our emotional attachments. We generally know where to find our loved ones. Even if they don't live with us, we generally know what city they're in. Even if they're traveling, we generally have a sense of where they're traveling or the general area in which they're traveling. Place cells and proximity cells are involved in that kind of mapping and representations as well. Now there's a third kind of cell that's particularly important for the sort of tool that we were talking about earlier, that tool of holding on to the emotional attachment to somebody, and yet trying to deliberately remap our understanding of where they are in space and time. And that has to do with a category of cells called trace cells. Trace cells were discovered by a number of laboratories. I think the most renowned of those is the Moser Laboratory. The Mosers are a couple. Actually, they were a couple. They're now, I think, amicably separated or divorced. That's not what this episode's about. If I have that wrong, forgive me. Edvard and Britt are their names. Their relationship isn't what's important, except what is important is the work that they did together in one form or another, which was very important work, establishing this category of cells not just in the hippocampus, but in an area of the brain called the entorhinal cortex, that acts as a sort of coordinate system, to orient us in space and time. Trace cells are activated when we expect something to be at a given location, but it's not there. Experiments done in their laboratory and in other laboratories have shown that, for instance, if you give a rodent or frankly, a person, a object that always resides at the same location, and we reach to it in order to access it, let's say where your coffeemaker is in the morning. I do a pour-over coffee. If I'm drinking coffee or latte, I'll do a pour-over. It's always more or less in the same location. And so there are place cells and proximity cells that relate to my being able to find that pour-over coffee cone thing. However, if I were to go to that location and it wasn't there, the trace cells, these neurons in my hippocampus and in the entorhinal cortex and elsewhere, 'cause again, these cells are connected by way of circuitry, by way of connections, those trace cells would fire. We could even call it a trace circuit. It's a circuit that has an expectation that something will be in a location. But when something is not at that location, this circuit becomes active. This is important because what we're talking about here is a neural circuit and a set of neurons that are responsible, not for the presence of something, but the absence of something. We have every reason to believe, based on neuroimaging studies and studies in animal models, that trace cells become very active in the immediate stage after the loss of a loved one, that the brain and our maps of the person, place, or thing that we know cognitively, we understand, we even believe they are gone. They are not accessible for whatever reason, death or otherwise. And yet we have neurons that are firing, to reveal that absence to us. And these neurons are closely associated with neurons that tell us where things ought to be. So if you feel the expectation, or you sense that somebody should walk through the door any moment, or call at any moment, or be next to you when you wake up, and yet you cognitively understand that they won't, that there's no real reason why they should, because they are indeed gone, you are not crazy. In fact, it's simply a reflection of the normal functioning of these trace cells and trace circuits. Now I'd like to consider why two people, both who are intensely attached to a person that is no longer there, can experience the grief of the loss of that person in such different ways. This is often observed. You can have, God forbid, incredibly sadly, in cases where a child is lost, where both parents are grieving intensely, but one seems to feel it at a emotional depth and level that seems distinct from the other. Now of course, keep in mind that we never really know how other people are feeling. This is something actually that was raised in the episode where I interviewed a psychiatrist and researcher colleague of mine from Stanford, Karl Deisseroth. As a psychiatrist, I heard him say once that we really don't know how other people feel. In fact, a lot of times we don't even really know how we feel, or at least describing that is quite challenging with language, often. And indeed that is the case. We don't really know how other people feel. There's no clear way of knowing that the expression someone else has or whether or not they're crying or not, or their body language really represents how they feel inside. So that is important to keep in mind. Nonetheless, there does seem to be a sort of a split among people, and indeed, among animals as well, even within a species, in terms of how intensely they feel the yearning aspect of grief. And it appears, based on a number of different lines of evidence, that that relates to this molecule that some of you have probably heard of, which is oxytocin. Oxytocin is a hormone slash peptide. A peptide just means a protein, generally a small protein, and a hormone is generally something that functions at numerous locations in the body to impact numerous organs and areas of the brain. So a peptide can be a hormone, and a hormone can be a peptide. They are not mutually exclusive. Oxytocin has a variety of roles in the brain and body. It's involved in milk letdown during lactation. It's involved in pair bonding, both in males and females. It's involved in bonding of parent to child, and indeed, between romantic partners, et cetera, et cetera. Let's talk about some of the animal models that inform us about the potential roles of oxytocin in the grieving process. There's a species of animal called the prairie vole, and believe it or not, the prairie vole has been studied fairly extensively by neuroscience and psychology researchers. In fact, our former director of the National Institutes of Mental Health, Tom Insel, his laboratory focused quite heavily on prairie voles. Prairie voles are one species of animal, but depending on where they live, you find that some prairie voles are monogamous. That is, they mate with the same prairie vole for life. They raise litters of little prairie voles for life, and other prairie voles, generally that live in different locations in the wild, are non-monogamous, sometimes called polygamous. The neurochemical and circuit basis for this monogamy versus non-monogamy, quite interesting. However, in the context of grief and attachment, the prairie voles have taught us a lot, and they've taught us a lot through the following experiment. You take two prairie voles that are coupled up. So these would be monogamous prairie voles, that have established a couple bond. I guess you would call that at a prairie voledom. Anyway, you put them in a cage together. They mate together, they raise young together, and then you separate them. You literally put a physical barrier between the two of them, and you can evaluate how strongly one prairie vole will work to get access to the other prairie vole, right? This is sort of the "Romeo and Juliet" of prairie vole experiments. And what you observe is that the monogamous prairie voles will work very hard to get back to their mate, to get access to their mate. They will lever press. They'll even walk across a metal plate that they get a electrical shock. They'll work very, very hard. They will cross rivers and valleys, if you will, in the experimental context, that is. The polygamous prairie voles, and again, we don't know if they are polyamorous. We don't know what they feel, right? We don't know if they're in love or if they're motivated simply for other things. But the non-monogamous prairie voles will not work as hard to access a prairie vole partner. Now you could argue that's because they expect that there will be other prairie vole partners, but even if they've never experienced another prairie vole partner, they won't work quite as hard to get back in connection with this other prairie vole, to mate or otherwise. This turns out to be interesting, when you start to explore the patterns of so-called oxytocin receptors in the brain. To make a long story short, and to also bridge to the human literature, it turns out that the monogamous prairie voles have far more oxytocin receptors in this brain area that I mentioned earlier, the nucleus accumbens. And again, to remind you, the nucleus accumbens is the brain area associated with motivation, craving and pursuit. So it's as if the monogamous prairie voles have a capacity to link the attachment circuitry and the molecules of attachment, in this case, oxytocin, to reward pathways and to motivational pathways. Polygamous, or we should say, non-monogamous prairie voles, do as well. However, they have less oxytocin receptors. So in other words, non-monogamous prairie voles seem to have less yearning for attachment overall, at least to a single individual prairie vole. And when we look at the human literature, in terms of oxytocin receptor expression and brain imaging experiments, and so on, what you find is the same, that people that experience intense grief, and a deep yearning and a motivation to reconnect with the person, animal, or thing that is lost, in many cases have heightened levels of oxytocin specifically, or I should say, oxytocin receptors to be exact, specifically within the brain regions associated with craving and pursuit. So for those of you that find yourself in this kind of stuck mode, this persistence of trying to reach into the past or wishful thinking, this counterfactual thinking, "if only, if only, if only." You don't necessarily want to pathologize that thinking. First of all, we should acknowledge that it's not necessarily adaptive. And in fact, in the complete loss of somebody, or if somebody says they don't want anything to do with you ever again, by all means, you know, if that's expressed clearly, then you need to accept that reality. But the yearning, the desire, and the impulsivity, that kind of leaning in at a almost reflexive way, to try and access that person again, to text them, to want to hear from them, could, and I have to highlight, could reflect the fact that you just so happen to have more oxytocin receptors or maybe more oxytocin overall in this brain area that's associated with motivation and pursuit. It does not necessarily mean that you are more capable of attachment than people who move through grief more quickly. And I should say that people move through grief at different rates. Even if two people lost the same person, or same animal, people move through this at different rates. And some of that is no doubt psychological, but some of it, no doubt, is also neurochemical and biological. And in sharing this with you, I hope it sheds some understanding and perhaps even some compassion for people who are moving through things more quickly or in a different way. And of course it should also, I would hope, shed compassion and understanding for people that seem incapable of quote unquote moving on. It's taking them far longer to move on. Earlier, we talked about complicated grief, non-complicated grief, and prolonged grief disorder. And I should say that the precise divisions between these categories is not very precise. It takes a really trained expert to be able to identify whether or not somebody is in the prolonged grief disorder category, complicated or non-complicated grief. There's actually a set of questionnaires that I invite you to answer if you like. They were provided, or I should say I accessed them through a public site on Mary-Frances O'Connor's webpage. We'll put them in the show note captions. You actually can submit those answers in an anonymous way to a study that she's doing. She has several surveys, one for loss of a romantic relationship, other for loss due to death of somebody, and still another one that relates to homesickness, and it's also available in several different languages. So I'll provide a link to that website. It's very easy to download. There's no cost to that at all. You can contribute to the scientific data collection process, if you like. And I do believe that you get your scores back or an interpretation of your scores by participating there. When Mary-Frances O'Connor hopefully comes on the podcast, she can tell us some more of the detail about separating out this prolonged grief disorder, complicated and non-complicated grief. But in the meantime, it's very clear that people move through grief at different rates. And as I mentioned just a moment ago, that this is entirely normal, probably has a basis in neurochemicals and hormones, such as oxytocin. There are probably other reasons as well. In fact, we can assume with almost certainty that there are other reasons as well. Nonetheless, I think it is really important to think about why some people might have a harder time moving through grief due to life circumstance, innate differences, and so on. There's a very nice set of studies, but one in particular, entitled "Catecholamine Predictors of Complicated Grief Outcomes." Here again, the first author is Mary-Frances O'Connor, reminding us that she's done so much important work in this area. This paper has several conclusions, but one of the key conclusions is that this particular category of molecules we call the catecholamines, the catecholamines include epinephrine, which is also adrenaline, norepinephrine, which is noradrenaline, and dopamine, which you've learned about before. Here, I'm just going to paraphrase, or I'll read directly, actually. What they found was that "participants", again, this is human subjects, "with the highest levels of epinephrine, of adrenaline, pre-treatment, had the highest levels of complicated grief symptoms post-treatment, and that could account for their baseline level of symptoms." What this means is that people that have a lot of circulating adrenaline, we might even call these people, people who are, or typically reside at a higher level of autonomic arousal, right? We have an autonomic nervous system that dictates how calm or alert or stressed we happen to be just at baseline. People who tend to be more alert and anxious at baseline, prior to any grief episode, tend to have, or statistically on average, we should say, are more likely to experience complicated grief and maybe even prolonged grief symptoms. So if you're somebody that is anticipating losing someone, or an animal, or a thing at some point, and I think that really means everybody, utilizing tools to adjust your epinephrine, your adrenaline levels down has a number of important benefits, improving sleep, health metrics, et cetera. There are tools to do that. We have an episode on mastering stress that you can find at our website, hubermanlab.com. It has a lot of behavioral tools that are backed by science, some of work that was done in my laboratory, but certainly other laboratories as well, that will allow you to control your autonomic nervous system, both in real time, and reduce the overall level of stress and even chronic activation of the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is just fancy geek speak for saying, there are tools to help you be calm, not just for sake of navigating daily stress, but as this paper illustrates, for anticipating the fact that at some point, you will lose somebody, an animal, or a thing, and there is a way to move through that process that we call healthy, normal grieving. And then there's the so-called complicated grief, or prolonged grief disorders, that reflect immense challenge in moving through grief at a reasonable rate. So you can somewhat inoculate yourself against complicated or prolonged grief, by reducing your resting levels of, or your pre-loss levels of epinephrine, of adrenaline. And again, there are excellent tools to do that. I won't review them here for sake of time, but they're time-stamped, and you can access those easily. Again, zero cost tools. Going back to this paper, "Catecholamine Predictors of Complicated Grief Treatment Outcomes," should say that not only did participants with the highest levels of adrenaline have the highest levels of complicated grief symptoms post-treatment, but the predictive relationship between these two things, adrenaline and complicated grief, was not seen in depression. And I find that incredibly interesting, because it further separates depression from grieving and grieving from depression. It's a resounding theme again and again. Grieving is not depression, and depression is not necessarily grieving. They can coexist, but they are separable as well, and indeed, reflect separate brain circuitries entirely. So the conclusion they draw is that "The present study supports the hypothesis that catecholamine levels," again, epinephrine, dopamine, norepinephrine are the catecholamines, "are affected by bereavement and in turn, can affect the ability of those with complicated grief to benefit from psychotherapy." So what does all this mean? What this means is, we can prepare ourselves to be in a better state to access, yes, access grief when it's appropriate. And indeed, grief is the appropriate response, when we lose someone, an animal, or a thing that we are closely attached to, and yet, to be able to move through that at a pace and in a way that is most adaptive for us. And to just, again, highlight what adaptive means. It does not mean dissociating from the attachment to the person, animal, or thing. I just want to pause for a second, and mention why I keep repeating person, animal, or thing. I'm saying that because, while grieving the loss of a person, or a relationship with a person, doesn't have to be through death, of course, but death or otherwise is something that we all can intuitively understand, even if we haven't experienced it. We are capable of achieving great attachments to animals as well. And while the loss of a thing, of an object, in no way, shape or form, approximates the loss of a person or an animal, I would never suggest that it does, it would also be naive and unfair of me or anyone else to suggest that things can't hold immense importance to us, and that the loss of them can feel quite significant, and invoke the grieving process. This isn't always about materialism. Sometimes it's purely about the sentimental attachment. So for instance, the loss of a wedding ring or an engagement ring that was very meaningful to you, or an article of clothing or a painting, or even a small, seemingly unimportant object to somebody else, but something that held great meaning to you, maybe a seashell that you collected with somebody on the beach, and then somehow it gets lost. And it's the relationship with that person that's contained within that object for you, as a representation within that object that's important. That's the reason why I keep saying, person, animal, or thing. I think it's only fair to include things in that category, but of course, with the understanding that they don't hold the absolute same magnitude as the loss of a being. One thing that we ought to consider for a moment, is whether or not the depth of attachment that you have to somebody predicts how long it will take for you to move through the loss of that person. We often hear this. Actually, I can remember some years ago, at the end of a relationship, a friend and colleague of mine saying, "You know, for every year that you were together, it's going to take you one month to get over that person." And I thought, "Where in the world did those data come from?" [laughs] And this is what I call anecdata or collective data, where this is like phrases such as, "Absence makes the heart grow fonder." And indeed, sometimes absence can make the heart grow fonder, in the context of two living people or people in a loving relationship, or even in the context of grief and loss. But of course, there's, "Absence makes the heart grow fonder," and then you also will hear, "Out of sight, out of mind." And if you've been listening to this episode, clearly, out of sight does not mean out of mind or out of emotional connection. So these sayings of, "Well, it takes X number of months for number of years," or "out of sight, out of mind," or "absence makes the heart grow fonder," they really don't hold a lot of meaning, at least not for somebody like me, who likes science because science is at least geared toward or aims towards establishing things in fact, not opinion, but also because science allows you to make predictions. It allows you to orient yourself in a process, and make predictions and understand. So, what are we to think of people who seem very, very attached to somebody? They break up, and they seem just crushed, devastated. But three weeks later, they're in a new relationship and they seem perfectly fine. Or somebody whose spouse dies, and then suddenly they're in a new relationship. I think there are rates of transition, if you will, that suggest some dysfunction, pathology, et cetera. But here we aren't in a position to judge. We're only in a position to speculate about this. And I think we can reasonably speculate that it sort of makes sense why someone who has an intense attachment to somebody might be able to form intense attachments generally, right, that they aren't restricted to one person, whereas other people who have an intense attachment to somebody might find themselves entirely incapable of moving on, or it would take them a very long time, hence the lines in the Feynman letter to Arline about, he had met various other young women. They seemed perfectly nice. And yet, they were meaningless to him in the shadow of her memory, or we should say, in the light of Arline's memory, or the memory of Arline, rather. So these dimensionalities of attachment, they cut in every direction. And I don't think any well-trained psychologist or neuroscientist would ever say, "Oh, if you are somebody who becomes very attached, therefore it's very hard to move on." I think that could be true. It could also be that if you're somebody who has a great capacity for attachment, you have a great capacity for attachment overall. Neuroscience nor psychology is really in a position to judge, certainly, but it's also not in a position to make those kinds of predictions, at least the field, as it stands right now, of attachment and grieving, can't really speak to why that's the case. So that's my attempt to depathologize some of what we observe, although I have to confess, from a just sort of everyday stance, that sometimes the rate in which people move out of attachments and grieving can be somewhat eerie. I'd like to take a moment and explore this idea that allowing ourselves to really feel the attachment to somebody can accelerate or at least support adaptive transitioning through grief. There's a really wonderful study that, on the face of it, appears to be a, what we call negative result. A negative result is when a hypothesis is posed, and then turns out the hypothesis is not true. But as is the case with so many interesting scientific findings, often when there's a negative result, there's a more interesting result nested in that negative outcome. And this is the case in a particular paper I'll share with you now. This is a paper published in the journal "Biological Psychology." And again, the title is posed as a question, which is, "Emotional Disclosure for Whom? A Study of Vagal Tone in Bereavement." What this study explored was whether or not written disclosure of the emotional connection to somebody that was lost would be effective as a way for people to move through the grieving process. The study also explored the so-called vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is an extensive nerve pathway that is bidirectional between brain and body, so brain to body and body to brain. It generally is associated with calming effects on our brain and body, although that's certainly not always the case. The way to think about it in terms of what we're going to talk about now is heart rate and heart rate variability. And in very simplistic terms, if your heart was just allowed to beat at its sort of default rate, that rate would be rather high, because of the activation of the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, the alertness component of the autonomic nervous system. The parasympathetic nervous system, as it's called, involves calming. We sometimes hear sympathetic is for stress or fight or flight. It's for a lot of other things as well, I should mention, and it is not for sympathy. Sympa simply means together, and it reflects the activity of a bunch of neurons being active at the same time or together, sympa, whereas parasympathetic is often associated with quote unquote rest and digest functions, or calming functions, although it is certainly involved in other things as well. So sympathetic nervous system drives alertness, panic, stress, et cetera. Parasympathetic nervous system, meaning a distinct set of neurons drive calming, falling asleep, digestion, sexual arousal for that matter, and so on. So it's sort of like a seesaw of alertness and calm, alertness and calm, sympathetic and parasympathetic, back and forth. The vagus nerve is generally associated with parasympathetic functions, and has the capacity to slow down our heart rate, in particular, by exhales, and just simply because of the movement of the diaphragm and its relationship to the heart and the thoracic cavity. Exhales result in slowing down of the heart rate. This is what we call an increased vagal tone. So let me explain for a moment. And actually here's a tool you can use, not just in terms of navigating grief, but in terms of stress modulation, generally. We have a muscle called the diaphragm. When we inhale, [inhales] whether or not it's through our mouth or our nose, our diaphragm moves down. As a consequence, there is more space overall in the thoracic cavity. The heart gets a little bit bigger, believe it or not, volume-wise, blood flows more slowly through that large volume. And there's a signal conveyed from the nervous system to the heart to speed the heart up. So inhales literally speed your heart up. And when you exhale, the diaphragm moves up. And as a consequence, there's less space in the thoracic cavity. Heart gets a little bit smaller. The existing blood volume in the heart at that time moves more quickly through that small volume, right? Given amount of blood volume, make the compartment it's in, the heart, smaller, and the blood moves more quickly through that volume. And as a consequence, the nervous system sends a signal to the heart, via the vagus and other pathways, to slow the heart down. In other words, exhales slow the heart down. That process, that relationship between inhales speeding the heart up, and exhales slowing the heart down, is something called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. Some people are able to engage respiratory sinus arrhythmia more naturally, more reflexively than others. You can actually train this by consciously thinking about slowing your heart rate while you exhale, and consciously thinking about increasing your heart rate as you inhale. You can literally strengthen these pathways. Now, respiratory sinus arrhythmia, and the ability to slow your heart rate with exhales, is one dimension of what's called vagal tone, or your ability to control your overall level of activation of alertness and stress, with these vagus nerve pathways. So vagal tone is something that varies from person to person. If you've trained up or you've thought about your relationship between breath and heart rate, you can improve vagal tone. Some people have very robust vagal tone without having done any training. Other people have less of it, et cetera. I'll just paraphrase from this paper, and you'll see where this takes us in terms of navigating grief, because it's quite important. "The vagus nerve provides inhibitory regulatory influence on the heart, allowing the heart rate to increase rapidly through vagal withdrawal," that means kind of coming off the break of the parasympathetic nervous system, "as in response to a stressor in one's environment." Right, when you're stressed, you rarely take the opportunity, if it's an immediate stress or threat, to actively exhale, although that would be a great tool to use. And in fact, we promote that tool in our "Mastering Stress" episode. "Vagal withdrawal usually co-occurs with an increase in sympathetic activation of the heart." You now know what that is, "or is known as the fight or flight response. Vagal tone reflects the degree to which there is tonic," meaning ongoing, "vagal influence on the heart." So when you have a high degree of vagal tone, it means that you are always activating that break on your stress system, just at default. And some people just happen to do that more. Other people need to practice long exhale breathing in order to build up vagal tone, something that's very useful to do, whether you're grieving or not. Now in this study, what they did is they had people, and I should say it was 35 participants, go through a writing exercise for a period of weeks. They actually wrote about three times per week. Then there was a follow up at some period of time, and then again, about a month later. And there were two different groups. One group was in the so-called written disclosure group. What they did is they, on day one, they would write about what happened when a loved one died. And indeed they used people who had experienced real loss. And so they were asked to talk about and write about their deepest emotions and thoughts about it, memories of their loved one, very intense stuff, if you think about it, if they're in the immediate period of having lost someone. Then they actually were asked to write a letter to the person that they lost. So again, a very intense exercise to go through, if you did indeed lose somebody as these subjects had. And then of course there was the testing, some period of time later, and I'll tell you what that period, what that testing involved. The other group was a so-called control group, where they were simply told to write about how they use their time. So an emotionally kind of empty writing exercise, if you will. They described what they did today after they woke up, et cetera, no heavy emotional content, and so on. Now, as I mentioned earlier, the immediate results of this study were a negative result, meaning no effect. The disclosure that, we should say, the emotionally intense writing group and the control group did not differ at baseline on any symptom measures or psychological variables, they tell us, and at least at face value, somewhat disappointingly, there really wasn't any kind of difference in outcome between the group that wrote about the very emotionally intense stuff versus non-emotionally intense. Now, what I didn't tell you thus far is why they had them do this exercise at all. They had them do this exercise because many of the effective practices for moving through grief involve, as I mentioned earlier, getting close to and actually deliberately experiencing the attachment that one has to that person that was lost, not distracting one's self, not getting into this counterfactual thinking, the what if, what if, what if, but rather thinking about, or in this case, writing about the real attachment. And so the initial idea was, if people write about this attachment, that they're going to experience this attachment, and that will serve them in some or many ways, in terms of moving through grief. And that wasn't what they found. They found no difference between the two groups, until they explored who had higher vagal tone, who had a greater degree of so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. In other words, who was able to modulate their state, using their breathing and their body. And what they discovered was that a subset of individuals who had a high degree of vagal tone seemed to get more benefit from this writing-type exercise. Now, this is one study, and I would consider it fairly preliminary with 35 subjects. Although, you know, it's a study unto itself and I think a quite nice one, and it really set the stage for a number of other studies that followed, from this group and other groups, that really point to the fact that yes, indeed, accessing these states of emotionality by writing or thinking about somebody is quite powerful in terms of engaging the bodily states and the mind states associated with the attachment. And that is very beneficial for moving through grief. That is very beneficial for sensing the attachment. And now it makes perfect sense as to why some people would benefit from that sort of practice more than others, because some people are able to access more real somatic feelings of attachment by writing about the attachment, or by thinking about it, than others. So this brings us back to an earlier discussion we were having, where we were talking about how some people seem to move through things very quickly, or don't seem to be grieving constantly, and a spouse or a family member of that person might think, "Gosh, why aren't you upset? How is it that you can be functional and I'm not," or, "how is it that you can be functional?" There can even be fractures in families and relationships on the basis of differences in rates of grieving and so on. Well, some of this, again, probably relates to psychology and the different attachments that people had to the person or animal or thing that was lost, but it no doubt also has to do with how much of a mind/body connection, how much vagal tone exists in the person, when they suddenly found themselves in the grief episode. So this actually offers multiple opportunities. If you're somebody, for instance, who is grieving so intensely and so often that you're finding it immensely difficult to move through grief at a reasonable rate, and you might even say, or find yourself diagnosed with prolonged grief disorder or with complicated grief syndrome in a way that's really impairing your adaptive functioning in life, well then, it's not clear to me, at least by my read of the data, that you would want to engage in a lot of practices to increase the mind/body relationship and feeling so much of this attachment, because you're already feeling an immense amount of it. Whereas other people who are feeling challenged in accessing the feelings of attachment, and perhaps not functioning well as a consequence of that, might find that practicing breathing in order to encourage respiratory sinus arrhythmia, again, focusing on slowing your heart rate consciously while you exhale, and concentrating on increasing your heart rate as you inhale, even just as a brief practice of even just one to three minutes or one to five minutes, every once in a while or per day, that could be immensely beneficial in building this mind/body relationship. Because again, what this paper really points to and set off a number of other investigations related to, is that for those that can really feel the relationship between breathing heart rate, what we call vagal tone, well, those people are going to be in a better position to move through grief, not because they are disengaging from the feelings of attachment, but because they are better able to access those feelings of attachment. So what this relates to of course is that tripartite map, that three-part map that we talked about earlier, that representation of space, where things are, where the person is, where their belongings are, where their car is, where their bicycle is, time, when you were expecting to see them on a regular basis, when they would call, when they would come home from work, et cetera, and that third node, or that third dimension of attachment, which is literally attachment and closeness. Well, what we're talking about here is anchoring to that attachment and really feeling into that, but then disengaging from the space and time map that we call episodic memory, that menu of prior experiences, that keeps us in many ways, maladaptively in an expectation of what never can be again. Now I'd like to take a moment and consider some of the tools that you can access that support healthy transitioning through grief. And these are tools distinct from that neural map, that space, time and closeness attachment map that we were talking about before. Rather, it's important to remind ourselves that everything exists in a context of our baseline physiology. And I'm certainly not going to be the first or the last to tell you that everything in life, learning, relationships with people that are still around, our health in every way, immune system, et cetera, function far better when we're sleeping really well, and when we are generally awake during the daytime and asleep at night. I realize there are shift workers out there, people who are traveling and are jet-lagged. First of all, thank you, shift workers. We rely on you. We have an episode all about jet lag and shift work, for you and for trying to maintain the best possible mental and physical health in the face of ongoing shift work and jet lag. You can find that episode on our website, hubermanlab.com. Lots of behavioral tools, some other tools as well. Nonetheless, human beings are diurnal. We were really designed to be awake mostly in the day and asleep at night. There are rare exceptions to this where people like to stay up late and sleep in late. But we are a diurnal species, by way of our genetic wiring and our neural circuit wiring. There's a particular feature to our diurnal, and diurnal, meaning the opposite of nocturnal, our diurnal pattern of the release of a hormone called cortisol. Cortisol is a stress hormone, it's sometimes called, but cortisol has a lot of other effects, many of which are positive. Cortisol for instance, protects us against infection. It can help us in terms of waking up in the morning. In fact, the pulse as it's called or the spike in cortisol early in the day is part of the reason we wake up. It's linked to our increase in temperature rhythms, and can further increase our temperature, which leads to waking, and so on. The typical pattern of cortisol in a healthy individual, and we really can say physically and emotionally healthy individual, is that cortisol is going to be somewhat high right around waking, and then is going to be highest as it ever will be in the 24-hour period, about 45 minutes post waking, not exactly 45 minutes, but about 45 minutes. And then it will drop gradually, such that by about 4:00 p.m. in the afternoon, which is actually when body temperature tends to start to drop as well, cortisol tends to be very low, and then remains low in a healthy individual, such that at 9:00 p.m., it's very low. And throughout the night as we sleep, it's very low. In fact, spikes or pulses in 9:00 p.m. cortisol are a fairly reliable biomarker readout of certain forms of depression and chronic anxiety. This relates to the beautiful work of my colleagues at Stanford and Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. David Spiegel, who's been on this podcast, and Dr. Robert Sapolsky, who has also been on this podcast. There's a very interesting paper exploring the relationship between cortisol rhythms and grieving, in particular, complicated versus non-complicated grieving. Again, complicated grieving being the form of grieving that reflects a immense challenge of people moving through the grieving process, such that it really needs to be dealt with, right? Again, grieving is healthy, but complicated grieving is a prolonged grieving, and has other dimensions as well, hence the name complicated. The title of this paper is, "Diurnal Cortisol in Complicated and Non-Complicated Grief, Slope Differences Across the Day." And the figure to orient to in this paper, if you do decide to check it out, and we'll put a link to it, is Figure One, which beautifully shows, or I should say very clearly shows, that in individuals that are experiencing complicated grief, there's the same general contour of high cortisol upon waking, even higher about 45 minutes after waking, and then a reduction in cortisol by 4:00 p.m., and even further reduction by 9:00 p.m., so just as it were in a typical individual, or somebody who is in non-complicated grieving. However, when you compare the cortisol levels between people experiencing complicated grieving versus non-complicated grieving, what you find is the 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. cortisol levels are significantly higher than they are in the non-complicated grieving group. This raises a very interesting idea, and relates very closely to what we were talking about with vagal tone. You could imagine a situation in which people who are experiencing complicated grief have higher levels of afternoon and nighttime cortisol, because they are in complicated grief, but you could also imagine the opposite, that they're experiencing complicated grief because of the fact that they have elevated cortisol. Now, it's very likely that it's bidirectional, that the answer isn't one or the other, but both, that complicated grief changes patterns of cortisol, and that patterns of cortisol change the likelihood that one has complicated grief. That's the most logical interpretation of data like these. However, when taken along with the data on vagal tone, that people who have a higher level of vagal tone are better able to navigate situations of the sort that we're talking about, and that some people perhaps have oxytocin receptors or patterns of catecholamines or epinephrine, that position them to be more likely to grieve in a particular way, we arrive at a scenario where it makes very good sense to think about modulating, that is controlling the foundation of your life, in a way that establishes cortisol rhythms, and sleep patterns, and patterns of autonomic arousal and catecholamine release that position you to navigate the grief process in the best possible way. If that was a complicated mouthful to digest, let me restate it in a simpler way. If you are somebody who is heading into grief or is challenged with grief, complicated grief, or otherwise, prolonged grief or otherwise, getting adequate sleep at night and establishing as normal a pattern of cortisol as possible is going to be very important. And there's a very simple, straightforward way to do this. And I apologize to the listeners of this podcast in advance, if I sound like a repeating record, but the most powerful way to do this is to view sunlight, very close to waking. It does not have to be right at sunrise, but when you get up in the morning, if the sun isn't out, please turn on as many bright lights as possible in your environment. And then once the sun is out, try and get some bright sunlight in your eyes. Never look at any light so bright that it's painful to look at, sunlight or otherwise. If you live in an area of the world where there isn't a lot of sunlight, please keep in mind that sunlight coming through cloud cover is going to still be a very effective mechanism for establishing this cortisol rhythm. Why do I say this thing about sunlight over and over and over again? Well, having an early day cortisol peak and a very low cortisol level late in the day, 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., is immensely beneficial. It's, reflects a properly regulated autonomic nervous system. It means being alert during the day. And your ability to sleep at night is tightly correlated to this viewing of sunlight in the morning. If you have additional questions about this or these protocols, please see our "Mastering Sleep" episode also at hubermanlab.com. But in brief, you don't want to wear sunglasses when you do this. You do not want to do this through a window or a windshield. It is 50 times less effective at least, because of filtering of the proper wavelengths. It is fine to wear eyeglasses, meaning corrective lenses or contacts, even if they have UV protection. Again, sunlight is best 10 minutes to 30 minutes, depending on how bright it is outside, and so on and so forth. I keep coming back to this protocol, because first of all, it is a zero cost, but very effective way to regulate things like cortisol rhythms, melatonin rhythms, wakefulness during the day, ease of falling asleep at night, and so on, and second of all, because I want to emphasize this idea of modulation. There are processes in our brain and body which directly mediate some psychological effect or physiological effect, right? Dopamine is directly involved in motivation. If you're somebody who struggles with motivation, your dopamine system is likely to be dysregulated in some way. And there are behavioral tools and other tools to adjust that. We had an episode on dopamine motivation and drive that talks extensively about those tools. However, the process of grief can't be distilled down to one molecule, one circuit, such that we can say, "Oh, you know, take this supplement or eat this diet and/or exercise in the following way, and you'll recover from grief more quickly." It's simply not the case. It is the case, however, that proper sleep at night sets the foundation for the proper emotional tone, to be able to navigate physical, psychological, and other types of challenges, and not incidentally, sleep at night, I should say, sufficient duration and quality of sleep at night is the way in which you engage neuroplasticity, the reordering of neural connections, and everything we've been talking about today about reordering of the maps in your mind. This tripartite, three-part map of space, time, and closeness involves neuroplasticity, the reconfiguring of connections between neurons, strengthening certain pathways, and not strengthening others, actively trying to disengage from the what if, right, this counterintuitive thinking, actively trying to disengage from the expectations that someone will be there, although when you find yourself doing that, understanding why it's so reflexive and normal to do that, actively trying to lean into the real attachment to somebody, animal, or thing, and yet at the same time, not deluding yourself and undermining the whole process of grieving, by trying to imagine that they are in fact still, truly there, right? It's a very narrow knife edge of a process, which is why it's so challenging. Regulating your cortisol rhythm through viewing sunlight early in the day, and I should also say, avoiding bright lights from artificial sources in the evening, generally 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m, but certainly in the evening, trying to dim lights in your immediate environment, trying to avoid bright screens, bright artificial lights as much as possible, and accessing that deep sleep, that's modulating, it's setting an overall autonomic state or an overall autonomic landscape, would be the better way to describe it, that's going to allow you to sleep and get neuroplasticity, sleep and be in the best emotional state to navigate the grieving process. Because it's only fair to say that the grieving process as we're describing it is hard, and not just because it's emotionally hard. It's cognitively hard. You just think about what's required to move through grief properly, if you will. It's thinking about, and actually physically experiencing the depth, the full depth of the attachment to the person, while at the same time trying to uncouple from that rich menu, that catalog of episodic memories that can date back many, many years and have so much richness. So many predictions form on the basis of those episodic memories, and actively trying to distance ourselves from those memories, by being very anchored in the fact that we are present, we are the person alone in that room, or in some cases with a bereavement group in that room, or with other people that are mourning the loss of that individual, animal, or thing, and that knife edge of feeling the intense attachment, while also disengaging from all the things that led to that attachment. Well, it's understandable why that would be so challenging, and it should also be understandable why positioning yourself to be able to do that in the best possible way requires proper sleep. So what are the tools that we can think about using, in terms of healthy, adaptive moving through grief, trying to avoid complicated grief and prolonged grief disorders? I realize that word disorder implies all sorts of things, but again, those are just naming categorizations that people come up with, that I think fairly reflect the fact that some people have more challenge moving through grieving than others. And for some people it can be very extended. I think the common misunderstanding is that proper grieving involves moving through something quickly. We're certainly not saying that. However, it is very clear that some people can get stuck, and that process of getting stuck, you should now understand, has a lot to do with maintaining or reactivating those episodic memories, those expectations of where somebody will be in space and time. So what can we say about the tools for moving through grief? Clearly it's of value to dedicate some period of time, perhaps every day, perhaps every other day, depending on your capacity and schedule. These could be periods of time ranging anywhere from five to 45 minutes, maybe longer. These blocks of time would be appropriately described as rational grieving, right? Rational grieving is a clear acceptance of the new reality that the person, animal, or thing no longer exists in the same space/time dimensionality that we knew them before, and yet holding on to an anchoring to the attachment that we had. This is again, not an unhealthy anchoring to the attachment. This is really anchoring to the depth and the intensity of the attachment that existed, as a way to, for lack of a better way to put it, push off from those episodic memories, to distance ourselves from them. Because those episodic memories are the ones that lead us to look for the person in our current reality. And assuming this is a real and complete loss, those sorts of expectations are maladaptive. They do not serve us well. The second aspect of this is to understand that the node of the map, the component of the neural map that you're anchoring to, is a very real component of you. These are literally cells that represent the depth of attachment. They are linked up with your emotional centers in the brain, and indeed they're linked up with your body. I think one of the things that comes up so often when people are grieving is why does it hurt so much? Well, that hurt is that yearning. It's that anticipation of action that you want to engage in, but some part of you at least knows that it leads nowhere. It's that reaching for that glass of water in a kind of desert of thirst, and you know you can't have it. That's why it hurts so badly, because the systems of your brain and body are in a place of anticipation of readiness. And given the activation of these brain reward systems like the nucleus accumbens, given your now understanding of oxytocin, being more enriched in the nucleus accumbens of some individuals and as opposed to others, it should make perfect sense as to why it's so painful in your body. We talked a moment ago about the importance of accessing quality sleep on a regular basis, gave you at least one tool to do that. There are again, a rich array of tools to do that in the "Mastering Sleep" episode. And again, highlighting the importance of sleep for not just emotion regulation and autonomic control, which is so vital, but also for making sure that neuroplasticity takes place. Because again, neuroplasticity is a two-part process. There's the triggering of the plasticity, which in the case of the things we're talking about today, will be naturally activated by the practice of a dedicated focusing on the attachment, feeling the attachment to the person, maybe even writing about the attachment to the person, as was described in that previous study, but also just the plasticity is triggered by the mere loss of that person, the intensity of that experience. But neuroplasticity, the literal rewiring of connections, occurs during deep sleep and in what I call non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. And you can find NSDR scripts, these are short behavioral protocols that you do for 10 to 30 minutes at some point throughout the day, maybe even multiple times through your day, that have been shown to accelerate neuroplasticity. So having a such a practice can be very useful, and understand that it involves some cognitive work. We have to hold onto the attachment, and imagine and feel as much as we can, the attachment, while also being extremely rationally grounded, and trying to not try to hold onto the past, trying to not anticipate the person walking in the room. This is very hard because when we think about the attachment, the attachment tends to drag with it those episodic memories, that rich catalog of experiences. The expectation that they will walk in the room is perfectly natural. The hard cognitive work is to experience the deep, emotional attachment, while at the same time severing from or distancing ourselves from these expectations that they'll suddenly show up in our reality, when in fact, they won't. And we talked about preparing ourselves for grief, right? If we have a loved one that's dying, or we anticipate that at some point we are going to have a loss of some sort, could be death, could be a loss of another type, breakup, et cetera, that we can prepare ourselves to grieve more adaptively by regulating the level of catecholamines, in particular epinephrine, that was well-described in the study that I referred to earlier, and tools such as the one found in our "Mastering Stress" episode, and tools of the sort that we talked about today, increasing that vagal tone by actively building up the relationship between exhales and slowing down of the heart rate, so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. Those things can be very useful tools. So we can actually encourage our nervous system and build our nervous system and build our mind to prepare for grief when it inevitably will come. Again, this is not about buffering ourselves from the realities of life. This is not about disengaging from grief as a real and important process. And indeed, it is a real and important process to engage in. Those that enter denial, or try and distract themselves with substances or thinking or distracting of behavior, substances or otherwise, won't move through grief as well, as adaptively, as those who embrace a process of the sort that I'm describing here. And of course, I want to restate again, that even though grief and depression are now known to be fundamentally different, even though people move through the different stages of grief at different rates and sometimes skip stages, et cetera, it is often important to access a trained professional psychologist, or psychiatrist, or both, or bereavement group, or all of the above, in order to get the proper support for grieving. So this is a podcast about science and science-based tools, but I absolutely want to emphasize that there are terrific resources out there that you can access. I don't say this in any kind of glib or kind of pass the buck kind of way. There are wonderful trained therapists, bereavement groups, psychiatrists that are expert in navigating these sorts of things. I like to think that the tools that we've talked about today would be not only compatible, but would be complementary to the sorts of approaches that they take. And as we think about this process of grief, as we all should at some point in our lives, because we all indeed will experience grief in one form or another, I would hope that the information that we discussed today would not only give you some tools, but hopefully give you a better understanding of not just the people that you've lost or that you stand to lose, not just the animals that you've lost and stand to lose, but also give you a sense of why it is that the people who are still in your life and that you're attached to, the animals that are still in your life, that you're attached to, have such profound meaning for you. And I would encourage you to not lean away from, but rather to lean into the building of those episodic memories, to build up a richer and richer set of experiences and emotional attachments. Because while the process of grieving is in direct relation to how close we are attached to people, there are ways to move through it. And of course it is the depth of our attachments, and the number and the depth of meaning of experiences that we share with others and with animals that makes life so rich and worth living. So I just want to take a moment and say thank you for being willing to explore this rather complicated, and sometimes extremely challenging thing that we call grief, from the perspective or through the lens of neuroscience and psychology. I certainly learned a lot in exploring this literature. I also really look forward to hosting people like Dr. O'Connor on the podcast, and others on the podcast who've done such beautiful work in this area. I've put out the request, and hopefully they'll join us soon to further elaborate and teach us about this fundamental component of our lives. If you are learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and at both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have comments and suggestions, feedback, or you'd like to see a particular guest on this podcast, please put those suggestions, comments, and feedback in the Comments section on YouTube. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's the best way to support us. Not during today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've discussed supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like easing and accelerating the transition time into sleep, and getting better, deeper sleep, as well as things such as focus, et cetera. We've partnered with Momentous Supplements, because Momentous Supplements, first of all, are of extremely high quality. That's obviously important. Also, they ship internationally. We had heard from many of you that you were having trouble accessing some of the supplements that were described on the Huberman Lab Podcast, because you did not live in the U.S. Momentous ships both within the U.S. and abroad. And many of you have also requested that there be a single site where you could access all of the supplements that we've talked about on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Right now at livemomentous.com/huberman, you can find a subset of the supplements that have been described on this podcast. Again, all of the very highest quality. Each, single-ingredient supplements. That turns out to be very important if you're trying to develop the proper array of supplements for you. It's not helpful to have supplements that include many ingredients, so we encouraged Momentous to have single-ingredient supplements with dosages that allow you to build up from the minimal effective dose, and so on. And the catalog of supplements they are going to add to that location, livemomentous.com/huberman, is going to expand in the weeks and months to come. And we expect that in a fairly short amount of time, all of the supplements that we've described on the Huberman Lab Podcast will be there. If you're not already following @hubermanlab on Instagram and Twitter, I post science and science-related tools @hubermanlab on Instagram, also @hubermanlab on Twitter. Oftentimes that material will overlap somewhat with the content covered on this podcast, but more often than not, what I'm covering on Instagram and Twitter is distinct from the information I cover on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We also have a newsletter that has summaries of podcasts, and points to specific protocols and links that could be useful to you. That is the Neural Network Newsletter, and you can find it at hubermanlab.com. Go to the menu, go to Newsletter. You can sign up simply by giving us your email. We do not share your email with anybody else. Our privacy policy is there, and is made very clear. You can also see some newsletters of months past, so you can assess whether or not you really do want to sign up, although I like to think that you will. Again, zero cost, total privacy of your email account, and many people find those Summaries and Takeaway Tools to be very useful in navigating these admittedly long podcast episodes. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light contemporary music fades]

========================================

--- Video 274 ---
Video ID: 099hgtRoUZw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=099hgtRoUZw
Title: Dr. Wendy Suzuki: Boost Attention & Memory with Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Podcast #73
Published: 2022-05-23 12:00:01 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Wendy Suzuki, Ph.D., Professor of Neural Science and Psychology and (soon) Dean of New York University, whose research focuses on memory, attention, brain plasticity and simple, daily habits that can be leveraged to improve learning, focus, memory and cognitive ability. We discuss the role of cardiovascular exercise, weight training, deliberate cold exposure, meditation, verbal affirmations, sleep, and other behavioral practices for enhancing learning, mood and stress management, and increasing attention span. Dr. Suzuki shares the mechanisms by which these practices change our brain in order to improve cognitive function fast and reduce age-related cognitive decline. 

#HubermanLab #Memory

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Blinkist: https://www.blinkist.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3amI809
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Wendy Suzuki Links
Academic Profile: https://as.nyu.edu/content/nyu-as/as/faculty/wendy-suzuki.html
Website: https://www.wendysuzuki.com 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/wasuzuki 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/wendy.suzuki  
Good Anxiety (book): https://amzn.to/38bnoI4 
Healthy Brain, Happy Life (book): https://amzn.to/3LD6tMj 
The brain-changing benefits of exercise (TED Talk): https://youtu.be/BHY0FxzoKZE

Article Links
Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus: https://go.nature.com/3LE75Bb
Acute Exercise Improves Prefrontal Cortex but not Hippocampal Function in Healthy Adults: https://bit.ly/38JUCOP
Midlife cardiovascular fitness and dementia: A 44-year longitudinal population study in women: https://bit.ly/3sSItOG
Brief, daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotional regulation in non-experienced meditators: https://bit.ly/3ai0X4D

Book Links
Tiny Habits: The Small Changes that Change Everything: https://amzn.to/39LDmZF
Atomic Habits: An Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits & Break Bad Ones: https://amzn.to/3NreMMr
Chatter: The Voice in Our Head, Why It Matters, and How to Harness It: https://amzn.to/3ahSLkX

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Wendy Suzuki, Learning & Memory
00:02:50 AG1 (Athletic Greens), InsideTracker, Blinkist  
00:07:27 How Memories Form 
00:10:14 Hippocampus: Memory, Association & Imagination 
00:16:20 Encoding Long-Term Memory 
00:18:48 One-Trial Memory
00:21:56 Tool: Foundational Habits to Enhance Brain Performance 
00:30:39 Exercise & Improved Memory, Making a “Big, Fat, Fluffy Hippocampus” 
00:39:35 Cardiovascular Exercise, BDNF (Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor) 
00:48:48 Neurogenesis (New Neuron Production) in Adults
00:51:50 Effects of Exercise on Memory 
00:56:31 Tool: Timing Daily Exercise, Cortisol 
01:00:02 Age-Related Memory Loss, Daily Exercise 
01:05:33 Tool: Exercise Protocol for Improving Cognition 
01:12:17 Anticipating Exercise, Daily Habits & Behaviors  
01:17:09 “Every Drop of Sweat Counts” – Exercise & Cognitive Function 
01:20:58 Positive Affirmations & Mood 
01:27:28 Meditation & Cognitive Performance 
01:32:27 How Meditation Works, Focusing on the Present
01:37:14 Tool: Strategies to Increase Attention 
01:42:50 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat rock music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Wendy Suzuki. Dr. Suzuki is a professor of neuroscience and psychology at New York University and one of the leading researchers in the area of learning and memory. Her laboratory has contributed fundamental textbook understanding of how brain areas such as the hippocampus, which you will learn about today, how the hippocampus and related brain circuits allow us to take certain experiences and commit them to memory so that we can use that information in the future. Dr. Suzuki is also an expert public educator in the realm of science. A few years back, she had a TED talk that essentially went viral. If you haven't seen it already, you should absolutely check it out in which she describes her experience using exercise as a way to enhance learning and memory. And on the basis of that personal experience, she reshaped her laboratory to explore how things like meditation, exercise, and other things that we can do with our physiology and our psychology can allow us to learn faster, to commit things to memory longer, and, indeed, to reshape our cognitive performance in a variety of settings. As such, I am delighted to announce that Dr. Suzuki is now not only running a laboratory at New York University, but she is the incoming Dean of Arts and Science at New York University. And of course she was selected for that role for her many talents, but one of the important aspects of her program, she tells me, is going to be to incorporate the incredible power of exercise, meditation, and other behavioral practices for enhancing learning, for improving stress management, and other things to optimize student performance. Today, you are going to get access to much of that information so that you can apply those tools in your daily life, as well. Dr. Suzuki is also an author of several important books. The most recent one is entitled "Good Anxiety: Harnessing the Power "of the Most Misunderstood Emotion," and a previous book entitled "Healthy Brain, Happy Life: "A Personal Program to Activate your Brain "and Do Everything Better." And while that is admittedly a very pop science-type title, I will remind you that she is one of the preeminent memory researchers in the world and has been for quite a while, so the information that you'll glean from those books is both rich in depth and breadth and is highly applicable. By the end of today's discussion, you will have learned from Dr. Suzuki a large amount of knowledge about how memories are formed, how they are lost, and you will have a much larger kit of tools to apply for your efforts to learn better, to remember better, and to apply that information in the ways that best serve you. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day, is that it meets all my foundational vitamin, mineral, and probiotic needs. In fact, whenever people ask me if I were to only take one supplement, which supplement should I take? I tell them Athletic Greens for the simple reason that it covers your base of vitamins, minerals, and probiotics, it also has important adaptogens, digestive enzymes for gut health. All of this is very important because we now know that gut health and the so-called gut-brain axis is very important for things like mood and brain function, and also contributes to immune system function. With Athletic Greens, you're covering all those bases. And of course you need to eat the nutrition and healthy diet that's right for you, but by taking Athletic Greens once or twice a day, you can be sure that there are going to be no gaps or deficiencies in your vitamin, mineral, or probiotic needs. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice or lime juice, I personally find it delicious. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2, both of which are also vital for immediate and long-term health. So once again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can get a special offer of five free travel packs to make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're in the car or otherwise traveling. Plus, they'll give you the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insight into, for instance, what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological age. And of course your biological age is the number that really matters. With InsideTracker, there's a distinct advantage and the advantage is that while there are many blood tests and DNA tests out there, InsideTracker's blood and DNA tests come also with a platform, meaning a website platform that allows you to see exactly what you could or should do in order to adjust the numbers on things like hormone levels, metabolic factors, and lipids, and so on. It's a little popup window, it points to nutritional, supplementation, and behavioral regimens that you can take in order to put those numbers in the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist. Blinkist is an app that has thousands of non-fiction books, each condensed down to just 15 minutes of key takeaways for those books. I love reading books from front to back. I like the actual physical book. I'm sort of old-fashioned in that way. And I do also listen to audiobooks. It's very rare that I don't finish a book that I've started. Nonetheless, I like to revisit some of my favorite books, I also like to write down key takeaways from those books. sometimes even before I listen to the full-length book. So I don't mind spoiling the takeaways because when I read non-fiction, generally I'm trying to extract the most valuable knowledge from them. So I'll often listen to a Blinkist 15-minute version, then the full-length book, or sometimes the full-length book, and then the Blinkist 15-minute version. Either way, Blinkist is a great way to get through any book and to extract the best from those books. I've used it for, for instance, Matt Walker's "Why We Sleep," an excellent book on why we sleep as well as Tim Ferriss's "The 4-Hour Body," Nassim Taleb's "The Black Swan," and so on, and so on. With Blinkist, you get unlimited access to read or listen to a massive library of non-fiction books. It really is a treasure trove of information. Right now, Blinkist has a special offer just for Huberman Lab Podcast listeners. If you go to blinkist.com/huberman, you can get a free seven-day trial and 25% off a Blinkist premium membership. Once again, go to blinkist.com/huberman to get a seven-day free trial and 25% off. And now for my discussion with Dr. Wendy Suzuki. Wendy, great to see you again and to have you here, it's been a little while. - It's been a while, so great to be here, Andrew. thank you so much for having me. - Yeah, delighted. I'd like to start off by talking about memory generally, and then I'd love to chat about your incredible work, discovering how exercise and memory interface and what people can do to improve their memory and brain function generally. - Yes. - But for those that are not familiar, maybe you could just step us through the basic elements of memory, a few brain structures, perhaps. - Sure. - You know, what happens when I, for instance, this mug of tea is pretty unremarkable. But the fact that now I've talked about it, I don't know that I'll ever forget about it. Maybe I will, maybe I won't. So what happens when I look at this mug and decide that it's something special for whatever reason? - Yeah, well, I like to say there are four things that make things memorable. Number one is novelty. If it's something new, the very first thing, the very first time we've seen something or experienced something, our brains are drawn to that, our attentional systems draw us to that. And when you are paying attention to something, that's part of what makes things memorable. Second is repetition. If you see that cup of tea every single day, and every single time you do an interview you talk about your cup of tea, you're going to remember it. That's just how our brains work, repetition works. Third is association. So if you meet somebody new that knows lots of people that you know, so you and I share many, many, many, many people that we both know. It's easy to remember, it's easier to remember you, especially if you were somebody new that I hadn't met before, we have met before, so association. And then the fourth one is emotional resonance. So we remember the happiest and the saddest moments of our lives, and that also includes funny, surprising things. That is the interaction between two key brain structures, the amygdala, which is important for processing lots of emotional, particularly threatening kinds of situations, but those threatening, surprising kinds of situations, the amygdala takes that information and makes another key structure called the hippocampus work better to put new long-term memories in your brain. So that, in fact, is the key structure for long-term memory, this structure called the hippocampus. - Fantastic, so novelty, repetition, association, and emotional resonance. - Yes. - Could you tell us a bit more about the hippocampus? I think, at least for my generation, well, I'm a neuroscientist, but for most people of my generation, I think they first heard about the hippocampus from the movie "Memento." - Oh yeah, yeah. - Where the guy says hippocampus, and for those of you that haven't seen that movie, it's a bizarrely constructed movie, but an interesting one, nonetheless, about memory. But even as a neuroscientist, sometimes I'm perplexed at how the hippocampus works. Maybe you could, if you would, step us through kind of what this structure is, what it looks like, maybe a few of its subregions, because unlike vision, the topic that I've worked most of my career on, where we know, okay, the eye does this part, and the thalamus does this part, and the cortex does that part, I've always been a little perplexed about the hippocampus, frankly. And I've read the textbooks and I've heard the lectures, but I'd love to get the update. What are the general themes of the hippocampus as a structure and its function? What do you think everyone, including neuroscientists, should know about the hippocampus? - Absolutely, so let's start with the basics. The word hippocampus means seahorse. It is shaped, the structure is shaped, like a kind of curlicue seahorse, that is accurate. Everybody, including neuroscientists, should know it's a beautiful structure. It is visually, anatomically beautiful with these kind of intertwining twirly subregions within it. And I think that's one of the reasons why early anatomists, who were the very first neuroscientists, got attracted to it because it's this interesting kind of twirly structure deep in the heart of the brain. So that's anatomically. Functionally, what does it do? Well, it's easiest to understand what it does when you look at what happens when you don't have a hippocampus anymore. What if you, by some disease, or you have your hippocampus removed by accident, what happens? Well, we know this from the most famous neurological patient of all time, his initials were HM, so all psychology and neuroscience students know him. He was operated in 1954 and the paper was published in 1957. They removed both his hippocampi because he had very terrible epilepsy and they knew that the hippocampus was the genesis of epilepsy. And this was experimental, his epilepsy was so bad that they decided not just to remove one hippocampus, but both. And what happened was immediate loss of all ability to form new memories for facts and events. Think about that for a second, all facts or events you're not able to remember. I can't remember this interaction between us. I can't remember any of the facts that we were just chatting about in our neuroscience lives. None of that can move into our long-term memory. So this hippocampus does something with all of these perceptions that are coming at us every single day, every minute of the day, and not for all of them, but for some of them that have these features that we just talked about, maybe they're novel, maybe they have associations, maybe they're emotionally relevant, maybe they've been repeated, some of those things in the realm of facts or events get encoded in our long-term memory. And that's the textbook of why the hippocampus is so important. I like to always add, and I mean, this is why I studied it for so many years, the hippocampus and what it does really defines our own personal histories. It means it defines who we are, because if we can't remember what we've done, the information we've learned, and the events of our lives, it changes us, that's what really defines us. That's why I wanted to study the hippocampus. And I think the exciting, new ideas about the hippocampus is that it's, you know, hippocampus is important for memory, so if you say that, you'll impress all your people at your cocktail party, but what people have started to realize that it's not just memory, it's not just putting together associations for what, where, and when of events that happened in our past, but it's putting together information that is in our long-term memory banks in interesting new ways. I'm talking about imagination. So without the hippocampus, yes, you can't remember things, but actually you're not able to imagine events or situations that you've never experienced before. So what that says is the hippocampus is important for memory is too simple a way to think about it. What the hippocampus is important for is what we've already talked about, associating things together writ large. Anytime you need to associate something together, either for your past, your present, or your future, you are using your hippocampus. And it takes on this much more important role in our cognitive lives when we think about it like that. That is kind of the new hippocampus that neuroscientists are studying these days. - That's fantastic, so it sounds like it really sets context, but it can do that with elements from the past, the present, or the future. - Yes. - And for neuroscientists the phrase is domain, we say the time domain meaning as opposed to just evaluating things in space, it sounds like the time domain of hippocampal functioning is incredibly interesting. - It is. - And even the fact that we can have short-term, medium-term, and long-term memories, and we could go down any of these rabbit holes. I'll ask you a true or false, mostly because I just really want to know the answer. A few years ago, the theme in various high-profile reviews seemed to be that the hippocampus was involved in encoding, in creating memories, but not in storing memories and that the memory storage was in the neocortex or the other overlying areas of the brain. Is that too general a statement? - That's a tricky statement because I think that ultimately, yes, that long-term memories are stored in the cortex, but those memories are stored in the hippocampus sometimes for a very, very long time. So how long is too long where you say, oh, it's not the hippocampus anymore? If it's four years, does that mean that it's not stored in the hippocampus? I think that's a tricky question. And yes, it was coming up a lot because people were debating it and some people did think that you shouldn't think about the hippocampus as a storage area, but I think it's a long, long, long-term kind of intermediate storage area, maybe not the long-term storage area. That's why it's hard to answer that question. - Great, as I recall, HM could remember facts from before his surgery. - Yes. - He couldn't form new memories. - Correct. - And given that he had no hippocampus, it would at least partially support the idea that some memories are retained outside the hippocampus. - However, he did have part of his posterior hippocampus intact. So that's the tricky thing. I think initially, in fact, Scoville, the neurosurgeon overestimated the number of millimeters he intended to remove of the hippocampus. And then when they did this, the very historic MRI of HM later in his life, they showed that, in fact, he did have that part of the posterior hippocampus intact. So now it makes it a little bit more complicated to interpret what's going on. Not that it was never uncomplicated, any interpretation of a lesion in a patient, as you know, is complicated, but HM had this mythical role in neuroscience and neurology and now it was complicated because he does have more of the hippocampus intact. - Got it, I did not know that. There are some memories that can be formed very quickly, so called one-trial learning, and I'm just looking at this list again, novelty, repetition, association, and emotional resonance. It seems like some experiences can bypass the need for multiple repetitions. - Yeah, absolutely. - And unfortunately it seems that our nervous system is skewed toward creating one-trial memories for negative events. - Right. - Which has a survival adaptive mechanism. What is the neural connection that allows that to happen? Is it the amygdala to hippocampus connection? I mean, as you and I know, it seems like every brain area ultimately is connected to everything else. It's just a question of through how many nodes, just like every city is connected to another city, it's just a question of how many flights and roads do you have to traverse before you get there. What is it about one-trial learning? I mean, at a kind of top contour level, how can we learn certain things so fast and other things are tricky? And now every time I look at this white mug, it's queuing up something special simply by virtue of saying it. So is that one-trial memory? What is it about very emotionally salient events that allow memories to get stamped in? - Yeah, I mean, I think you've already alluded to it. That is there is this protective function of our brains that has evolved over the last 2.5 million years that you need to pay attention and remember certain things for your survival. So some things that get stamped in, they're memories, but they're fear memories. If I get mugged on the subway or, you know, there are terrible things that could happen on the subway as we just learned. But if something terrible happens, if something very scary happens, you remember that, and that fear and that memory of all those things, I mean, I have one when I lived in Washington, DC, I went to work at NIH on a Sunday afternoon and I came back and when I rounded the corner to my door of my apartment, it was crowbarred in. Somebody had taken a crowbar, opened up my door, and stole all of the nicest things in my apartment, which wasn't that nice, 'cause I wasn't making that much money. But ever since then, whenever I rounded that corner, I still had that memory. It was terrible because it put me in a terrible state when I was just coming home and that's a survival mechanism. Do you want to be alert to possible danger? Absolutely yes. So part of those one-trial memories, I think, is often taking advantage of this evolutionarily developed system to tamp in things that could be potentially dangerous to you into your memory. So you forever will remember this particular corner or this hallway because that is where something really bad happened to you. - It seems like a location. We talk about conditioned place aversion, which is just a geek speak for wanting to avoid the place where something bad happened, or conditioned place preference, wanting to go back to a place where something positive happened. Or even looking at a photograph of where you had a wonderful time with somebody and that can evoke all sorts of positive sensations. It seems like at some level, as complex as the brain is, the basic elements of feeling good or feeling lousy are states within the brain and body and linking those to places seems like it's a pretty straightforward formula, you know, link place to state, link state to place, etc., as your description just provided. When we learn more complex information, a poem, a concept, or we have to ratchet through a set of ideas, that also involves memory. I'm sure that we'll talk more about this, but is there any way that you are aware of that state, bodily state can be leveraged to enhance the speed or the quality of memories and memory formation? So to be clear about it, it seems there's something very important about this fourth, this emotional resonance component. Novelty, the crowbar into the doors, thank goodness sounds like it was novel, it wasn't repeated thing, thank goodness. So repetition is out and the association is very, very strong. But for people trying to learn information that they're not that excited about, or that repetition is hard, or the novelty is simply that it's painful. - Yes, I've been there, absolutely. - Yeah, as have I. Is there something that we can do to leverage knowledge of how the memory system works naturally to make that a more straightforward process? - So, I immediately turn to the things that I've studied that you talk about so beautifully on your podcast, which are strategies generally to make your brain work better. I was just reminding myself of your podcast about cold because I use that every morning. - Oh, you do cold? - I do, I do. - Just take a moment and, and just tell us, what is your cold exposure protocol, then I'll take you back to what you're saying. - So my cold exposure protocol is at the end of every morning shower that I take, the shower is warm, but I give myself a big blast of cold at the end of that and it makes me feel so good. And because I've been doing it for several years, it's so much less painful. Okay, I admit, it was really painful at the beginning, but it's much less painful. I could handle the cold water and my pipes give nice, really cold water. And it just, I could feel the awakedness kind of come up in me after that. And I miss it, if I forget to do it, sometimes I run back in and give myself that cold blast because it is upping, I think you talked about this on your podcast, what's happening in the brain? - Basically the cold stimulus, that shock, that catching your breath, etc., is adrenaline from the adrenals. But also from what we understand now, some new neuroimaging, there's epinephrine and norepinephrine released from locus ceruleus, which again is a brain structure in the back of the brain, kind of sprinklers the rest of the brain with a kind of a wake-up chemical. And there's a long arc on dopamine release. This paper back in 2000 showed that it's a steady increase up to about 2.5x of circulating dopamine. So they weren't looking directly in the brain admittedly, but it goes on for four or five hours. - Wow, yeah. - So the improved mood and the feeling of alertness is a real thing. - Yeah, yeah, so I use that. I mean, so basically I use my morning routine. What is my morning routine? I get up, I do a 45-minute tea meditation. So meditating over the brewing and drinking of tea that I learned from a monk who has an institute in Taiwan where he teaches tea meditation, love it. I've learned all about tea, different kinds of tea. And then I do a 30-minute cardio weights workout. Then I take my shower with the hot-cold contrast. And, oh, and before that, key thing, if I want to learn something and I want to be able to get over the difficulty of repeating things, or just push myself to do stuff, sleep, so good, good sleep. I've learned that over the pandemic, I did sleep experiments on myself and I learned that I was sleeping an hour less than I really needed. So I really need seven-and-a-half to eight hours of sleep. And I was getting six and a half. And so now, I get that seven-and-a-half to eight hours every single night, and guess what? I come to different difficult tasks and I am more willing to give it a try, to try longer, to try harder, and my brain works better. And so I think probably if you go back to all of your podcasts, you'll learn exactly why each one of those things that I do, which I would bet that you probably do, too, is helping my brain. - I guarantee they are. And I'm impressed that you do all these things, although not surprised. And I should say that the extra hour of sleep is really impressive and extremely beneficial. I'm curious, do you get that in the early part of the night by going to bed earlier? - Yeah. - Terrific, and I should just mention, 'cause you're too humble to do it, but I'll say it again that not only are you a full professor, tenured full professor and running a laboratory, you teach undergraduates, you have an important role in public education, multiple books, and you're now dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at NYU. So the extra hour of sleep is benefiting you and as a consequence benefiting everybody else as well. Thanks for sharing with us your protocol. I took you off the trajectory of what one can do, but I think that people and I appreciate knowing kind of what the practical steps are. Because knowing the science is important, mechanism I do believe is important for embedding protocols in people's minds and why they might want to do them, but really hearing the mechanics of it is useful. It sounds like everything together takes about an hour, it's not an excessive amount of time, but it probably gives you an outsized positive effect on your day. - Absolutely, I definitely notice it if I'm not able to do it. And when I don't, so I do this seven days a week, it's also not just five days, seven days a week. And when I can't do it, it's usually early-morning flights or things like that. And I get over it, but it's critical for the working of my brain. - I love it and I'll just highlight one thing that you said before we move on, which is that you said when sometimes if you get out of the shower before the cold, you'll get back in. That's, to me, a really beautiful example of conditioned place preference. Now the cold shower has become something that you sort of look forward to. I should say that nobody is immune from the adrenaline increase of cold, no matter how cold, this is what's interesting about cold. It's one of the reasons why it's such an important part of the screening for special operations, so our SEAL teams, but other branches in military too, which is that there are very few stimuli that you can give anyone and consistently get an adrenaline - Oh, interesting. - Release from that without harming them. With heat, eventually you need to use so much heat that you damage tissue. Or with exercise, you have to use so much exercise that you can damage joints. And it's this very kind of brilliant, I don't know if it was intentional or not, it's sort of unintentional genius that special operations has figured out that by sending people back into the cold over and over, it never really gets easier, but over time people actually start to crave it and it provides this reduction in inflammation, etc. So anyway, beautiful practice, thank you. I want to learn more about your tea meditation later in the episode. But in any event returning to ways that we can improve memory formation. Maybe if you would tell us your story around this. I know you've told it before, but I think a lot of members of the audience and I would love to hear how you came to this. Because growing up in neuroscience, I knew you as one of the, I would say one of the three or four, and they're all alongside one another, this isn't a hierarchical statement, three or four top memory researchers in the world. Textbook material is Suzuki. My textbooks are filled with the word Suzuki, your last name, according to the information on memory and memory formation. So you were doing that and doing the things that academics do, and then you're still doing that, and still at a very high level, but then things took a different direction. And maybe we could talk about your story and how you came to the place you are at now because I think it provides a number of tools that people could implement themselves. - Yeah, so this story happened as I was working to get tenure at NYU. And, as you know, it's a stress-filled process. They give you six years to show your stuff and you are judged in front of all your colleagues. And either they say, okay, you can join the club or they say, sorry, you are humiliated in front of everybody. This was what was going on in my life. - They actually tell people to leave. If you don't get tenure, you're gone. - You have to leave your institution. And so, you work really, really hard. And so my strategy was, I'm just going to not do anything but work and I'm just going to work. And I'm going to just work as hard as I can for the six years. And what happens when you work and you don't have any sort of life outside of work and you live in New York where there's all sorts of really good takeout, you gain 25 pounds, which is exactly what I did. And you get really, really stressed. And you start to ask yourself how come I'm living in New York City, and I love Broadway, and I haven't gone to a Broadway show in two years? And so I, 25 pounds overweight, I decided to go on vacation. And I went by myself 'cause I had no friends. And I went to, I did an adventure river rafting trip in Peru. And so I go by myself and meet other interesting people and I was the weakest person on this whole trip. Like they were so much in better shape, it was embarrassing and they won't say this, they won't admit this to me, but it was true. And I kind of came back and I said, okay, I cannot be the weakest person. I'm in my late 30s, I have to do something. So I went to the gym and I said, oh my God, I'm 25 pounds overweight, let's try at least to lose this weight. And so I go to the gym, I notice how much better I feel when I go to just a single class. I remember the very first class I went to was a hip hop dance class. I'm a terrible hip hop dancer, but I still felt good after that class. And then fast forward a year and a half, I've lost the 25 pounds, so proud of myself, so much happier. And I'm sitting in my office doing what you and I do a lot, which is writing an NIH grant, which is our lifeblood. And writing, writing, writing, and this thought goes through my mind that had never gone through my mind before during this six years of frantic grant writing when I was trying to get tenure, and that thought was grant writing went well today. You know, that felt good. I was like, I've never had that thought before, what's going on here, this is really weird? - I don't know that anyone has had that thought before. - No, I'm sure people have had that thought. But I thought maybe I'm just having a good day. But when I thought about it, I thought it's not just today. My grant writing seems to have been getting smoother, like I'm able to focus longer, the sessions feel better to me. And at that point, the only thing that I changed in my life, it was a huge thing, but I had become a gym rat rather than a workaholic. And that's when my spidey sense for neuroscientists popped up and I said, what do we know about the effects of exercise on your brain? Because if I think about it, what was better about my writing is I could focus longer and deeper, very important, and I could remember those little details that you try and pull together for your million dollar NIH grant from 30 different articles that you have open on your screen all at the same time, that's the hippocampal memory. I was studying that, I was writing the grant on hippocampal memory. And so that's when I got really interested in the effects of exercise on both prefrontal focus and attention function and hippocampal function because of my own observation. I still remember where I was sitting, which office I was in, when I had this revelation. But the thing that really sealed it for me, that made me think not just, oh, this is interesting, but I want to study this, is right around that time I got a phone call from my mom who said that my dad wasn't feeling well and that he had told her that he got lost driving back from the 7-11, which was literally seven blocks from our house that I grew up in. And I knew that was hippocampal function. I suspected dementia. I suspected, oh, didn't want to admit Alzheimer's dementia, which he had. And it was funny because, I mean it wasn't funny, but my mom and dad are two sides of a very different coin. My dad is the engineer, not so active all his life, but would loved and sit and read books all day. My mom was the athlete. She played team tennis into her 80s. And it started to show at that point. And so then I had even a more pressing reason to think about what the effects of exercise were because I noticed that all the things that were improving in my brain suddenly went away in my dad's brain. Really, really smart guy, engineer in Silicon Valley, helped that push in Silicon Valley in the '70s happen, he had no more memory. He couldn't focus his attention. His mood was rock bottom, he's a very happy guy. And everything was the opposite in me. And I started thinking this isn't just something to help somebody who wants to get tenure, this is something that could help millions and millions of people, most importantly, our aging population. What if, you know, what's happening? And so the thing that makes me wake up in the morning is when I realized that every single time you move your body, you are releasing a whole bunch of neurochemicals. And some of them we've talked about, the good mood comes from dopamine, and serotonin, and noradrenaline, but the thing that gets released also, particularly with aerobic exercise, is a growth factor called brain derived neurotrophic factor, or BDNF. And that is so important because what it does is it goes directly to your hippocampus and it helps brand new brain cells grow in your hippocampus. We all have that. Even if you're a couch potato, you can get new brain cells in your hippocampus to grow. But it's like giving your hippocampus a boost with this regular BDNF, if you are exercising. Which means that we all have the capacity to grow a bigger, fatter, fluffier hippocampus. And so what I like to give people is this image of every single time you move your body, it's like giving your brain this wonderful bubble bath of neurochemicals, what's going on, I need my bubble bath of noradrenaline, and dopamine, and serotonin, and growth factors. And with regular bubble baths, what am I doing? I'm growing a big fat, fluffy hippocampus. And I'm not going to cure my father's dementia, Alzheimer's dementia, but you know what? If I go into my 70s with a big fat, fluffy hippocampus, even if I had that in my genes and it starts to kick in, it's going to take longer for that disease to start to affect my ability to form and retain new long-term memories for facts and events, which is my motivation for getting up and doing my 30 to 45 minutes of aerobic exercise every day. - Fantastic. Quick question about your protocol just because. And then we'll discuss a few mechanistic things related to what signals the body might be sending the brain and a little bit more detail on BDNF and some circuitry. So 30 to 45 minutes of, it sounds like cardiovascular exercise might be special. But as I say that and I think about the literature that I'm aware of in mice and some in monkeys, and certainly in humans, looking at the effects of exercise on brain function and typically the outcome is improvement, almost always. I don't think I've ever seen a paper showing that when animals or humans exercise more, that their brain gets worse. I just can't think of a single paper. It doesn't mean it doesn't exist. I'm sure someone will put one in the comment section. They'll find that one, and thank you for if you can find that, but it seems like it's always cardiovascular exercise and experimentally in a lab it's a lot easier to get a mouse to run on a treadmill than it is to get a mouse to lift weights. Although people have put little ankle weights on mice and the ways of getting mice to do resistance work is actually a little bit barbaric - Little stressful. - 'Cause oftentimes they'll incapacitate a limb to overload another limb, so it's an asymmetric thing. It's not the same as sending them in to do squats, or deadlifts, or something. But cardiovascular exercise might be special. And what are your thoughts on that? And please first, though, tell us your routine. Your routine is 30 to 45 minutes of, are you a Peloton cycler? Does it matter? - I think that the data suggests that as long as your heart rate is getting up for these long-term effects on your hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, you also get better at shifting and focusing your attention, for that you need cardiovascular. And what I use is a video workout that I started even before the pandemic, it's called "Daily Burn," and is just thousands of different workouts. But I love they are 30 minutes that I sometimes add on a 10 to 15 minute stretch at the beginning or at the end. But I love the variety. Sometimes I do it with weight. Sometimes I do it without weights. I love kickboxing, so they have a lot of kickboxing in there. It just fits my routine, and it's always there, and I don't have to get all dressed up to go to the gym to work out. So that's what I do. - And that's a daily thing, seven days a week? - Yeah, yeah. - Seven days a week, fantastic. So in terms of he way that some of these changes are being conveyed from the body to the brain, that fascinates me. I mean, as you and I know, and I'm sort of a repeating record on the podcast always saying, you got a brain but you also have a spinal cord and then your nervous system connects everything. Every organ in your body is basically signaled to by the nervous system and back to the nervous system, you're explaining everything. But so let's imagine your morning routine, you do your cardiovascular exercise, so you're pumping more blood, that's the definition of a higher heart rate, stroke volume of the heart goes up over time, you're getting fitter, so blood flow to the brain is increasing. Do we know how that gets translated to a signal to release more BDNF? And then it raises this other question, which is, does it matter where your mind is when you exercise? Because ultimately the brain, of course, you can anchor your attention to the exercise or you can be listening to a podcast or something else. I've always wondered about this. Can we enhance the effects of exercise by combining the enhanced blood flow with cognitive work during exercise? Or is it simply a matter of just getting more blood flow up to the hippocampus? - Yeah, I wish I had the answer to that question, too. My instinct is, yes, it matters partially because of the work of your colleague, Alia Crum, on mindset and the power of that to change how physiologically our body is responding. So how could it not work in her experiments or work in her experiments and not work for my morning or our morning exercise routine. But are there studies, point to a study, I don't know of one. So exercise neuroscientists out there, I'd love to see that study done. So yes, it works. Before I go into the aerobic thing, I always like to start with the least amount of exercise to get something really useful, because I don't want people to say, oh God, I hate sweating, I don't want to listen anymore. So I always like to start with studies have shown that just 10 minutes of walking outside can shift your mood. That is part of that neurochemical bubble bath that you're getting dopamine, serotonin, noradrenaline and anybody can walk for 10 minutes. And so that is for all of you thinking that out there, what is the minimum that I could get some of these brain effects? 10 minutes of walking, anybody can do it. - Now is outside important? I'm a big believer in getting photons into the eyes. - I think that that study was done indoors on a treadmill. And the comparison wasn't done, but moving your, which is great, in the middle of the pandemic I walked around my apartment for 30 minutes sometimes just for some variety, felt like a rat on a running wheel, but yes. So that minimum amount of movement in your body can get you those mood effects. But what about the big, fat, fluffy hippocampus? What about the better performing prefrontal cortex? That's where you start to need the cardio workout. And from my reading of the literature, there haven't been enough studies directly comparing and contrasting kickboxing with running, with whatever other cardio that you need to do, but any cardio workout that is done has these positive effects. So I'm going to say my interpretation of that is that whatever way you get your heart rate up, including a power walk, a power walk can get your heart rate up, that is beneficial. And what is happening, there are two pathways that have been studied about how you go from moving your body to more BDNF, that neurotrophin that's increasing the growth of new hippocampal brain cells. The two pathways are the following. One is a myokine, which is a protein released by the muscles. And not your heart, these are striated muscles in your body. And so by running, these were studies done in rats on running wheels, they showed that the running rats had more of this myokine, released the myokine past the blood-brain barrier. so got into the rarefied, very protected bloodstream of inside the brain, and that myokine stimulated the release of BDNF in the brain, that's pathway number one. Pathway number two comes through the liver because exercise is a stress generally. How do we know that, well, cortisol is released whenever we exercise. We need that sugar in our blood and so that's how the physiological mechanisms work. And so there is a ketone, beta-hydroxybutyrate, that we've known for a very long time that gets released by the liver during exercise. And we also know that that particular ketone passes that blood-brain barrier. And it's another stimulant for BDNF. So kind of the final common pathway seems to be BDNF stimulation in the hippocampus. Is it the only one, probably not, but that's the one that has been studied most clearly. So it comes from all of our physiological systems, our muscles working, our liver responding to the stress of exercise, and what is it doing, it is giving more BDNF precursors to get into our brain, to cause the upspike of BDNF, which is part of your bubble bath that you're getting every time you move. - I love that description of a factor from muscle and a factor from liver, because anytime we're thinking about movement of the body and translating that to the brain, as you so clearly pointed out, that needs to traverse the blood-brain barrier. Not everything that happens in the body is communicated to the brain and these seem like really important signals. Beta-hydroxybutyrate, you mentioned is a ketone, I just want to underscore that doesn't mean, folks, that you need to be on a ketogenic diet. I think people hear ketone and they think, I know some people are, most people are not, I imagine. There are ketones that are released in your brain and body that can function, even if you're ingesting carbohydrates and not ketogenic, just for a point of clarification. This issue of new neurons is one that you hear a lot, you know, neurogenesis, you're going to grow new neurons, new neurons. And my understanding is that the rodent literature is very clear that animals that run on wheels more often, it turns out rodents love to run on wheels. Do you know these studies by Hoppy Holster, which are pretty funny, they're very cool, by the way, Hoppy, Howard Hughes investigator, I'm not making light of them. They put running wheels in a field and wild rodents will run to the running wheel and run on that running wheel. - Oh, that's great. - They really enjoy it. Which I find amusing for reasons that probably only a neuroscientist would find amusing. In any case, in rodents, it seems that running more on a wheel can trigger neurogenesis, literally the birth of new neurons and the addition of new neurons to the hippocampus. In monkeys, this has been controversial. It seems it does happen in the hippocampus and in the olfactory bulb, probably not in the neocortex. Thinking back to the decades or more controversy between Liz Gould and Pasko Rakic. I hope they settled their differences there. Neuroscientists love to argue. It's kind of what we do. And in humans, I think it's been a bit controversial. Some people say absolutely, yes. Other people say absolutely no, there are new neurons added to the adult brain. I haven't followed that literature down to the detail. But I do remember one study that I don't think is contested, which is the work of Rusty Gage at the Salk Institute where they actually injected a sort of due type marker into the brains of terminally ill humans who very graciously offered to have their brains removed and dissected after death. And in some cases, these very old terminally ill humans, they did see evidence for new neurons being born in the hippocampus. Can I trust that idea still? Is that generally accepted? - Well, so after that study, which was quite a while ago, there are more recent studies, still controversial, but showing and demonstrating, using even new and better techniques than were used in that original Rusty Gage study, which was groundbreaking at the time, that suggest, and I think show, that there are new neurons born in adult human brains into the ninth decade of life. So they not only did this, I think those patients were in their 60s, then they died of cancer. But these new studies looking across the timeline, can we see, because the other thing was, yeah, maybe you have some when you're 20, but by the time you're older and you might need these new neurons, you have no new neuron growth. And so these studies seem to suggest that, yes, yes you do. And we all do even into old age. - Great, and I'll just take a moment to say that I am personally not aware of any studies looking at other forms of exercise besides cardiovascular exercise for sake of brain health. And this, I think, is an important gap in the literature that ought to be filled, whether or not for instance, high intensity interval training, or whether or not weight training, which has other effects on the musculature, so you can imagine perhaps the myokine to BDNF pathway, the pathway one that you mentioned, might be signaled, but maybe not the liver pathway, maybe. Yes, I'm speculating here. Those studies need to be done. To my knowledge, they just haven't been done yet. But they should be done. If you would, could you tell us about some of the more specific effects of exercise on memory? Memory is a broad category of effects and phenomena. So things like what comes to mind is short-term, medium- and long-term memory, reaction time, learning math, at least for me, is quite a bit different than learning history, although there's certainly overlap in the neural underpinnings. What has been demonstrated in the laboratory in animal models, but especially in humans, and if you want to share with us any results from your lab, published or unpublished, I'm sure that the audience would be delighted to learn about them. - Absolutely, let me start with kind of the immediate effects, acute effects as they're called, of exercise on the brain. So this is asking what does a one-off exercise session do for your brain? And there, there are three major effects that have been reproduced. I've seen it in my lab, many labs have reproduced this. So what do you get with the one-off? This is usually an aerobic-type exercise session, 30 to 45 minutes. What you get is that mood boost, very, very consistent. You get improved prefrontal function, typically tested with a Stroop test, which is a test that asks you to shift and focus your attention in specific ways. It's a challenging task and clearly dependent on the prefrontal cortex largely. And significant improvements in reaction time, so your speed at responding, often a motor kind of, but cognitive motor response is improved. Over the pandemic, one of the unpublished studies that I did looking at the effects of 30 minutes of age-appropriate workout in subjects ranging in age from their 20s all the way up to their 90s. So what are the things that I saw more consistently? Irrespective of your age, everybody got a decreased anxiety and depression and hostility score, which is very important. So it's not just decreasing your anxiety and depression but decreasing your hostility levels. - Making the world a better place. - Making the world a better place. Energy, the feeling of energy went up. And what we found is in the older population, even more than in the younger population, we saw improved performance on both Stroop and Eriksen flanker task, which is another task dependent on really focusing in on different letters and paying attention to what letter is being shown. So these are consistent effects. How long do they last? One of the studies that I did publish in my lab showed that the immediate effects of exercise lasted up to two hours. Unfortunately, that was the longest that we last, they were still there at two hours. So that's a pretty big bang for your buck. - That is. - One 30 minute. - Sorry to interrupt, I just want to make sure I understand. So when you say the effects lasted up to two hours, does that mean up to two hours after you finished exercise? Or up to two hours of memory challenging work? Just to be clear. - Yeah, that's a great question. So my study looked at two hours after you finish your workout we gave you these cognitive tests. During that two-hour period, you were free to do anything except exercise or eat. And so there was no extra load on people. But two hours later, you did do significantly better on these focused attention tasks compared to a group that watched videos for the exercise period. This was an hour of cycling that they did. These were young subjects in their 20s. - Okay, so if I finish my exercise at 9:00 AM, even if I start this cognitive work, this mental work at 11, I'll still see benefits. - Yes, at least by 11, because I didn't go farther than two hours. So it could last even longer than that, but I have evidence that it lasts for two hours. - And perhaps if I had started the cognitive work 45 minutes after my exercise ended, it would also be helpful. - Yes. - So there's no reason to think that there's a, that you have to wait before starting cognitive work. - Yeah, no reason at all. - I'm asking questions of the sort that I get in the comments, that we are going to get in the comment section. We always strive for clarity here. So what this tells me is that exercising early in the day may have a special effect. I realize that some people cannot exercise until later in the evening, but you mentioned something earlier that I want to cue people to, it's very, very important. I don't think I've ever mentioned this on the podcast, which is any kind of physical activity will increase cortisol to varying degrees. And so sometimes it's a healthy increase, sometimes it's an unhealthy increase. If you do two hours of really intense exercise and you're not prepared for it, that's a big spike in cortisol, probably not a good thing for most people. But if you are going to do your cardiovascular or weight training later in the day, that increase in cortisol can promote too much wakefulness for sleep, etc. Shifting that cortisol spike early in the day is associated with a number of important things related to mood, etc. But more and more, what I'm thinking and hearing is that exercise early in the day is key. Our former dean of the medical school, Phil Pizzo, was and is kind of famous still for jogging between the hours of, like, 4 and 5:00 AM, or five and six, and then running the medical school. And you're up early doing your exercise, and cold shower, and meditation, we'll talk about meditation, but this is more and more of a push, I feel like, or a stimulus for us to think about moving our exercise earlier in the day. - Yeah, I mean, I like to say that, I know there are moms and dads out there and they just say, look, I have a kid, the kid's more important than my doing my exercise. So you will get benefits if you do it whenever you can. So that's great, more power to you. But what all the neuroscience data suggests is the best time to do your exercise is right before you need to use your brain in the most important way that you need to use it every day. And so that is why the morning for most of us is beneficial. That's why I do it in the morning and I'm lucky enough to be able to do that. But yeah, it makes sense with all, everything we know about how this works and how it benefits our brain. - I think about our colleague, Eric Kandel, who not incidentally has a Nobel Prize and studies memory. And rumor has it that he's been a swimmer for a lot of years. That he'll put in, I think nowadays he's in his '90s, now he'll put in half a mile, but he used to do swim a mile a day or something of that sort. - Wow, I heard that, too, that he was a swimmer and he does it very, very religiously. - Okay, so there are a few other neuroscientists that do that, I can think of a lot of neuroscientists that probably should exercise more. And I don't say that to poke at them, I just would love to see them doing their incredible work for many more decades. And everything that we're talking about today indicates that if one doesn't, unless you have incredible genetics, we all experience age-related dementia, right. I mean, the story of your father is a salient one. And we should remember that as we go forward. I also want to emphasize, and I'd love to get your thoughts on just memory and memory loss in general. It seems we all get worse at remembering and learning things, even if we don't get Alzheimer's. When does that typically start for humans? - You know, I think there's so much variability, not only because we are individuals, but because our stress levels are different and, well, everybody's anxiety level has gone up in the last couple of years, but that also has an effect. We don't remember as much in a highly stressful, highly anxious situation. So, as you know, it's hard to answer that question. People say, okay, just tell me how much exercise I have to do. - 30 to 45 minutes a day. But I love that per day, I've been doing this whole thing of telling people, oh, the data say 150 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio, which is kind of moderately hard but not excessively hard, but I love this everyday theme. Because whenever I do that, the questions that come back are, well, what if I take a long hike on the weekends? And so people start negotiating. There's something that's very powerful about non-negotiable, everyday. Sun in your eyes every day even through cloud cover. Exercise for 30 to 45 minutes. Cold shower every day. - Every day, yeah. - My understanding of the literature is that somewhere in our 50s or 60s, we start noticing little hiccups in memory, for some people younger, for some people later. But I have to imagine that doing the exercise throughout one's entire life is going to help offset some of this simply 'cause of the BDNF and other downstream effects. - Yeah, I mean, that's what it suggests. One of my favorite studies, and then I want to get back to you wanted, you invited me to share some of my unpublished data on the effects of long-term exercise, but first I want to share one of my favorite studies, which is a longitudinal study done in Swedish women. And this was published in 2018. And what they did was back in the 1960s, they found Swedish women, 300 Swedish women in their 40s. And they characterized them as low fit, mid fit, high fit. Okay, and then 40 years later, they came back and found these women, they let them do, live their lives. And they asked what happened to these women as a function of whether they were low fit, mid fit, high fit in their 40s, they're now in their 80s. And what they found was that relative to the low fit or mid fit women, the women that were high fit gained nine more years of good cognition later in life. Now this is not a randomized controlled study. This is a correlational study. But does it agree with everything that we've been talking about today? Yes, does it agree with this idea that the women that were high fit were giving their brains this bubble bath, maybe not every day, but very, very regularly for that entire 40 years and that built up their big, fat, beautiful hippocampi? Yes, it does. So that's one of my favorite studies. - Yeah, another cause for getting the exercise in consistently. I am impressed by this 10-minute walk and the improvements in mood from just a 10-minute walk. But again, I think that daily repetition also I have to imagine has effects on the very pathways that allow plasticity. This is something we, in the realm of neuroplasticity, we don't often hear about or think about, even as a neuroscientist, which is that the pathways for engaging plasticity probably can be, probably I'm speculating here, can be made better by engaging in the sorts of behavior that stimulate plasticity. In other words, if one gets better at calming themselves down under stress, those circuits get better at doing that. - Yes, absolutely. - Neural circuits gain proficiency. And so, because blood vessels can grow, capillaries can grow in the brain, you can imagine that more pumping of blood to the brain, delivery of these various muscle and liver factors would also establish larger or more efficient portals to getting that stuff there. So you could imagine kind of an amplifying effect of exercise, and again, I'm speculating here, but I've seen this over and over again in colleagues, the ones who exercise consistently seem to be really, really smart and doing amazing work well into their 80s and 90s and the ones who aren't, some of whom actually pride themselves on how little they exercise, they get worse over time. You see them each meeting, each decade and I'm not poking fun at them at all, it's actually quite, quite hard to see. And they're kind of a fading light, they're starting to flicker. So there is this incredible relationship between body vitality and brain vitality. That, of course, is not an excuse for spending all day in the gym. The gym rats, I enjoy working out so I could imagine doing that, but that doesn't make us smarter, unfortunately you actually have to do the cognitive work also, it's not just exercise. So I'd love to hear about some of these new unpublished data. - Yeah, okay, so when I jumped into the exercise work, everybody was studying people 65 or older because that's when cognitive decline begins. And if the idea is exercise can help you with your cognition, then makes sense. However, I thought, well, you know that it's great, there's lots of work there. I wanted to know what happens in people in their 40s and their 50s, maybe even their 30s and their 20s. Why, because that's when we, as humans are able, ready, willing, and able to increase our exercise and gets us set up to build our brains as we go into our 60s. And so the first study that I did looked at low fit participants from their 30s to mid 50s, and we wanted to ask this question, how much exercise do you really need to start seeing benefits? Do you see benefits? Or maybe you have to wait until you start seeing cognitive decline to get benefits. That was one of the theories out there. And so that's what I wanted to do. And so what we did was three months of two to three times a week cardio, it was a spin class, so spin classes are great for cardio. And the comparison group was two to three times a week of competitive video Scrabble. So no heart rate change, but they had to come into my lab and be in a group just like they were in a group for the spin class. We touched them cognitively at the beginning and the end of the session. What we found was two to three times a week of cardio in these people, they are low fit, which means specifically that they were exercising less than 30 minutes a week for the three months previous to the experiment. So they went from that to two to three times a week of spin class and what we found was changes in baseline rates of their positive mood states went up relative to the video Scrabble group. Their body image got more positive because they were exercising, which is great. And really important, their motivation to exercise went up significantly compared to the video Scrabble group, which is great. So the more you exercise, the more motivated you are to exercise. What about cognition? What changed in the cognitive circuits of their brain? Number one, we got improved performance on the Stroop task, but we're headed towards my favorite structure, which is the hippocampus. What we found was improved performance on both a recognition memory task, which was a memory and coding task, and that is, can you differentiate similar items that we're asking you to remember, and a spatial episodic memory task, where we had them play one of those Doom like games when they went into this spatial maze and they had to do things in a virtual city. Their performance there got better, which is very, very classically dependent on the hippocampus. So this, it was so satisfying to do this study because I've been wanting to answer this question, what is a minimum amount or doable amount of exercise that will get you these cognitive benefits? And now I can say in 30-to-50-year olds that are low fit, two to three times a week. Is that doable, absolutely. Will it be hard if you're low fit, yeah, it's going to be challenging, but absolutely doable. And so it makes sense with all of the mechanisms that we are, I didn't study the mechanisms just to be clear, but with all the mechanisms we are imagining are playing a role here, that absolutely makes sense and it is doable. This is not like you have to become marathon runner to get any of these benefits. This is you have to start moving your body on a regular basis two to three times a week. So I love that for its realness. - How long are those sessions again? - 45 Minutes. - 45 Minutes. - Yeah, 45 minutes, it's a typical spin kind of class. There's a warmup for five minutes and a cool down for five minutes, so it's really 35 minutes of they're really pushing you. - And so they're breathing reasonably hard. Heart rate is up. - Heart rate is up definitely up, yeah - I find that all of those results are really interesting that the results showing improvement in motivation to exercise is interesting, 'cause it gets back to this issue of kind of a self-amplifying effect. And the neuroscientist in me wants to think about kind of pre-motor circuits and the fact that we have a motor system that can obviously do things like lift cups, and walk, and run if we want to or need to, but that it's possible to create a kind of anticipatory activity in our nervous system where our body craves a certain stimulus, you mentioned the cold and how you crave the cold. Now whether or not that's the adrenaline, and the dopamine, etc., or whether or not somebody who exercises, going from zero, less than 30 minutes per week to two to three times a week, 45 minutes, as you described for this study. I've had that experience before of that the cardio, that I tend to battle the most, I love lifting heavy objects, at least heavy for me. I'm happy to go to the gym every other day and just lift heavy objects for an hour. It just makes me happy, I like the way it feels, and I've been doing it since I was in my teens, so 30 years. Cardio's a little bit trickier. I like to run, but if I stop running for a little while I find it very hard to get back into. But if I start running three times a week for 30 to 45 minutes and I do this pretty consistently on the days I don't weight train, I find that I start to crave it. It's almost as if my body needs that in order to, I always say, clear out the cobwebs, but it's like my mind doesn't function as well, clearly now I understand why and why exercise helps, but also physically I almost feel like my body needs to engage in that movement. Like the pre-motor circuits are kind of revving, kind of like revving then engine on a car while it's in park. So the motivation to exercise obviously could be multifaceted. It could be purely psychological, but do you think there's any reason to speculate at least or believe that we can build an anticipatory, reverbatory activity into our nervous system? - Yeah, yeah, I agree with that because I also have those same kinds of thoughts and I do have anticipatory exercise when I can't do it. So I just got back from a week and a half in Paris, where I got to do a book launch of my last book, "Good Anxiety." And I really walked around a lot, but I did not do my exercise for that whole week and a half. But there was a lot of stress 'cause I had to do all these interviews in French. So I gave myself a break. - You speak French? - I speak French. - I was going to say, otherwise it would be really stressful. - That would be really stressful. - Then I'd be really impressed. Then I would definitely start exercising. Actually, I would follow your morning routine to a T, but okay, very impressive nonetheless. - But I got back and coming back this direction from Paris, I live in New York, is much easier. And so I was able to get up at a normal time the next day. And that exercise session that first day is like, okay, I'm back in my home, I'm back in my environment. And it felt so good. It was like I wanted to come back. And I know it's because I worked up over years, now I could truthfully say seven days a week, but it was first it was four to five, then it was five to six, and yeah, seven, but that includes a yoga day, or sometimes I have to do it for 10 minutes instead of 30 because I have to leave. But that habit of you do that even for five minutes, you do either the weight 10-minute thing, or a five-minute thing, or a stretch, that is a tiny habit. Is that somebody at Stanford that invented this idea of tiny habits, I thought it was? - Well, we've got a number of people there. And I apologize in advance to all the people I neglect in this statement, but I'm happy to put it in the comments, folks. BJ Fogg is there, has done-- - Yes, that's who I, - BJ's done really great work. And then James Clear wrote a book about habits and has a very popular newsletter about habits. We've done an episode about habits that covers some of their work and some of the more laboratory-ish, not ish, laboratory science, peer-reviewed work on it. Daily behaviors, also daily behaviors performed at roughly the same time of day. I mean, one thing we know for sure is that the circadian system is part of our nervous system's way of anticipating when things will happen, not just what will happen. I'm telling you things you obviously know already, but for the audience. Performing your exercise at roughly the same time each day will make it easier as opposed to just saying, I'm going to do it seven days a week sometime today. But of course, getting it done sometime is better than not getting it done. - Yes, absolutely, absolutely. - Well, those are impressive effects and I love that you're starting to look in populations that are a bit younger, not because some of these older populations aren't important, but I think that building good habits in across one's entire life is really what it's about. As I always say with anything related to longevity or offsetting an age-related decline, we don't know, it's hard to know if things work because there's no within subject control. But what we also know for sure is that you don't want to be the control experiment. - Exactly. - You absolutely don't want to be the control experiment, especially for something that's purely behavioral. I mean, you're not talking about ingesting a particular supplement. You're not talking about changing your diet in any way. But I am curious diet is a very barbed wire topic on the internet, which diets whether or not they work, etc., but in general, in any of these studies, do they evaluate whether or not people change their eating habits when they start to exercise more? - Yeah, I think I've seen one study that controlled for that, but I feel for them because it's hard enough to get people to exercise at the level and at the time, that you need for your study. If you also ask them, okay, fill out this survey to tell us exactly what you ate all day, they're going to say, forget you, I'm not joining your study. So it's a critical question. And again, there's only been one that I've seen and the evidence was that diets got better when they, you know, less processed foods, when they did adhere to this exercise. But lot more information needs to be gathered in that realm. The second study that I wanted to share unpublished, we're writing it up right now, is part two of that study that I just described, which was the low fit people. Next we move to mid fit people, like what about us, we're already exercising, am I going to benefit from increasing my exercise? So here again we collaborated with a great spin studio that had a whole bunch of mid fit people that by our definition were exercising two to three times a week on a regular basis. That's great, all you people out there that are doing that, you should know you're already benefiting your brain. But our question was what if we invited them to exercise as much as they wanted at the spin studio for three months, from two to three times all the way up to seven times a week, and let's just see what happened. And the control group, we asked them not to change their exercise. And so what we ended up with was a nice big array of starting with mid fit people that exercise between staying at two to three times a week, all the way up to seven times a week. And the bottom line from that study is every drop of sweat counted. That is, the more you change and you increase your workout up to seven times a week, the better your mood was, you had lower amounts of depression and anxiety, higher amounts of good effect, and the better your hippocampal memory was with the more you worked out, again, this was for three months. So I love that too, because it gives power to those of us that are regularly exercising and wondering, do I really need to? I mean, is it really going to help me? And the answer is yes. I mean, not all of us can exercise, go to a spin class seven times a week, but I love the message that our body is responsive to that. And you can get better hippocampal function, better overall baseline mood affect with a higher level. So it works for the mid fit people as well. - Fantastic, the more I learn from you, the more I'm starting to conceptualize the brain as an organ that is privileged in so many ways, has this unique blood-brain barrier, has this incredible quality of being able to predict things, and it's job mainly is, of course, to predict things among other functions, of course, but that our brain isn't necessarily going to stay stable or get better over time, that it needs a signal. It isn't sufficient to just say that we can't take it for granted, that our brain is actually an organ that requires a signal in order to maintain its own function and it sounds like enhanced blood flow and these pathways that you described earlier, these two pathways are at least among the more critical signals. I'm tempted now to move my frequency of cardiovascular exercise from, I confess it's about three days, 35 minutes lately, and it should be more to daily. There's something really, again, really special about daily because it's nonnegotiable, you just do it. And it sounds like if one were to do higher intensity exercise, you know in a spin class, I've never taken a spin class, but I've seen there are times when they're standing up on the bike and pedaling very hard. So that is included in these kinds of workouts, right? - Absolutely, yeah. - Okay. - I mean, that's what the instructor is doing. I cannot control. We did monitor heart rate of all the subjects and it was clearly, compared to the video Scrabble, it was highly significant. - I would hope so. - Yes. - I guess it depends on how intense that game of Scrabble is. Could we just briefly talk about mindset and affirmations? - Yeah, sure. - You've talked a bit before about affirmations, and as you mentioned, the beautiful work of my colleague at Stanford, Alia Crum, we can summarize her work pretty simply, although we won't do it complete justice by it, she's already been on the podcast, just to say that one's beliefs about a behavior also impact the outcomes of that behavior. If you learn a lot of true facts about stress being good for you, then you'll experience stress as better for you then if you only focus on or learn about the negative effects of stress. If you learn about the positive effects of exercise, you actually derive greater benefit from exercise, believe it or not. It's incredible, incredible effects, but they make sense when you understand what the brain is doing, which is a lot of this predictive coding and mindsets don't seem as mysterious and woo anymore once you understand what the brain is really doing. But what is, if any, the value of affirmation of telling yourself something positive about yourself, or of exercise, on not the exercise itself, but on mood, self image, memory, and brain function? - Yeah, so, I looked into this because I am also a certified exercise instructor and the form of exercise that I teach is called IntenSati. It's a form of exercise that was developed by this amazing instructor, Patricia Moreno. And she combined physical movements from kickbox, and dance, and yoga, and martial arts with positive spoken affirmations. So each move, if you're punching back and forth, as you would do in a kickbox class, you don't just punch, you say something like I am strong now, which every punch is associated with a word. And you know, you can create your own series of affirmations with the moves that you put together. And the first time I did it, I just wandered into her class, I didn't know what it was and I felt idiotic, I was like what, I came into the wrong class, I don't want to come into this class. But then I saw they didn't care whether I thought they looked silly saying these affir-, not saying, yelling these affirmations out loud while doing the choreography at the same time. And then I tried it, okay, I didn't yell out, I kind of whispered it at first. But by the end, I was really yelling it out. There's something about the declaration, using your own voice of saying things that you don't often say to yourself, like I'm strong, I'm inspired, I believe I will succeed, are all the kinds of affirmations you say. And you walk out of that class, or I walked out of that class, thinking, ah, I feel really good now. Man, I can't wait to come back to this class. Which is why I ultimately took teacher training to be able to teach that class. And so I started to look into what was known about affirmations and they were never combined with physical activity, but it was clear that there was a literature showing that positive affirmations, saying them or reading them could change mood in the same way as we're talking about, you know, Alia Crum's work. If you have this, it's a belief, once you start saying these things, these are not difficult things to believe, but it's amazing how much you don't say these kinds of things to yourself or with your own voice. You might say them about somebody else, oh, you're strong, you're so smart. Do you say that about yourself? And that's the thing about the self affirmations. It really gets you into a habit of saying good things about yourself. And then you start to realize, oh my God, I'm so mean to myself. I have lots of negative thoughts going on about myself in my head, and which is part of the other reason why I loved this, this particular form of exercise. So what you get in IntenSati is the mood boost from the positive spoken affirmations together with all the other brain and affect boosts that we've been talking about for this whole podcast, from the exercise, because it's a sweaty workout as well. - Interesting, there's a book, I confess I haven't read it, but I have had the pleasure of having a discussion with a psychologist from, I believe he's at University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Ethan Kross wrote a book called "Chatter," which focuses on the fact that so much of our inner dialogue, it is indeed negative. He certainly wasn't the first to point that out. But that explicit statements to counter that negative chatter, I believe is one of the hallmarks of readjusting one's own, not just internal reference frame, but actually self-image generally. And it's a fascinating and, I think, a very important area of psychology and neuroscience because, and I acknowledge this, we're talking about this, two laboratory neuroscientists who record from neurons and label neurons and look at stuff down the microscope, we are now deep in the territory, in the deep water of what some of our colleagues and people who think about neuroscience would consider really out there on the kind of subjective edges. And yet I think it's worth pointing out that the brain does all these things. It's responsible for simple reflexes and motor behaviors, but also high-level conceptual ideas about the universe and what it might look like in 10 years, or 100 years, or 1,000 years, but also high-level conceptual understanding of who we are and what we are about. And so even though it might seem a little bit out on the fringes, dare I say, I think that these are some of the more important untread landscapes of neuroscience. And I just want to acknowledge my appreciation for the fact that I'm going to connect the dots here and say, you went from somebody who didn't exercise, who went on this rafting trip, That discovered exercise and its benefits for your grant writing and then on and on and on, and then became a certified - Exercise instructor. - Instructor. So you don't do anything halfway, either as it's clear. I'd like to touch on something you mentioned earlier, but we haven't dove into it all in any depth, which is meditation. You mentioned this tea meditation. You had a publication recently on a 10-minute meditation. - Yes. - Right? Maybe you could tell us about this 10-minute meditation because it seems like such at tractable amount of time. And then if you would maybe tell us a little bit about the tea meditation. But sounds like you've discovered a minimum, a close to minimum threshold of meditation that can really benefit us. So maybe you could tell us about that study. - So the study was, as you very astutely pointed out, very practical study, just 10 minutes, not 30 minutes, not an hour meditation, that's too hard, 10 minutes guided meditation. They logged into a site. So we can tell that they logged in and they listened to a, it's a body scan, very basic, but easy to follow kind of meditation. And we asked them to do it, how often? Daily, seven days a week, just 10 minutes a day. And the most shocking thing about this study is that we got more adherence to the 10 minute daily meditation than the 10 minute daily podcast listening, which was our control. So the highest retention rate I've ever gotten in any, this kind of study that I've done, exercise or meditation, they wanted to do it 10 minutes a day. It was great. - I'm going to just start leading meditations for three hours as opposed to doing a three-hour podcast. - So we looked at cognitive effects before and after this, it was eight weeks of daily, it was actually 12-minute meditation, 12 minutes of body scan meditation. And what we found was significant decreases in stress response. So we did the stress test to see how you responded to an unexpected, stressful situation. The meditators did much better. Their mood was better and their cognitive performance was also better. And this was my first little foray into meditation after I had started my personal tea meditation, that really shifted my relationship with meditation. But it is consistent with many other studies showing the beneficial effects of meditation. But the unique thing was we tried to make it doable that many, many people out there could actually follow this typical regimen, and so we're continuing that. In fact, my research in my lab right now is all about those doable, short things that NYU college students will do, not just at the beginning of the semester, but at the end of the semester when the stress and anxiety levels are now at record-breaking high levels. And they need something to bring that level down so that they could show their professors what their brains can actually do. And so it includes very short meditations, sound meditations, visual meditations, walking, things that any college student, but we're obviously focused on NYU students, will do. I want to get at graduation rates. I want to get at class performance with these kinds of interventions. But it started with that study that I just described, meditation. - If you would, and here's where we can highlight this again, as some highly educated speculation, if it's coming from you. What do you think is going on during meditation? I mean, so a body skin involves a kind of a interoceptive awareness, like interoception, of course, being an attention to what's going on on the surface of and within the confines of our skin as opposed to the outside world. Drawing our attention to anything inside us or outside us involves forebrain function, prefrontal cortex presumably, and other things, typically eyes are closed, typically it's relaxing. So there are a lot of variables that could be feeding into a number of different effects. But as a neuroscientist, what do you think is going on that this period of kind of an self-induced, somewhat unusual state, what do you think is going on in terms of network behavior and networks within the brain that it can have these long-term effects? Because we got to some of the ones downstream of exercise and I think there's so much evidence, I know there's so much evidence that meditation is beneficial. How do you think it's working or what do you think it's doing? - Yeah, I think that one of the most important things that gets worked when we are doing a simple 10 minute or 12 minute body scan meditation regularly, this 10 minutes a day, 12 minutes a day is the habit building and the practice of focusing on the present moment. I think that is very hard for us modern humans to do, because I'm worrying about the thing that's due at the end of the week that I need to do and how many hours am I going to have to be able to do that. Or I'm worried about, whatever, the email that wasn't as polite as it should be that I sent and what were the repercussions for that instead of focusing on this moment, which is fun, I get to talk to you, it's a beautiful day outside, I'm feeling good right at this moment. And I think that those, all of the meditative practices that I've done, and this one also, whether you know it or not, is getting you to focus on this moment. And I think it's even more important in this day and age where anxiety levels and the next variant might come out and what are the repercussions there? And I have a mother who's older and she's more susceptible to it, and there's a war, and what's going to happen there? Those are all future possibilities. And we should be worried about that. That is a possibility, you need to plan for that. But you also need to focus on this moment right now. I'm healthy, I can breathe, I get to have this interesting conversation right in this moment. If I start thinking about other things, then it takes away from this moment. Do I know what circuits are involved? Not exactly, that is not my area. I think there are some studies that have focused on that, that present moment kind of activity. But that is what I think is most important about the practice of meditation or one of the important things that calms us down. Because if you know how to do that, that gives you this powerful tool for the rest of your day. You're not locked into that fearful future thinking that so many of us have, or that just reliving of the terrible past, but you could enjoy the present moment. - Yeah, that really resonates. I think that going back to the earlier part of our conversation, the hippocampus has this incredible storage capacity and ability to set context about past, present, and future. And that's a beautiful thing because as much as I like to think he had some semblance of a healthy life, none of us want to HM, none of us want to be in the position of not being able to form new memories and have no context to the past or the present. So we're grateful that, we should all be grateful that our hippocampus can draw from past, present, and future in various combinations and we should support it through the daily exercise and other habits, let's call them habits, so that people make them habits now that you've highlighted. But if we are not deliberately anchoring within past, present, and future according to what we need, and we're just shuffling between past, present, and future, that is not a good way to live. - No. - It's not effective. - No. - It sounds like meditation can really help us go to the right stacks. I guess people don't go to libraries anymore, but in the old days you would go to the right location in the library, you actually can't get distracted by the books that you're interested in, if you need to go just reflexively, if you need to go study a particular topic. So that's kind of how I think about it. It makes us more linear perhaps in our way of being. - I think so, and it actually counteracts, not that I'm against technology, but having our phones and being connected to every good and bad thing going on in the world today is incredibly distracting and takes you away from the present moment virtually 24 hours a day. And so we have to work extra hard right now compared to in the '40s when we didn't have all this technology or at the same level. So yeah, it becomes even more important practice, I think, for everyday life. - Yeah, or even 10, 15 years ago it felt like smartphones weren't as intrusive. One final question and maybe a request. As the new incoming dean of College of Letters and Sciences, and I must say I'm delighted, thrilled actually to hear that a lot of the practices that we've been discussing today and that you've pioneered are going to be incorporated into undergraduate education. I predict, and I'd be willing to wager that that will become a template for how universities and non-university systems should function because if indeed the, and it is true, that there's this incredible relationship between physical movement and mental deliberate practices and performance, any corporation, school, household would be crazy, would be self-limiting, and even self-destructive to not incorporate those. So I'm so happy that you're going to do this and collect data. Please, we'll have to touch back with you and hear what comes to that. But one of the main things that I hear so much about today are issues with attention. And we haven't talked about attention, we've mainly been talking about memory and cognition. But you know a lot about attention, and here I'm not being disparaging, I think people have done what I'm about to say as a consequence of need and lack of other resources. There's an immense amount of Adderall use, Ritalin use, Modafinil use, and caffeine abuse. Now, I happen to like caffeine, I don't use the other compounds I described, but it's just incredible to me how the data on this are, a colleague of mine at Stanford claims that something like two-thirds or more of college students use these without prescription for ADHD. What can we expect in terms of the effects of regular exercise on attention? And are there any other things besides exercise and meditation that you would like to see people do in terms of trying to increase their powers of attention? Because I think the ability to focus and attend is really the distinguishing feature between those that will succeed in any endeavor and those that won't. And that's a scary thing for a lot of people to hear because a lot of people think they have ADHD. They may, they may not. But I bet that a number of students at both Stanford and NYU feel challenged with holding their attention to the thing that they need to hold their attention to. - Yeah, so I would say the top three tools that everybody right this minute today can use to up their capacity to attend where they want to include exercise for the reasons we've talked about. It has a direct effect on functioning of the prefrontal cortex. Meditation also, clear clinical studies showing improved ability to focus and particularly focus on the present moment. And the third has to be sleep. So sleep is, you can't, it's out of the three, it is the most physiological. I mean, I could live my whole life without meditating one minute. Could I survive without sleep? No, none of us could. So, it's more basic physiological, but it is so important for all core cognitive functions, including attention, including creativity, including just good basic brain function. That is why it's so critical to get that information, that basic neuroscience information into the heads of these students that are trying their best to show us how their brains work, but being hampered because they're not moving enough, they're not meditating. And there's all these distracting things that they include in their lives. Some of which a little bit is good, but you know, 24 hours a day on your phone and linked in, not LinkedIn, but linked to your phone is damaging to your attention. So exercise, meditation, sleep can help you learn, retain, and perform better than if you do not have these three things in your life. - Wonderful, music to my ears. And also either very low cost or zero cost, considering that the exercise doesn't require a class, one could use the freely available resource of gravity to do jumping jacks, or burpees, or pushups, or whatever, or sit ups, or all those in combination. - And don't forget YouTube, the freely accessible millions of YouTube videos. If you don't want to do your jumping jacks by yourself, I always say this, I talk about breath meditation for my book, "Good Anxiety," and if you don't like the one that I suggest there's only about a million more on YouTube with ratings from one star to five stars, so use that resource. - It is a wonderful resource and you are an amazing resource. Wendy, thank you so much for coming here today to have this discussion and share your knowledge about not just existing data, but new data coming out soon, and for your leadership in the university system, for your leadership in public education, for the decades of important work on memory and neural circuitry, which we got to learn about today, as well. Thank you ever so much. - Thank you, Andrew, fun conversation. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about learning and memory and how to get better at learning and remembering with Dr. Wendy Suzuki. If you'd like to learn more about Dr. Suzuki's work, you can go to WendySuzuki.com. There you will also find titles and links to her popular books, as well as her social media handles. We've also placed those in the show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and/or Apple, and on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. If you have suggestions about guests or topics that you'd like us to cover on the Huberman Lab Podcast, or you'd like to give us feedback of any kind, please leave that in the comment section on YouTube, that's the best place to give us feedback. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. On many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements, while supplements are certainly not necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like accelerating the transition into sleep, and getting better, deeper sleep, as well as enhancing focus and learning, and other aspects of human performance and health. We're excited to announce that we've partnered with Momentous supplements. The reason we partnered with Momentous is several-fold. First of all, we wanted to have one location where Huberman Lab Podcast listeners could go in order to find all the supplements that we talk about and to find those in a form where they could systematically try one or the other. This is a real issue in the supplement industry. A lot of supplement brands out there combine different ingredients in ways that don't really allow you to pinpoint exactly what you need and what you don't need. So getting supplements that have low doses, or just the minimal effective dose of particular ingredients, and being able to mix and match those ingredients yourself, and really establish what's best for you is really key. In addition, we came to realize that a lot of our listeners want supplements, but they reside outside of the United States. So we're pleased to tell you that Momentous ships both within the US and internationally. And of course, Momentous supplements are of the very highest quality ingredients and the precision of the amounts of those ingredients is tightly regulated. If you're interested in Momentous supplements, the catalog of supplements related to the Huberman Lab Podcast are growing all the time. A good number of them are already there. You can go to livemomentous.com/huberman in order to find them. And there will be additional supplements added to that site as we go forward. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Twitter and Instagram, I post neuroscience and other science-related information and tools on a regular basis. Some of that information overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but a lot of it is distinct from the information contained on the Huberman Lab Podcast. So again, that's Huberman Lab on Instagram and Huberman Lab on Twitter. We also have a Neural Network Newsletter. What that is is a monthly newsletter in which I distill critical points from different podcast episodes, provide links to useful resources. If you want to sign up for that newsletter, I should mention it is zero cost, and we do not share your email with anybody, and we have a very clear privacy policy posted at hubermanlab.com, just go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, you'll see the Neural Network Newsletter. You can also look at examples of newsletters without having to sign up to make sure that you actually do want to sign up. But if you are interested, the signup is there, very easy and you can receive our monthly newsletter. So once again, thank you for joining me today for our voyage into the neuroscience of learning and memory and tools to get better at learning and memory. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat rock music]

========================================

--- Video 275 ---
Video ID: szqPAPKE5tQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szqPAPKE5tQ
Title: Understand & Improve Memory Using Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Podcast #72
Published: 2022-05-16 12:00:35 UTC
Description:
This episode I explain the mechanisms by which different types of memories are established in our brain and how to leverage the amount and timing of key neurochemicals and hormones, such as adrenaline (aka epinephrine) and cortisol, to improve your learning and memory abilities. I describe multiple science-based protocols to do this, including repetition, caffeine, emotional states, deliberate cold exposure, sleep, meditation, and the role of vision, including taking “mental snapshots.” I also describe how exercise and an associated hormone, osteocalcin, can improve cognitive ability and memory formation. I also describe unique aspects and forms of memory such as photographic memory, extreme facial recognition (aka super recognition), and the phenomenon known as déjà vu. 

#HubermanLab #Memory

Thank you to our sponsors
Eight Sleep: https://www.eightsleep.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
A Novel Demonstration of Enhanced Memory Associated with Emotional Arousal: https://bit.ly/3FLuyPH
Mechanisms of memory under stress: https://bit.ly/3sEmdaZ
Photographic Memory: The Effects of Volitional Photo Taking on Memory for Visual and Auditory Aspects of an Experience: https://bit.ly/3MlZB6U
Brief, daily meditation enhances attention, memory, mood, and emotional regulation in non-experienced meditators: https://bit.ly/3PnYaH5

Timestamps
00:00:00 Memory, Improving Memory  
00:02:45 Eight Sleep, Thesis, InsideTracker 
00:07:54 Sensory Stimuli, Nervous System & Encoding Memory 
00:11:12 Context & Memory Formation 
00:13:46 Tool: Repetition, Improving Learning & Memory 
00:17:11 Co-Activation and intensity Neuron Activation  
00:20:50 Different Types of Memory
00:25:40 Memory Formation in the Brain, Hippocampus 
00:28:00 Hippocampus, Role in Memory & Learning, Explicit vs. Implicit Memory
00:31:49 Emotion & Memory Enhancement 
00:36:44 Tool: Emotion Saliency & Improved Memory
00:41:42 Conditioned-Placed Avoidance/Preference, Adrenaline 
00:47:14 Adrenaline & Cortisol  
00:49:35 Accelerating the Repetition Curve & Adrenaline 
00:53:03 Tool: Enhancing Learning & Memory - Caffeine, Alpha-GPC & Stimulant Timing
01:00:50 Tool: Enhancing Learning & Memory - Sleep, Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR)
01:04:48 Tool: Enhancing Learning & Memory - Deliberate Cold Exposure, Adrenaline
01:08:42 Timing of Adrenaline Release & Memory Formation 
01:12:36 Chronically High Adrenaline & Cortisol, Impact on Learning & Memory 
01:15:12 Adrenaline Linked with Learning: Not a New Principle 
01:17:25 Amygdala, Adrenaline & Memory Formation, Generalization of Memories
01:22:20 Tool: Cardiovascular Exercise & Neurogenesis 
01:27:00 Cardiovascular Exercise, Osteocalcin & Improved Hippocampal Function
01:29:59 Load-Bearing Exercise, Osteocalcin & Cognitive Ability 
01:34:41 Tool: Timing of Exercise, Learning & Memory Enhancement
01:37:29 Photographic Memory
01:38:49 “Super Recognizers,” Facial Recognition   
01:41:46 Tool: Mental Snapshots, Photographs & Memory Enhancement
01:49:12 Déjà Vu
01:53:24 Tool: Meditation, Daily Timing of Meditation
02:02:21 How to Enhance Memory 
02:05:51 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 276 ---
Video ID: RBK5KLA5Jjg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBK5KLA5Jjg
Title: Understanding & Controlling Aggression | Huberman Lab Podcast #71
Published: 2022-05-09 12:00:23 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe the neural mechanisms that activate and control aggressive states and behaviors and the role of hormones—estrogen and testosterone—in mediating violent and/or competitive aggression. I also describe tools that can be used to modulate the factors that have been shown to ‘prime’ an individual for aggression, including sunlight, estrogen sensitivity, competition within social settings, and overall stress levels, and the hormone cortisol. I discuss how substances such as caffeine and alcohol can impact impulsive behaviors and how nutrition and supplementation can be used to regulate mood and aggression. 

#HubermanLab 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
ROKA - https://www.roka.com -- code: huberman
Helix Sleep - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
Photoperiod reverses the effects of estrogens on male aggression via genomic and nongenomic pathways: https://bit.ly/3sl6ehZ
Testosterone and occupational choice: actors, ministers, and other men: https://bit.ly/3KV2IkS
Age, Testosterone, and Behavior Among Female Prison Inmates: https://bit.ly/3N48xOt
Testosterone Rapidly Increases Neural Reactivity to Threat in Healthy Men: A Novel Two-Step Pharmacological Challenge Paradigm: https://bit.ly/3MVP4iQ
Caffeinated and non-caffeinated alcohol use and indirect aggression: The impact of self-regulation: https://bit.ly/39F09X3
Efficacy of carnitine in the treatment of children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: https://bit.ly/3FtpSh9
Functional identification of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus (See "Supplementary information" for movies): https://go.nature.com/3yltYGB

Book Links
An Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology 5th Edition: https://amzn.to/396bHm9
The Nature of the Beast: How Emotions Guide Us: https://amzn.to/3wd6NM3

Other Links
Mouse switching from mating behavior to aggressive behaviors upon stimulation of VMH: https://youtu.be/AIlp69kfqjw?t=882
VMH stimulation causes mouse to display aggressive behaviors toward an inanimate object (e.g., glove): https://youtu.be/AIlp69kfqjw?t=689

Timestamps
00:00:00 Aggression, Types of Aggression 
00:03:33 AG1 (Athletic Greens), ROKA, Helix Sleep
00:08:29 Neural Circuits for Aggression, “Hydraulic Pressure Model” 
00:15:50 Brain Regions Controlling Aggression, Ventromedial Hypothalamus (VMH) 
00:22:14 Psychiatric Disorders & Aggression 
00:23:36 Stimulation of the VMH, Estrogen Receptors & Aggression
00:31:57 Neural Circuits Mediating Physical Acts of Aggression, Biting
00:35:56 Testosterone & Competitiveness/Estrogen & Aggression 
00:43:00 Sunlight, Melatonin & Aggression 
00:45:46 Cortisol, Serotonin & Aggressive Behaviors 
00:51:56 Tool: Omega-3 Supplementation & Mood 
00:54:18 Tool: Sunlight, Sauna & Cortisol Reduction
00:55:54 Tool: Ashwagandha & Cortisol Reduction
00:57:06 Tool: Seasonality/Sunlight, Genetic Variation in Estrogen Sensitivity
01:00:37 Testosterone & Aggression, Competitive Work Environments
01:05:07 Testosterone, Amygdala, Challenge & Effort 
01:09:27 Caffeine, Alcohol & Impulsivity 
01:13:15 Tool: Caffeinated Alcohol Beverages, Impulsivity & Aggression 
01:17:18 Tool: ADHD, Acetyl-L Carnitine & Aggressive Behavior 
01:24:10 Factors Affecting the “Hydraulic Pressure Model” of Aggression 
01:25:44 Book by Dr. David Anderson, Aggression & Social Relationships 
01:27:35 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Momentous Supplements, Neural Network Newsletter, Instagram, Twitter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [cheerful music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing aggression. I'm going to explain to you that there are several different types of aggression, for instance, reactive aggression versus proactive aggression. Meaning sometimes people will be aggressive because they feel threatened or they are protecting those that they love, who also feel threatened. There's also proactive aggression where people go out of their way to deliberately try and harm others. And there is indirect aggression, which is aggression, not involving physical violence, for instance, shaming people and things of that sort. It turns out that there are different biological mechanisms underlying each of the different types of aggression. And today I will define those for you. I'll talk about the neural circuits in the brain and body that mediate each of the different kinds of aggression. Talk about some of the hormones and peptides and neurotransmitters involved. I promise to make it all accessible to you, even if you do not have any biology or science background, I will also discuss tools, psychological tools and biological tools that one can use to better control aggression. Now, right here at the outset, I want to acknowledge that any discussion about aggression has to have an element of context within it. To be fair, human beings invest a lot of money, a lot of time, and a lot of energy, and indeed can even derive pleasure from aggression. Later I'll talk about neural circuits in the brain and body that reinforce, in other words, reward through the release of chemicals that make people feel good. Acts of aggression. However, what I'm mainly referring to is the context in which human beings will pay money in order to derive what we call vicarious aggression, put it simply people spend an enormous amount of money and time and energy watching other people engage in, for instance, aggressive sports. And we know that observing your team winning over another team causes the release of neurochemicals in your brain and body that make you feel good. And yes, that can make you feel more aggressive. We also know of course that most governments invest many billions if not trillions of dollars in infrastructure, technologies and human beings in order to engage in aggression if needed, so-called military warfare, et cetera. So today's discussion will include a description of aggression in the pathological sense. We'll actually talk about an explosive aggressive disorder that most of you probably haven't heard of, but is actually far more common than perhaps, you know, we'll talk about the role of things like attention deficit, hyperactivity disorder, and how that can relate to aggression through the relationship between impulsivity and aggression. And we'll talk about verbal aggression, physical aggression, proactive aggression, as mentioned before, and reactive aggression. I'm certain that by the end of the episode, you will come away with a much more thorough understanding of what this thing that we call aggression really is. And when you see it in other people, I think it will make more sense to you. And when you observe it in yourself or the impulse to engage in aggression, verbal, or physical or otherwise, I hope that you'll understand it better as well. And of course, the tools that I will describe should allow you to modulate and control aggressive tendencies or predispositions to aggressiveness and just generally to be able to engage with people in a more adaptive way overall. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all your foundational health needs. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring this podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it covers all of my basic vitamin mineral and probiotic needs. The probiotics are especially important to me. There are now abundant data showing that the gut microbiome, which is basically a community of trillions of little bacteria that live in our guts are beneficial for our immune system, for brain function, for mood and many other aspects of our health. The gut microbiome thrives on probiotics and Athletic Greens contains the proper array of probiotics to optimize the gut microbiome. Athletic Greens also has adaptogens for recovery from physical and mental exertion, digestive enzymes for gut health, vitamin C, zinc, as I mentioned before, all the other vitamins and minerals that you need in order to cover your basic needs each day. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. That'll give you five free travel packs that make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road and a year supply of Vitamin D3K2. There's now a wealth of data showing that vitamin D3 is important for many aspects of our immediate and long term health. Many people, even if they get out in the sunlight are not getting enough Vitamin D3, and the K2 is thought to be beneficial for calcium regulation and a number of other things important to our health. So again, if you go to athleticGreens.com/huberman, you can claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind, I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with some pretty tough challenges as you move throughout the day. For instance, if you go from a brightly lit region to a dimmer region, your visual system has to adjust. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with those sorts of adjustments in mind. So for instance, if you're outside in the shade, you move into the sun and then back into the shade, you don't have to take your sunglasses on and off. Their glasses were initially designed for sports performance and the great thing is they could be used for that, but also they have a terrific aesthetic, so you can wear them to work or out to dinner. I wear readers at night and when I drive at night and I wear sunglasses, if I'm out a lot on really bright days. The terrific thing about ROKA glasses is that even if you get sweaty, they won't fall off. So you can run with them, you can cycle with them. Or as I mentioned before, you can just wear them out and about. If you'd like to try ROKA, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code "Huberman" to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA roka.com and enter the code "Huberman" at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that in my opinion are the very best you'll find. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress a little over a year ago, and it's the best sleep I've had ever since. If you go to the Helix site, they have a terrific sleep quiz that just takes a few minutes, ask you questions like, "Do you tend to sleep on your side, your back or your stomach?" Maybe you don't know because you're asleep, but many people do know. And even if you don't know that's okay, it will also ask you questions like, "Do you tend to run hot or cold?" Do you tend to wake up in the middle of the night or not? And by taking that brief quiz, they will match you to the specific mattress that's ideal for you and your sleep needs. And that's really what sets Helix Sleep mattresses apart. Everybody's unique, and they know that. So if you take this quiz, you'll get matched to a particular mattress. For me, it was the "Dusk" mattress D-U-S-K, but again, that's just me, and you may match to that one, or you may match to a different one. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress and sleeping much better, go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take that two minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. I also love their pillows. I've always had this issue with pillows that they heat up too much. I'm always looking for the pillow that can cool itself. Somehow the pillows stay nice and cool. They're also not too big, so I'm not propped up, not getting the Text Neck in the middle of the night, where I'm letting my chin push my chest, nor am I falling back and having trouble breathing in the middle of the night. They're designed just right. They also have a 10 years warranty and you get to try it out for a hundred nights, risk free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it. But I think that you will. Again, if you're interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. Let's talk about aggression. I think that many people out there are put off by aggression, although others are drawn to aggression both in themselves and when observing it in others. The reason to talk about aggression is, that as mentioned before, the context of aggression really matters. So there are instances where aggression is adaptive. For instance, a mother protecting her children if she's being attacked, or if her children are being threatened. I think most people would agree that so-called maternal aggression of that sort, provided the context is right, is a great thing. Protecting our young is after all one of the primary adaptive drives of our species, and thank goodness it is. Of course, other forms of aggression like unprovoked, proactive aggression, somebody simply being violent to somebody else, even when unprovoked, most of us cringe when we see that kind of behavior, it can even evoke aggression in people when they observe that kind of behavior. So again, context really matters, but a more general and perhaps an even more important reason to think about and understand aggression is that by understanding the biology and psychology of aggression, you will be in a much better position to understand how all emotional states come to be, both in yourself and in others. For instance, many of you have probably heard the statement that I believe arises from pop psychology, not from formal academic psychology, that aggression is just sadness. It's a form of sadness that's amplified and it shows up as aggression. But when we look at the underlying biology and the peer reviewed literature on this, nothing could be further from the truth. We have distinct circuits in the brain for aggression versus grief and mourning, those are non-overlapping. Now that doesn't mean that you can't be sad and aggressive or in a state of mourning and aggressive at the same time, but the idea that sadness and aggression are one in the same thing is simply not true. And by understanding that, or perhaps by understanding that irritability and aggression are not the same thing, you'll be in a much better position to apply some of the tools that we will talk about in this episode in order to be able to reduce or eliminate, or if it's adaptive to you to modulate aggression. And yes, there are cases where modulating your aggression in some cases, even amplifying aggression can be adaptive. Now this of course is not the first discussion about the biology of aggression or the psychology of aggression. And we really can look to the beginning of the last century as the time in which the formal study of aggression really began. One of the names that's most associated with the formal study of aggression is none other than Konrad Lorenz. Some of you may be familiar with that name, others of you may not be familiar with that name. Konrad Lorenz studied so-called imprinting behaviors and fixed action pattern behaviors. He's most famous, at least in scientific circles, for getting geese to believe that he was their parent. And if you were to put into Google Conrad with a K, Lorenz, just as it sounds, Konrad Lorenz, geese, you're going to see a lot of photos of Conrad walking down roads with a lot of geese following him or swimming in lakes with a lot of geese following him. He had a habit of geese adopting him because of the behaviors that he partook in. So he would swim out on a lake in front of a bunch of little geese and then they would think that he was the parent and they would imprint on him. He even lived with these animals and they lived with him, sort of a strange character from what I hear. But nonetheless, all this work was deserving of a Nobel prize because what he discovered were fixed action patterns. That is patterns of behavior that could be evoked by a single stimulus. Okay. This is really important. The idea that you can get a whole category of behaviors, like swimming behind a parent, or looking to somebody for comfort, and only them, the idea that you could get a huge category of different behaviors in a bunch of different contexts triggered by just the presence of that person is remarkable, because what it suggested and what turns out to be true is that there are neural circuits, not just individual brain areas, but collections of brain areas that work together to engage a pattern of behaviors. And that's the first fundamental principle that we need to define today, that when we talk about aggression, we are talking about activation of neural circuits, not individual brain areas, but neural circuits that get played out in sequence like keys on a piano, but that playing out in sequence means that aggression is a verb. It has a beginning, a middle and an end, and it's a process. It's not an event. And as you'll see, that turns out to be very important in terms of thinking about how one can halt aggression, prevent it from happening before it's initiated, or maybe even prolonging aggression, if that's what's needed. Now, Konrad Lorenz had no real knowledge of neural circuits. I mean, obviously he knew there was this thing that we call a brain and a nervous system, and he knew that there were chemicals in the brain and hormones and things of that sort that were likely to play a role, but he really didn't take any measures to define what the neural circuits were, frankly, he didn't need to. He had his Nobel prize and he did all this beautiful work. He's known for an abundance of work, but he did think about what sorts of underlying processes could drive something like aggression. And he talked about one particular feature that's especially important, and that's this notion of a pressure. The idea that yes, certain hormones will bias somebody or an animal to be aggressive, certain neural transmitter states, and you'll learn what those are today will bias somebody to be more or less aggressive, maybe even submissive and passive, maybe outright proactively aggressive towards anyone or anything in front of them. And yes, of course there will be historical features based on their childhood, et cetera, et cetera. He understood that there will be a constellation of things that would drive people to be aggressive. And he described a so-called pressure, almost like a hydraulic pressure. Just think about fluid pressure in a small container being pushed, pushed, pushed until the can, or the container is ready to explode and how multiple features, multiple variables could impinge on that and create that pressure. It turns out that's exactly the way the system works. There is no single brain area that flips the switch for aggression. Although we'll soon talk about a brain structure that generally houses the propensity and the output of aggression. This notion of a hydraulic pressure that can drive us toward aggressive behavior or conversely can be very low pressure and keep us in a state of non-reactivity, maybe even passivity or submissiveness is a very important feature because it really captures the essence of how neural circuits work when we're talking about primitive behaviors generally. And you can start to notice this in yourself and in others, you can start to notice when you are veering toward aggression or when someone is veering toward aggression, verbal or physical. Now that veering is the buildup of this hydraulic pressure that Lorenz was referring to, and it really does have an underlying biological basis. Now it was some years later that the first experiments came along, which really started to identify the brain areas and the biological so-called pressures that can induce aggressive behavior. And the person that really gets credit for this is a guy by the name of Walter Hess, who at that time was working on cats. And I know that when say working on cats, a lot of people will cringe. A lot of people have cats as pets, and certainly cats can be delightful. Some people like them more, some people like them less. Most people cringe at the idea of doing experiments on cats. I should say that these days, very few laboratories work on cats. Most laboratories that work on animal models will work on flies, Drosophila fruit flies for their capacity to do genetics, on laboratory mice, sometimes rats, but usually mice. And occasionally you'll find a lab that still works on cats. Back in the time of Hess, very few laboratories worked on mice, most laboratories worked on cats or rats. And the reason for that is nowadays most laboratories use mice if they use animal models because of the genetic tools that exist in mice to knock out this gene or knock in this gene, et cetera, which can't be done in humans or non-human primates, at least not very easily at this point in history. So when I say he was working on cats, I realized that probably evokes some negative emotions in some of you, maybe even aggression in some of you, what we can do, however, is look at the data and make use of the data in terms of our understanding. What Hess did was he had cats that were awake and he was able to lower a stimulating electrode into their brain. Now keep in mind that the brain does not have any pain sensors. So after a small hole is made in the skull, electrodes are lowered into the brain. This is what's done commonly in human neurosurgery. And he was able to stimulate different brain areas and he was sort of poking around. And when I say sort of, he was doing this with some logical intent and purpose, he wasn't just poking around in there for fun. He was trying to identify brain regions that could generate entire categories of behavior, ALA Lorenz, right? These fixed action pattern behaviors. Eventually his electrode landed in a site and he provided electrical stimulation to the cat that caused this otherwise passive purring relaxing cat to suddenly go into an absolute rage. So arched back, hissing hair up. So called piloerection, where the hairs go up, animals try to make themselves as big as possible often when they're aggressive. Drooling, maybe even spitting, believe it or not, cats and other animals can do this. And the cat tried to attack him or anyone else, and anything else, even inanimate objects when he stimulated this particula brain area. So Hess obviously took notice of this incredible transformation in behavior. And the fact that when he turned off the stimulation of this particular brain area, the cat very quickly within seconds, went back to being passive calm kitty. Now, of course, he repeated this experiment in other animals because he had to confirm that it wasn't just happenstance, that there wasn't something unique about this one cat that perhaps he had stimulated an area that had been built up during the kittenhood of this cat and had been reactivated. Maybe this kitten had been traumatized early in life or scared and reactivation of a particular circuit, unique to that cat created this aggressive behavior. That wasn't the case, every cat that he looked at and stimulated this particular brain area, the cat would immediately go into an aggressive, almost rage type behavior. Now, of course we can't anthropomorphize. We don't know what the cat was feeling. For all we know the cat could be happy, although that seems pretty unlikely and later experiments done in mice, but also in humans confirm that indeed, stimulation of this brain area evoked not just behavioral aggression, but also subjective feelings of aggression and anger. So what was this incredible brain area, or rather, I should say, what is the brain area that harbored this incredible capacity to generate aggressive behavior in Hess's experiments? Well, for those of you that are regular listeners of this podcast, you'll probably be relieved to know that today we're going to talk about some new neural circuits, oftentimes we'll center back on the amygdala or the prefrontal cortex, and those names will come up. And for those of you that haven't heard them before, don't worry, I'll make it clear as to what those brain areas are and what they do. But today we're going to talk a lot about the so-called VMH or ventromedial hypothalamus. The ventromedial hypothalamus is a nucleus, meaning a small collection of neurons... What are neurons? Nerve cells, and that small collection of neurons that we call the ventromedial hypothalamus is truly small. It's only about 1,500 neurons on one side of your brain and a matching 1,500 neurons on the other side of your brain and that combined 3000 neurons or so, it's not exactly 3000, but 3000 neurons or so is sufficient to generate aggressive behavior of the sort that Hess observed in the cat, and believe it or not, when you see somebody who's in an act of rage or in an act of verbal aggression or in an act of defensive aggression, protecting their family or loved ones or country, et cetera, almost certainly those neurons are engaged in that behavior. Those neurons are perhaps even generating that behavior. And next I'll describe some experiments that were done just recently within the last 10 years or so, but leading right up until this year and even last month that keep confirming again and again and again, that it is the activity of neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that are both necessary and sufficient to generate the full catalog of aggressive behaviors. Now, before I go further to describe the beautiful recent studies on the VMH, the ventromedial hypothalamus, and the important role of testosterone, and more importantly, estrogen, in the activation of aggressive behavior, that's right. That's soon to be clear to you why that's the case. I want to emphasize that the ventromedial hypothalamus is something that we should all care about. Why? Well, it turns out that many categories of psychiatric disorders, developmental disorders, and psychological challenges, things like schizophrenia, PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, borderline personality disorder, and even certain forms of autism can include elements of aggression and even violence. Now it's certainly not the case that aggression and violence are present in all people who suffer from schizophrenia or PTSD or depression or autism or borderline personality disorder. I'm absolutely not saying that. However, it can be a feature of those. And it's a well described feature in terms of trying to understand the constellation of challenges that people suffer from when they have those. So thinking about the VMH goes way beyond just understanding basic aggression in the context of adaptive aggression. So, you know, when earlier I use the example, maternal aggression, that's one adaptive form of aggression. It also can be pathologic aggression, meaning it can harm ourselves or others. So keep this in mind as we go forward, because later we're going to talk about specific tools designed to modulate or prevent aggression in, for instance, people with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and especially kids with ADHD. In the meantime, let's return to the VMH, this relatively small collection of neurons. And the reason I say relatively small is, well, your brain has many hundreds of billions of neurons, maybe even trillions of neurons, the exact number of neurons isn't really clear, but it's a lot. And it certainly is a lot relative to the number of neurons this 3000 or so neurons living in your hypothalamus that can evoke this aggressive response. Experiments done by David Anderson's lab at Caltech were really the first to parse the fine circuitry and to really show that the ventromedial hypothalamus is both necessary and sufficient for aggressive behavior. These are important experiments and they're worth knowing about. What they did was they identified, first of all, where the ventromedial hypothalamus was in the mouse, that was pretty straightforward to do was sort of known before they started these experiments. And then they analyzed which genes, meaning which DNA, which of course becomes RNA and RNA becomes protein, which DNA and therefore which proteins are expressed in particular cells of the ventromedial hypothalamus. And it turns out that there's a particular category of neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that make an estrogen receptor. And it is those neurons in particular that are responsible for generating aggressive behavior. How did they know this? Well, they used a tool that's actually been described by a previous guest of this podcast. We had an episode with the psychiatrist and bioengineer and my colleague at Stanford School of Medicine, Karl Deisseroth, he and others have developed tools that allow people to control the activity of neurons essentially by remote control, by shining light on those neurons. So in the context of an experiment on a mouse, which is what David's lab did, and these were the beautiful experiments of Dayu Lin who's now in her own laboratory at New York University, put a little fiber optic cable down into the brain into the hypothalamus that is of the mouse. The mouse is able to move around in its cage freely moving, even though it has a little tether, this little wire, it's a very thin wire. And that little thin wire is actually a little what we call optrode. And the experimentalist in this case, Dayu, was able to stimulate the turning on of a little bit of blue light and that blue light activated only those estrogen receptor neurons in only the ventromedial hypothalamus and the way she was able to do that, is she had introduced a gene that had been developed by our friend, Karl Deisseroth that allows light to trigger electrical activity in those neurons. So if any of that is confusing, or if all of that is confusing, here's the experiment. There's a mouse in a cage. It has a little wire coming out of its head. It doesn't notice, believe it or not. We know this 'cause it's still eating and mating and doing all the things that mics like to do on a daily basis and sleeping, et cetera. And the mere pressing of a button will activate a little bit of light released at the end of that wire, that light activates particular neurons in this case, it's the estrogen receptor containing neurons in only the ventromedial hypothalamus. When that mouse is in a cage with another mouse, a couple of things happen depending on what the other mouse is, or we could say who the other mouse is. If it's a male mouse and you put in there with a female mouse, the male mouse will attempt to mate with a female mouse provided that the male mouse has gone through puberty. He will try to mount and mate with the female mouse. Now female mice are either in a receptive phase or a non-receptive phase of their so-called estrous cycle. They don't have a menstrual 28 day cycle They have an estrous cycle. And on particular days of the estrous cycle, they are not happy to mate. They will basically keep their hindquarters away from the male mouse at all costs. They'll even attack the male mouse. On certain days of the estrous cycle, however, the female mouse will undergo what's called lordosis, which is an arching of her back and she'll allow the male to mount and mate with her. So a large number of experiments were done, but the first experiment really was to put the male mouse in with a female mouse who's in the so-called receptive phase of estrus. That is, she will allow mating and he starts mating with her and they go through the standard repertoire of mating behaviors that you observe in mice: mounting, thrusting, intromission as it's called in the mouse sex world. Well, I guess I don't know what the mice call it, but that's what the experimenters call it. And then afterwards that he will dismount, okay. So they observe this kind of mounting and sex behavior is very typical, but about halfway through the behavior, Dayu turned on the light to stimulate these estrogen receptor containing neurons only in the male mouse and what she observed was incredibly dramatic. The male mouse ceases from trying to mate with the female mouse and immediately tries to kill the female mouse. He starts attacking her. Then she turns off the light, the male stops and goes back to trying to mate with the female mouse. So I'm sure all of this was very confusing and disturbing to the female mouse. Nonetheless, that was the repertoire. They would mate. She would stimulate these ventromedial hypothalamus neurons. The male mouse would immediately try and attack and kill the female mouse. And then she would stop the stimulation and he would stop trying to attack and kill the female mouse, return to the attempt, at least, to mate with the female mouse. These are such dramatic shifts in behavior triggered only by the activation of only the small set of neurons within the ventromedial hypothalamus. And for those of you that think that you can watch this sort of thing without being disturbed, I encourage you to go to YouTube. We will provide a link where you can see a video of this type of behavior. It's incredibly dramatic. The shift in behavior is almost instantaneous, occurs within seconds, if not milliseconds, thousandths of a second. The next experiment that she did was to put a male mouse with this stimulation with light capability in its ventromedial hypothalamus into a cage alone, but with a rubber glove filled with air or water. Mouse, walking around sniffing, peeing, which is what male mice seem to do. They seem to urinate everywhere, that's actually an interesting, perhaps interesting feature of male mice and actually many male animals, perhaps even humans. We don't know, or maybe we do know, basically this has been an observed time and time again in experiments, mainly by Lisa Stowers's lab at the Scripps Institute, that's characterized this. If you put female mice into an arena or a cage, they always urinate in a very small corner of that cage. Whereas if you put mail mice into an arena or a cage, the urinate everywhere, they have this obsession with spraying their urine everywhere, you can transpose that to human behavior if you like. In any event, Dayu put the mouse in the cage alone, but with this rubber glove, the mouse is walking around urinating, et cetera, doing whatever is that mice do, then she stimulates the activation of these ventromedial hypothalamus neurons, and the mouse immediately tries to kill the glove. It goes into a rage, attacking the glove as if it were another mouse or some other animate object. But of course it's an inanimate object. It's just a rubber glove. She stops the stimulation and the mouse immediately goes back to being completely calm or at least not attacking. Again, we don't know what the mouse was feeling. So these are very dramatic videos. Again, you can see them by following the link that we'll provide in the caption. If that sort of thing is going to disturb you, by to see, for instance, the attack, one mouse attacking another, please just don't watch them. I'm not interested in traumatizing anybody or you traumatizing yourself, that is. A number of different variations were done on this experiment. For instance, stimulating the VMH in female mice, as opposed to male mice, putting the female mice in with other female mice or with other male mice, no matter what variation one carries out, so it doesn't matter if it's male with female, male with male, female with female, et cetera, stimulation of the ventromedial hypothalamus in a male mouse or a female mouse evokes this very dramatic, almost instantaneous aggressive behavior, physically aggressive behavior. Subsequent experiments done by Dayu Lin in her own laboratory and other laboratories have shown that the ventromedial hypothalamus connected with a bunch of other brain areas that are interesting, And I'll talk about some of those in a little bit, but one of them that I want to call out now is the so-called PAG, the periaqueductal gray nucleus. This is a large structure in the back of the brain that houses things like neurons that can create opioids. We all know of the opioid crisis, but these are neurons that can produce endogenous, means made by the body, chemicals that can cause pain relief. You could understand why that might occur in a circuit for aggression, right? Even if one is the aggressor, it's likely that they may incur some physical damage and they'd want some pain relief. The PAG also is connected to a number of neural circuits that eventually, through several processing stations, excuse me, arrive at things like the jaws. And in fact, stimulation of the ventromedial hypothalamus can evoke biting and aggressive biting behavior. Now aggressive biting behavior is particularly interesting because in humans and especially in human children, biting is something that, while young children might do as a form of aggression, tends to disappear pretty early in childhood. And if it doesn't, it's often seen as a mark of pathology. I have a story about this, actually, when I was a kid, I went to a summer sports camp and I'll never forget this, so we're playing soccer and in a rare stroke of luck or accident, I happened to score a goal. I wasn't a particularly good soccer player, especially not at that stage of my life. They later figured out that it was just better to make me a fullback, 'cause I could just wait there and do what fullbacks do. I was better at taking the ball or the person out than I was putting the ball in the goal. Nonetheless, I, again, by chance, scored a goal and I was trotting back to my side of the field, and all of a sudden I felt this sting in my back, a kid, not to be named, although I do remember your name, I'm not going to tell you what his name was. A kid jumped on my back and bit me on the top of my back. And this of course resulted in a discussion and a timeout and all the usual things and parents I think got involved. I don't recall, I didn't think much else of it, but I recall that this was considered especially troubling behavior because he bit me as opposed to hit me or shoved me down or something that sort, and it does seem as if the tendency to use biting as an aggressive behavior is associated with a more primitive circuitry. Now here I'm truly anthropomorphizing. I don't know what this other kid happened to be thinking or feeling at the time, how could I? And I certainly am not going to say that biting in every case reflects a pathology, although I think there is general agreement in the psychology community, in the psychiatric community that past a certain age, the using of one's teeth to impart aggression and damage on others is a particularly primitive and troubling or at least for the observer or the person experiencing is a pretty disturbing event. Dayu's lab has shown that activation of the ventromedial hypothalamus triggers a downstream circuit in the periaqueductal gray which then triggers a whole other set of circuits of fixed action patterns. Here we are back to Lorenz with fixed action patterns, including swinging of the limbs, right punching. And this wouldn't necessarily be controlled punching, but also biting behavior. So it's remarkable to me, at least that we have circuits in our brain that can evoke violent use of things like our mouth or violent use of things like our limbs. That of course could be used for things like singing or kissing or eating or, you know, gesticulating in any kind of polite or impolite way. The point here is that neural circuits, not individual brain areas evoke the constellation of behaviors that we call aggression. Now, many of you are probably puzzled or at least should be because I've been talking about this highly specialized brain area, the ventromedial hypothalamus and this highly specialized subcategory of neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus, these neurons that make estrogen receptors. And yet the activation of those cells triggers dramatic and immediate aggression, both in males and in females and both against males and against females. So what's going on here? Most of us think about estrogen and we don't immediately think of aggression. Most of us hear testosterone and we might think about aggression, although other things as well. In order to understand this, I just want to briefly refer back to a conversation that I had on a previous episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast. And that was with my colleague, the great Robert Sapolsky of course, is a professor at Stanford who studied testosterone and its impacts on behavior as well as estrogen and other hormones and their impacts on behavior. To make a long story short and to dispel a still unfortunately very common myth. Testosterone does not increase aggressiveness, testosterone increases proactivity and the willingness to lean into effort in competitive scenarios. Sometimes this is referred to as the challenge hypothesis, but to make a long story short, if people are given testosterone, or if you look at people who have different levels, excuse me, of testosterone, endogenously that they naturally make. What you'll find is that testosterone tends to increase competitiveness, but not just in aggressive scenarios. So if somebody is already aggressive, giving them testosterone will have the tendency to make them more aggressive. If somebody however is very benevolent and altruistic, giving them testosterone will make them more benevolent and altruistic, at least up to a point. Now, of course there are certain forms of synthetic testosterones that are known in sports circles and in other circles to increase aggressiveness because of the way those particular forms of synthetic testosterones work. But in general, most of the experiments that I'm referring to have not been done using those, they've been done using the let's call them the more traditional biological forms of testosterone or that resemble the biological forms of testosterone. In fact, Robert Sapolsky described a really interesting experiment in which, if you look at testosterone levels or you administer additional testosterone to people who are doing philanthropy, giving money to organizations and so they're essentially doing good because these are organizations doing good. What you find is that increased testosterone or further increasing testosterone makes people more willing to compete, to give more money than the other person in the room in order, you know, to put it in air quotes, "To Alpha out the other person," by giving more money. So this is an act of altruistic or benevolent philanthropy. It is not an act of aggression. Of course, we don't know what the people are feeling underneath all that. Again, we can't anthropomorphize or project onto other people what they're feeling. But the point is that testosterone itself does not make people more aggressive. And in the experiments that we've been talking about up until now, it's actually the activation of estrogen receptor containing neurons that makes these animals more aggressive. And it turns out there's evidence that in certain context, estrogen can make people more aggressive. So what's going on here? Well, what's going on is that testosterone can be converted into estrogen through a process called aromatization. There's an enzyme called aromatase. Anytime you have word that ends in A-S-E, at least if it's in the context of biology, it's almost always not always, but almost always an enzyme. So the aromatase enzyme converts testosterone into estrogen, and it is actually testosterone, aromatized, converted into estrogen and then binding to these estrogen containing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that triggers aggression. I want to repeat that, it is not testosterone itself, that triggers aggression. It is testosterone aromatized into estrogen within the brain and binding to these estrogen receptor containing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus that evokes aggression and dramatic aggression at that. Now this effect of estrogen causing aggression in the brain is very robust, so much so that if you take a mouse that lacks the aromatase enzyme or a human that lacks the aromatase enzyme, and they do exist, then there is a reduction in overall aggression, despite high levels of testosterone. And if people who or mice who have the aromatase enzyme have that enzyme blocked, well, then it doesn't matter how much you increase testosterone or any of its other derivatives. You do not observe this aggression. So this runs counter to everything that we know and think about the role of testosterone. Again, testosterone increases competitiveness. It can increase the desire to work under challenge. I've said it before, and I ran this or pressure tested this against Robert Sapolsky who's been working on testosterone and it's role in the brain and behavior for many decades now. It is fair to say that testosterone has the net effect of making effort feel good, or at least increasing the threshold at which effort feels bad or unsustainable. And it does that by way of changing the activity or the threshold for activation of brain structures, like the amygdala and other brain structures associated with anxiety. So the next time somebody says, testosterone makes people aggressive. You can say, "Ah, no, actually it's estrogen that makes people aggressive, and animals aggressive for that matter. Now of course it is the case that because males have relatively less estrogen circulating in their brain and body than females, right? Because they have testes, not ovaries, that testosterone is required in the first place in order to be converted into estrogen, to activate this aggressive circuit involving these estrogen receptor containing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. But nonetheless, it is estrogen that is the final step. It is the hormone on which aggression hinges. And I think for most people, that's a quite surprising finding. And yet this is perhaps one of the more robust findings in both the animal and human literature, as it relates to hormones and psychological states and behavior. Now, of course it is the case that if testosterone is low, that a person or an animal will exhibit less aggressive behavior, but that's not because of reduced testosterone per se. It's because of the subsequent reduction in testosterone, meaning if there's no testosterone to aromatize into estrogen, estrogen will also be lower. So we've established that it's not testosterone, but testosterone converted into estrogen that activates these circuits for aggression. But nonetheless, it's still surprising, right? I mean, most of us don't think about estrogen as the hormone that stimulates aggression, but it turns out it's all contextual. There are beautiful data showing that whether or not estrogen stimulates aggression, can be powerfully modulated by whether or not days are short or days are long. In other words, whether or not here's a lot of sunshine or not. Now, obviously brain is encased in skull. So it doesn't really know if there's a lot of sunshine out there even though you can see the sun with your eyes, you can feel it on your skin. Day length is converted into hormonal signals and chemical signals and the primary hormonal and chemical signals involve melatonin and dopamine and also the stress hormones. So to make a very long story short, in the long days where we get a lot of sunlight, both in our eyes and on our skin, melatonin levels are reduced. Melatonin is a hormone that tends to produce states of sleepiness and quiescence. It also tends to activate pathways that tend to reduce things like breeding and sexual behavior. In long days, dopamine is increased. Dopamine is a molecule associated with feelings of wellbeing and motivation and the desire to seek out all sorts of things, all sorts of motivated behaviors. And in long days provided we're getting enough sunlight on our skin and to our eyes, the stress hormones, especially cortisol, and some of the other stress hormones are reduced in levels. If estrogen levels are increased experimentally under long day conditions, it does not evoke aggression. However, in short days, if estrogen is increased, there's a heightened predisposition for aggression. And that makes perfect sense. If you think about what short days do to the biology of your brain and body. In short days, the melatonin signal goes up. There's more melatonin circulating for more of each 24 hour cycle. Stress hormones are circulating more. Why? Short days tend to be associated with winter. In winter, we are bombarded with more bacterial viruses because bacterial viruses actually survive better in cold than they do in heat. In fact, in my laboratory, we work with a lot of viruses and bacteria and when we want to keep them alive, we put them in the freezer. If we want to kill them, if we want to inoculate them, we put them under UV light. Like you would see from the sunlight. So shorter days are conducive to aggression. Not because days are short per se, but because stress hormone levels are higher and because dopamine levels are lower. Now, here's where all of this starts to converge on a very clear biological picture, a very clear psychological picture, and indeed a very clear set of tools that we can think about and use. Under conditions where cortisol is high, where this stress hormone is elevated and under conditions where the neuromodulator serotonin is reduced there is a greater propensity for estrogen to trigger aggression. Now, again, I know I've said it before, but for males who make a lot of testosterone relative to estrogen, you have to swap in your mind this idea that if testosterone is high, that means that estrogen is low because while that can be true in the periphery in the body, if testosterone is high, there is going to be some aromatization, that conversion of testosterone to estrogen. So anytime you hear that testosterone is high, you should think testosterone is high in the body and perhaps estrogen is low in the body. But that means that there's going to be heightened levels of estrogen in the brain and therefore increased propensity for aggression. In females who generally make less testosterone relative to estrogen, there is sufficient estrogen already present to trigger aggression. So both males and females are primed for aggression, but that's riding on a context and that context of whether or not you get a tendency for aggression or not. depends on whether or not cortisol is high or low, and I'm telling you that if cortisol is relatively higher in any individual, there's going to be a tilt, an increase in that hydraulic pressure that Lorenz talked about toward aggression. And if serotonin, the neuromodulator that is associated with feelings of wellbeing and sometimes even of slight passivity, but certainly of wellbeing, if serotonin is low, there's also going to be a further shift towards an aggressive tendency. So if we return to Lorenz's hydraulic pressure model of aggression in other internal states, we realize that external stimuli, things that we hear, things that we see, for instance, someone saying something upsetting or us, seeing somebody do something that we don't like to others or to us, as well as our internal state, our subjective feelings of wellbeing, but also our stress level, our feelings of whether or not we have enough resources and are content with what we have. All of that is converging on this thing that we call internal state and creating this pressure of either to be more aggressive or less aggressive. And now we have some major players feeding into that final pathway. That question of whether or not will we hit the other, person, will we say the thing that is considered aggressive? Will we not say it? If somebody says something or does something aggressive to us, will we respond or will we be submissive or even passive? Again, there are many things funneling into that question and dictating whether or not the answer is, "Absolutely I'll fight back," or, "I'm going to attack them even unprovoked." Or if they say this, I'm going to do that, or no matter what they do, I'm not going to respond. These kinds of things are very complex. And yet we really can boil them down to just a few common elements. And I'm telling you that those elements are whether or not cortisol levels are relatively lower or relatively higher. Again, relatively higher is going to tend to make people more reactive. Why? Because reactivity is really a function of the autonomic nervous system, which is sort of like a seesaw that oscillates between the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which tends to put us into a state of readiness through the release of adrenaline. Cortisol and adrenaline when they're circulating the brain and body, make us more likely to move and to react and to speak. It's actually what will induce a kind of low level tremor, which is an anticipatory tremor to be able to move more quickly, right? A body in motion is more easily set into further motion, that is, and the neuromodulator serotonin is a neuromodulator that in general is associated with feelings of wellbeing in response to what we already have. So when we are well fed, serotonin tends to be released in our brain and body, in particular, well fed with carbohydrates, the precursor to serotonin is tryptophan. And indeed there are nice studies exploring the types of diets, nutritional programs that can reduce aggressive behavior, both in children and in adults and tryptophan-rich diets or supplementation with tryptophan. So for tryptophan rich diets, things like white turkey meat, but then there are also a number of carbohydrates you can look up. It's very easy to find foods that contain lots of tryptophan. Those foods contain the precursor to serotonin. Now it isn't simply the case that eating more foods with tryptophan will tend to reduce your aggression. I suppose it could do that, if you ate it in abundance, it could make you tired and then you're less likely to be aggressive, I don't recommend that strategy, but the idea here is that when it's been explored, increasing levels of tryptophan either by supplementation or by food or drugs, prescription drugs that increase serotonin. So for instance, fluoxetine sometimes called Prozac or Zoloft or any number of the other SSRIs tend to reduce aggressive behavior. Now, not always, but in general, that's the case. Similarly, because elevated cortisol tends to shift the whole system, again, create more of a hydraulic pressure towards aggressive states. If cortisol levels are reduced, well then the tendency for aggressive behavior is reduced. This is supported by a number of peer reviewed studies. We'll provide links to some of those in the caption show notes. And we're going to return to these a bit later in the context of specific studies that have looked at genetic variants in different individuals that cause them to make more or less serotonin, or at least to metabolize serotonin differently. This is also the case for so-called intermittent explosive disorder that can often be associated with gene variants that control how much serotonin is made or how it's metabolized or how much cortisol is made and how much it's metabolized. In thinking about tools that are a number of things that one could consider. First of all, there are a number of decent studies exploring how supplementation with the Omega-3 fatty acids, which are precursors of some of the transmitter systems, including serotonin that can modulate not directly mediate, but modulate mood and emotional tone supplementation with the omega 3 S has been shown to reduce impulsivity and aggressiveness in certain contexts in things like ADHD or in individuals who have a predisposition for aggressive type behavior or aggressive thinking. Now that doesn't necessarily mean that the omega 3 fatty acids are going directly to the ventromedial hypothalamus and changing the activity of neurons there more likely they are causing or modulating an overall shift in mood through the immune system, through hormone systems that are changing the overall tone or the propensity for neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus to be activated. How much omega 3 fatty acid, what source? Well, we've talked about this on the podcast before. You can, of course get omega 3 fatty acids from a number of different foods. Getting them from whole foods is probably the best way to do it, but many people, including people with depression will often supplement with one gram or more of omega 3 fatty acid per day. Some people including myself will take them every day as just a general mood enhancer. I don't suffer from depression, but I've found it be beneficial for my health. And so some people do that, and I've talked about before, how in double blind placebo controlled studies, people taking one to three grams of omega 3 fatty acids per day, typically in the form of a high quality fish oil, although there are other sources as well, algae and so forth, can experience improvements in mood that are on par with some of the SSRIs, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. And of course, if you're prescribed an SSRI by your psychiatrist or other doctor, please do take that and don't cease to take it just simply to take omega 3s. However you might mention to them, and you can find links to the studies in our previous episodes on depression that supplementation with omega 3 fatty acids of at this one gram or more of EPA specifically, so getting above that one gram threshold, as high as three grams per day of the EPA has allowed people to take lower doses of SSRIs and still keep their mood in a place that's beneficial for them. And in terms of keeping cortisol in a range that's healthy and doesn't bias someone toward high levels of aggression and irritability, that's again, going to be set by a number of larger modulators or contextual cues. And I've talked about some of those on the podcast, but I'll just briefly recap them now, obviously getting sunlight in your eyes early in the day, and as much sunlight as you safely can in your eyes throughout the day is going to be important. Again, because of this effect of estrogen in long days, not increasing aggression, however, in shorter days, estrogen increases aggression because of the increase in cortisol observed in short days. Another way to reduce cortisol was discussed in our episode on heat and the use of sauna and heat, but also hot baths. It turns out that hot baths and sauna can be very beneficial for reducing cortisol. All the details on that are included in the episode on heat and it's timestamped, so you can go directly to that if you want to learn about the temperatures and the various durations, but to just give a synopsis of that, a 20 minute sauna at anywhere from 80 to a hundred degrees Celsius is going to be beneficial for reducing cortisol. If you don't have access to a sauna, you could do a hot bath, adjust the temperature so you don't burn yourself. I think 80 to a hundred degrees Celsius is going to be too hot for many people if it's a hot bath, whereas many people who can't tolerate that hot bath can tolerate the sauna. So safety first always, and of course, but hot baths reduce cortisol, hot saunas, reduce cortisol of a duration about 20 or 30 minutes is going to be beneficial. And of course, some of you may be interested in exploring the supplementation route and for reductions in cortisol, really the chief player there is ashwagandha, which is known to decrease cortisol, fairly potently. I should just warn you that if you're going to use ashwagandha in order to reduce cortisol, first of all, check with your doctor or healthcare provider before adding or subtracting anything from your supplementation or health regimen. Of course, I don't just say that to protect us. I say that to protect you, you are responsible for your health, what you take and what you don't take. Chronic supplementation with ashwagandha can have some not so great effects of disruption of other hormone pathways and neurotransmitter pathways. So the limit seems to be about two weeks of regular use before you'd want to take a break of about two weeks. So ashwagandha again, a very potent inhibitor of cortisol, but with some other effects as well, don't use it chronically for longer than two weeks. But if your goal is to reduce cortisol, let's say you're going through a period of increased irritability and aggressive tendency, maybe you're also not getting as much light as you would like, and perhaps also, if there are other circumstantial things leading you towards more aggressiveness and your goal is to reduce aggressiveness, that can be potentially helpful. And in light of all this stuff about cortisol and estrogen and day length, I should mention that there are in fact, some people who have a genetic predisposition to be more irritable and aggressive, and there are a couple of different gene pathways associated with this. We never like to think about just one gene causing a specific behavior. The way to think about genes is that genes generally code for things within our biology. In the context of today's discussion, things like neural circuits or the amounts of neurotransmitters that are made, or the amounts of hormones that are made, or the amount of neurotransmitter hormone receptors or enzymes, et cetera, that shift the activity of our biology in a particular direction. They bias our biology. And in fact, there is a genetic variant present in certain people that adjusts their estrogen receptor sensitivity, and that estrogen receptor sensitivity can result in increased levels of aggression, sometimes dramatic increases, however, and also very interestingly, photo period, meaning day length, is a strong modulator of whether or not that aggressiveness turns up or not. Whether or not that person with the particular gene variant is more aggressive or not, depends on how long the day is and how long the night is. One particular study that I like that references this is Trainer, et al, the title of the study is "Photo period reverses the effects of estrogens on male aggression, via genomic and non-genomic pathways." This was a paper published in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. We'll put a reference to this in the show notes, if you'd like to explore it further, but it really points to the fact that rarely, sometimes, but rarely, is it the case that just one gene will cause somebody to be hyper aggressive. Almost always there's going to be an interplay between genetics and environment and as environment changes such as day length changes and the length of night changes, so too, will the tendency for people with a given genetic variant to be more aggressive or not. Now, of course, in the absence of detailed genetic testing for this particular estrogen receptor variant, most people, I'm guessing you, are probably not walking around knowing that you have this gene or not. Regardless, I think it's important to pay attention to how you feel at different times of year, depending on whether or not summer, whether or not it's winter, whether or not you're getting sufficient sunlight, meaning viewing sufficient sunlight or not, whether or not you're getting sufficient sunlight exposure to your skin or not, whether or not you're indoors all the time. Generally those things correlate with season, but not always. You can go through long bouts of hard work in the summer months when days are long, but you're indoors a lot and getting a lot of fluorescent light exposure late in the evening. And perhaps that's when you're feeling more aggressive. So we have to be careful about drawing a one-to-one relationship between any biological feature and certainly psychological or behavioral feature like aggressiveness, but it's, I believe, helpful to know that these genetic biases exist, how they play out again, they shift our biology in a general thematic direction. They don't change one thing. They change a variety of things that bias us toward or away from certain psychological and behavioral outcomes and the various things that we can do in order to offset them. And we described those earlier in terms of trying to keep cortisol low by getting sufficient sunlight regardless of time of year, and regardless of whether or not you happen to have this particular genetic variant. So earlier I talked about how it is testosterone converted into estrogen that's activating aggression in the ventromedial hypothalamus, not testosterone itself. However, there are some studies carried out in humans that have evaluated the effects of testosterone and how levels of testosterone correlate with aggressiveness in the short term. I'm just going to detail a few of those studies because I think they are interesting and important. First of all, there is a study that has explored levels of testosterone in men of different professions. Now, before I tell you the data, I want to be very clear here, with a study such as this, one never knows whether or not these men went into a particular profession because they had a testosterone level of a given value or whether or not the work itself altered their testosterone levels or both. And I think it's fair to assume that it's probably both. So be very careful in assuming that a given testosterone level is causal for choosing a particular career or that a particular career is causal for creating a particular testosterone level. This study used salivary testosterone levels as the measure, which to be fair is not the best way to measure testosterone. Typically blood draw would be the best way to measure testosterone, but nonetheless, provided the appropriate methods are used, salivary testosterone can be a reasonable measure of testosterone. The different occupations that were looked at were, and here they just looked at men in this particular study were ministers, salesmen, they didn't say what particular types of salesmen, firemen, professors, of all things, physicians and NFL players. And what they discovered was that the testosterone levels were essentially in that order from low to highest. So minister, salesman, fireman, professor, physician, NFL player. Now we could micro dissect all the different stereotypes and all the different features of each of these jobs. For instance, we don't know whether or not the fact that the firemen happened, at least in this study to have lower testosterone levels on average than the professors or the physicians was because firemen have lower testosterone levels or because they have a much more stressful job and their cortisol levels are higher than the professor or the physician and cortisol and testosterone, not always, but generally are in somewhat antagonistic push-pull mode because they derive from the same precursor, et cetera. Typically, when cortisol is high, testosterone tends to be lower and vice versa. So we don't know what's causing these effects. And again, this is just one study and just six occupations, but I think it's relatively interesting given the fact that each of these professions involves different levels of competitiveness, right? So we don't necessarily just want to think about the level of physical exertion that's required, but also the level of competitiveness because it's known that competitive interactions can cause increases in testosterone, in particular, in the winners of competitive interactions, a topic for a future podcast. Meanwhile, studies that have analyzed also again, salivary testosterone in prisoners, in this case, female prisoners, so these are incarcerated individuals, have looked at levels of testosterone according to whether or not the person committed a non-violent or a violent crime in order to arrive in prison. And higher levels of salivary testosterone were related to those that had arrived in prison because of conviction of a violent crime, as opposed to a nonviolent crime. Likewise, when they analyzed prison rule violations, so an indirect measure of aggressiveness, but in this case, it was strongly associated with aggressiveness because they knew what the violations were, they found were for prisoners that had none, no prison violations, prison rule violations I should say, their testosterone levels tended to be lower than the testosterone levels of women that had some, even one, or more aggressive violations of prison rules. We'll provide links to these studies in the show notes if you'd like to go into them further, obviously studies like this need to be taken with a grain of salt because there are so many different factors, different prisons have different degrees of violence to begin with and competitiveness to begin with. But just as a final pass at examining the role between testosterone and aggressiveness, there was a very interesting study from Goetz, et al, G-O-E-T-Z published in 2014, that looked at serum, so in this case, blood levels of testosterone. 30 minutes after application of a gel-based testosterone that goes transdermal so that the testosterone can go very quickly into the bloodstream, and then did brain imaging to evaluate the activity of neurons in the so-called corticomedial amygdala, the cortico, the medial amygdala is one of the areas of the amygdala complex as we call it because it's complex, it's got a lot of different nuclei, you know, know what nuclei are, low clusters of neurons. It's got a lot of different ones, but that medial and that cortico medial amygdala in particular, is known to be associated with aggressive type behaviors. It's linked up with as part of the larger circuit that includes the ventromedial hypothalamus and other brain areas that we referred to earlier, such as the PAG. What is remarkable about this study is that it showed that just 30 minutes after application of this so-called AndroGel, this testosterone that seeps into the bloodstream, there was a significant increase in of course, testosterone and corticomedial amygdala activation. So testosterone can have acute effects, immediate effects on the pathways related to aggression. And I think this is something that's not often discussed because many of the effects of steroid hormones like testosterone, and estrogen are very slow acting. In fact, steroid hormones, because they have a certain biochemical composition can actually pass through the membranes of cells, so the outside of a cell and into the nucleus of the cell and change gene expression in the cell, you think about puberty, the kid that goes home for the summer and then comes back looking completely different. Well that's because of a lot of genes got turned on by steroid hormones like testosterone and estrogen, but the steroid hormones can also have very fast acting effects and with testosterone in particular, those can be remarkably fast acting and one of the most apparent and well documented fast acting effects is this effect: the ability to activate cells within the amygdala, so you might say, "Well, I thought the amygdala was associated with fear?" Wouldn't testosterone then cause fear? No. Turns out that the amygdala harbors, both cortisol, corticosteroid receptors and testosterone receptors, and they each adjust the activity in the amygdala differently, such that testosterone tends to activate amygdala circuitry for inducing states of mind and body that are more action based and indeed in animals and in humans, testosterone application and activation of this corticomedial amygdala pathway will make animals and humans lean into effort. This is why I say testosterone makes effort feel good, or at least biases the organism toward leaning into challenge. So if you recall, there's not just one type of aggression, there's reactive aggression, which is triggered when one is confronted with something that sometimes is inevitable, right? One needs to fight for their life or for somebody else's life, but also proactive aggression and proactive aggression involves activation of those go-pathways in the basal ganglia and a leaning into effort to overcome whatever state one happens to be in to begin with. And so this is very important because it points to the fact that yes, estrogen is activating aggression pathways that are in the ventromedial hypothalamus, but it's very likely the case that testosterone is acting to accelerate or to bias states of mind and body toward those that will lead to aggression. Again, aggression is not like a switch, on and off. It's a process. It has a beginning, a middle and an end. Remember that hydraulic pressure that Conrad Lorenz hypothesized? Well, think of testosterone as increasing the pressure toward an aggressive episode and then estrogen actually triggering that aggressive episode in the ventromedial hypothalamus. So if somebody tells you that testosterone, endogenous or exogenous makes people aggressive, tell them no, testosterone tends to make people lean into effort. And if that effort involves being aggressive, either reactively aggressive or proactively aggressive, well then it will indeed lead to aggression. But the actual aggression itself is triggered by estrogen, not testosterone. Now, thus far, we really haven't talked too much about the social context in which aggression occurs. And that's because there is a near infinite, if not infinite number of variables that will determine that. So for instance, violent aggression is entirely appropriate at a professional boxing match provided it's occurring inside the ring and only between the competitors and within the bounds of the rules of the sport, et cetera. However, there are some things that tend to bias certain social context toward being more aggressive or less aggressive and not always physical aggression. And those generally come in two forms that many of you are familiar with, which are alcohol and caffeine. Let's discuss caffeine first. Why would caffeine increase aggressive impulsivity? Well, the general effects of caffeine are to increase autonomic arousal. The activity of the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is to put it very much in plain language it's the alertness arm of your nervous system. That is, it creates a sense of readiness in your brain and body and it does so by activating the so-called sympathetic chain ganglia. Again, as I always remind people, simpa and sympathetic does not mean sympathy. Simpa means together, we're all at ones. And caffeine tends to bias our brain and body to activate the sympathetic chain ganglia, which run from about the base of your neck until the top of your pelvis and deploy a bunch of chemicals that jut out into the rest of your body, activate adrenaline release. There's a parallel increase in of adrenaline in your brain, creating the state of alertness and readiness. That state of alertness and readiness can be for all sorts of things, not just aggression. However when we are in a state of increased sympathetic tone, meaning more alert, such as after drinking caffeine, we will bias all those brain and body systems, the hormones, the chemicals, et cetera that exist, toward action as opposed to inaction. So put simply, caffeine can increase impulsivity, no surprise there. On the opposite end of things, alcohol tends to decrease activity in the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, tends to make us feel less alert. Now, initially it can create a state of alertness because of its effects in inhibiting the forebrain, our forebrain prefrontal cortex in particular has what's called top-down inhibition. It exerts a inhibitory or a quieting effect on some of the circuits of the hypothalamus, such as the ventromedial hypothalamus. The way to conceptualize this is that your forebrain is able to rationalize and think clearly and to suppress behavior and to engage the no-go pathways telling you, "Don't say that mean thing." "Don't do that violent thing," et cetera. Alcohol initially tends to increase our level of overall activity by reducing inhibition, not just in that forebrain circuit, but in other circuits. Tends to make us more active. We tend to talk more than we normally would, move more than we normally would, but very shortly thereafter starts acting as a sedative by way of reducing activity in the forebrain, releasing some of the deeper brain circuits that are involved in impulsivity, but also causing a somewhat sedative effect. And then of course, as alcohol levels increase even further, people eventually will pass out, blackout, et cetera. So what we've got with alcohol and caffeine is we've got two opposite ends of the spectrum, caffeine increasing arousal and readiness, and the tendency for impulsivity and alcohol also increasing impulsivity, but through a different mechanism. A really interesting study, and I should just mention that the title of the study is, "Caffeinated and non-caffeinated alcohol use and indirect aggression at the impact of self-regulation." So the title is almost self-explanatory. This was a paper published in the Journal of Addictive Behavior in 2016, examining how ingestion of alcohol that's either caffeinated or non-decaffeinated alcohol drinks impacted what they call indirect aggression. And just to remind you what indirect aggression is, these are not physical acts of aggression. These are verbal acts of aggression, so embarrassing others or otherwise, somehow trying to reduce the wellbeing of others by saying certain things in particular in groups, this study examined both males and females. This was done on by way of a college campus study, subjects were 18 to 47 years old. I guess there's some older students on that campus, or maybe they use some non-students, but you know, these days you've also got some students that are in their thirties and forties. So they have a fairly broad swath of subjects included, fairly broad racial background as well, included, not at equal numbers, but at least they included a pretty broad spectrum of people with different backgrounds. They looked in particular people that ingested non-caffeinated alcohol drinks at a frequency of 9.18 drinks per week, okay. Again, there's a college campus, not that I encourage that. I'm one of these people that I don't, I've never really liked drugs or alcohol and sort fortunate in that way I can drink or not drink and tend to not drink. But so to me, 9.18, drinks per week sounds like a lot, but I know for some people that might actually be typical. And then others who are drinking at least one caffeinated alcoholic beverage per week. And those individuals end as high, I should say as 7.87 caffeinated alcohol beverages per week. So this would be energy drinks combined, typically with hard alcohol, that's fairly commonly available in bars and so forth. And some individuals drank as much as goodness, 20.36 alcoholic drinks per week, total, some that were caffeinated, some that were not caffeinated. The basic outcome of this study was that the more alcohol someone tended to consume, the more likely it was that they would engage in these indirect aggressive type behaviors. And in terms of the caffeinated alcoholic beverages, there, the effect was especially interesting. Here I'm just going to paraphrase or I'll actually read from the study, quote, "With regard to caffeinated alcoholic beverage use, our findings indicated that heavier caffeinated alcohol beverage use was associated positively with indirect aggression, even after considering one's typical alcohol use and dispositional aggression." What this means is that even though alcohol can bias certain individuals to be more aggressive, and even though certain individuals already have a disposition toward being more aggressive, there was an effect that was independent, meaning above and beyond both alcohol and a predisposition, meaning if someone was consuming caffeinated alcoholic beverages, they had a particularly high likelihood of engaging in indirect aggressive behavior. Now this makes perfect sense in light of the model they propose, which is this self-regulation model, that basically self-regulation involves several things. It involves engaging in certain behaviors and suppressing other behaviors. So as described before, because alcohol tends to have a sedative suppressive effect on the autonomic nervous system, at least after the initial period, it's going to tend to reduce the likelihood that people will engage in any type of behavior. Whereas caffeine will increase autonomic arousal and increase the likelihood that someone will engage in a particular type of behavior, aggressive or otherwise. So the combination of caffeine and alcohol is really acting as a two prong system to bias people towards more impulsivity that is less self-regulation. So it's really yanking your volitional control, your ability to engage in prefrontal top down inhibition over your hypothalamus from two distinct and specific circuits. By now, you should be getting the impression that self-regulation is a key feature of whether or not somebody, maybe even you, is going to engage in aggressive speech or aggressive behavior. And we've talked about a number of tools that one can use to reduce the probability that that will happen. I suppose, if the context were appropriate, you could even take those tool recommendations and just invert them and increase the likelihood that aggressiveness would happen. But regardless, self-regulation is key. And in light of that, I want to share with you a study that's focused on kids, but that has important ramifications for adults as well. As you probably are already aware there are many kids out there that suffer from so-called attention deficit hyperactivity, disorder, ADHD. There are also many adults we are finding that are suffering from ADHD. And there's also an epidemic I would say of people that are concerned about whether or not they have ADHD. Now whether or not they have true, clinical ADHD or not, is not clear. We did an episode all about ADHD and tools for ADHD. I would encourage you to check out that episode and some of the diagnostic criteria. If you have the opportunity you can find at hubermanlab.com, as this study I'm about to share with you aptly points out, there is no objective diagnostic marker of ADHD. There's no biomarker or blood draw or blood test for ADHD, whether or not one has ADHD depends on their performance on a number of different cognitive tests and behavioral tests and self report. In any event, the study I'm about to share with you explored how a particular pattern of supplementation in kids with ADHD was able to reduce aggressive episodes and impulsivity and increased self-regulation. And the title of the study is, "Efficacy of carnitine in the treatment of children with attention deficit, hyperactivity disorder." Even though they put carnitine in the title, that what they focused on was whether or not acetyl-L-carnitine supplementation could somehow adjust the behavioral tendency of these kids with ADHD and to make a long story short, indeed it did. There was a very significant effect of acetyl L-carnitine supplementation on improving some of the symptomology, excuse me, of ADHD. A few details about this study that might be relevant to you. This was a randomized double blind placebo controlled double crossover study, this was done as an outpatient study. So the kids weren't in a hospital, they were living out in the world. This again was done on younger kids. So this was six to six to 13 year old kids that were diagnosed with ADHD. They received either acetyl L-carnitine or placebo, and they did all the good practice stuff that good researchers do of making sure that the placebo and the acetyl L-carnitine had similar look and taste. It was consumed twice daily after meals. I should just mentioned that acetyl L-carnitine typically is taken in capsule form or occasionally an injectable form. Here, they they were using this as a drink, which essentially the same as capsule form, but the powders just going directly into liquid and the carnitine dosage was 100 milligrams per kilogram. So they're doing this according to the body weight of these kids with a maximum dosage of four grams per day, the quantity of the medication was supplied here. I'm reading for a period of eight weeks and every eight weeks a new quantity of medication was supplied. So basically this is a fairly long term study, exploring behavioral outcomes and psychological outcomes in week eight, 16 and 24. They also looked at blood things that you could only get through a blood draw, so things like hemoglobin, hematocrit, red blood cell count, white blood cell count, et cetera, they, these are kids and even if it were adults, they were quite appropriately examining a lot of the physiological measures that one would want to carry out to make sure, first of all, that blood levels of carnitine are increasing. And indeed they confirmed that, but also that no negative effects are showing up in the physiology as well as the psychology of these kids. So, first I'll just tell you the basic outcome of the study, which was, here I'm paraphrasing, "Here, given twice daily, carnitine appeared to be effective and well tolerated treatment for a group of children with ADHD." "They showed significant, the abnormal behavior compared to these other boys." And now I'm moving to the table of results. They showed significant reductions in their so-called "Total Problem Score." The total problem score is a well-established measure of behavioral problems in kids with ADHD. And I should say adults with ADHD, has to do with challenges in social and learning environments and how well or poorly an individual tends to perform. Reductions in intentional problems, overall reductions in delinquency, and most important for sake of today's discussion, significant reductions in aggressive behavior. Now what's especially nice about this study, I think, is that even though it's a relatively small number of subjects and certainly needs to be repeated in other studies and other laboratories, that they were able to confirm the shifts in L-carnitine within the bloodstream of these kids, that is they were able to correlate the physiology with the psychological changes, in studies like this. And frankly in all studies of human pharmacology, you have to worry about effects that show up, not just because of placebo effects, but because of so-called off target effects or related things, totally independent of the drug or the particular supplement that you happen to be looking at, to put in the words of a great neuroscientist. Unfortunately, he passed away some years ago, but he was a member of the national academy, extremely accomplished neuroscientist once turned to me and said, "Never forget a drug is a substance that when injected into an animal or a human being creates a paper," meaning you can see effects of pretty much any drug or any supplement in most all conditions. However, it is in cases such as this study, where you can quite convincingly see that the particular feature of physiology that you expected to change, actually changed. And you see a psychological outcome that you can gain much greater confidence that the changes in delinquency, in this case reduced delinquency, improved attention, reduced aggressiveness and so forth was at least somehow related to the shift in blood physiology and levels of L-carnitine or acetyl L-carnitine and carnitine in the bloodstream of these children, as opposed to something else like L-carnitine going and affecting some downstream target that you have no knowledge of. Now, of course that's still entirely possible, but I think studies such as these increase our confidence that things like L-carnitine can be used perhaps in concert with things like omega 3 supplementation, diets that are biased towards increasing more tryptophan and therefore more serotonin, obviously avoiding things like alcohol and as it appears from the study I just described, reducing one's intake or not consuming any caffeinated alcoholic beverages seems like it would be a good idea if your goal is to reduce aggressiveness, to think about the hormone context and whether or not you tend to have higher testosterone, an estrogen or lower testosterone, an estrogen, maybe even think about the work environment, whether or not you are existing in a particularly competitive work environment and even day life, time of year and whether or not you're getting sufficient sunlight, whether or not you're avoiding light in the evening and so on. So studies such as this I think are useful because they point to the fact that very seldom, if ever, will there be one supplement or one nutritional change or even one behavioral change, that's going to completely shift in individual from being aggressive and impulsive, but rather that by combining different behavioral regimens, by paying attention to things like time of year and work conditions and school conditions and overall levels of stress and likely therefore levels of cortisol, et cetera, that you can use behaviors, diet, and supplementation as a way to shift that overall internal milieu from one of providing a lot of internal hydraulic pressure as it's been called throughout the episode toward aggressive impulsivity and relax some of that hydraulic pressure and reduce aggressive tendencies. So once again, and frankly, as always, we've done a deep dive into the neurobiology and the psychology of what I believe to be an important feature of our lives, in this case aggression. I want to point out that in a episode in the not too distant future, I'm going to be hosting Dr. Professor David Anderson from Caltech University, who is the world expert on the neurobiology of aggression. In fact, he is the senior author on many of the studies related to the ventromedial hypothalamus that I discussed today. Our discussion will touch on aggression, of course. So hearing today's episode will help you digest that information, but we are also going to talk about other emotional states. He is an expert, not just in aggression, but in motivated states related to sex and mating behavior, social relationships of all kinds and how those relate, not just to biology and psychology, but also certain forms of pathology, things like PTSD and the relationship for instance, between anger, fear, anxiety, and depression, and many other important topics that I know many of you, if not all of you will be interested in. In the meantime, I want to point you to his recently released and wonderful book entitled, "The Nature of the Beast, How Emotions Guide Us." And again, the author is David Anderson from Caltech. This is a wonderful book. It serves as a tremendous introduction to the history of the study of these areas, the current science and discoveries being made in these areas, all made accessible to the scientist and non-scientist alike. It's a very engaging read and so much so that even though he was gracious in sending me a copy, I also purchased myself a copy to give to somebody who is a therapist, and I've purchased another copy to give to a high school kid that I mentor because he's very interested in the neuroscience of emotions. And I think we are all interested in emotions, not just fear and some of these negative states, not just aggression, but also the positive emotions of our lives. And so, "The Nature of the Beast, How Emotions Guide Us," by David Anderson is a wonderful read. I can't recommend it highly enough. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. Also, if there are any episodes of the podcast that you particularly like, please share them with others. And if you have suggestions about particular guests or topics that you'd like us to cover on the podcast, please put that in the comment section on YouTube, we do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that is the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's episode and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discussed supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like improving the transition time and the quality of your sleep and improving alertness and focus. And so on. Anytime you're considering taking supplements, there are several key considerations. First of all, those supplements should be of the very highest quality. And you want to make sure that what's listed on the bottle is actually what's in the bottle, which is a problem for any supplement companies out there. The Huberman Lab Podcast is pleased to announce that we are now partnered with Momentous supplements because we believe Momentous supplements to be of the very highest quality of any supplements out there. And we've been working very closely with them in order to direct them, to create supplements that are individual ingredient supplements of the particular quality and sources that we would like to see, and that relate to the science and studies covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. If you'd like to see some of those supplements, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman, and there you'll see some of the supplements that we've talked about on this podcast before such as magnesium threonate for augmenting sleep, things like L-tyrosine for augmenting dopamine and things like L-carnitine, which we've discussed on today's podcast. Right now, the list of supplements and the products that are there is only partial to what will soon be included in the future. So that's an ever expanding catalog of, again, what we believe to be the very highest quality supplements available to you. For those of you that are interested in behavioral, nutritional and supplementation based tools for neuroscience and other aspects of your biology, the impact, your health and performance, we have a newsletter. It is a zero cost newsletter. It's called "The Neural Network Newsletter." You can go to hubermanlab.com and there in the menu, you'll find "The Neural Network Newsletter" sign-up. You can just put your email. We do not share your email with anybody else. You will also find examples of the newsletter that you can download right away without having to sign up and decide if signing up is right for you. And if you're not already following us on Twitter an Instagram, we are Huberman Lab on both Instagram and Twitter. And at both places, I describe science and science based tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Once again, thank you for joining me for our discussion about the biology, psychology and actionable tools around aggression, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [inspirational music]

========================================

--- Video 277 ---
Video ID: XcvhERcZpWw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XcvhERcZpWw
Title: Dr. Rhonda Patrick: Micronutrients for Health & Longevity | Huberman Lab Podcast #70
Published: 2022-05-02 12:00:15 UTC
Description:
My guest is Rhonda Patrick, Ph.D. She earned her doctoral degree in biomedical science from St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital at the University of Tennessee Health Science Center and has become one of the leading public health educators on the brain and general health, aging, cancer, and nutrition. We discuss the four major categories of micronutrients that regulate cellular and organ stress and antioxidants, inflammation, hormone regulation, immune system, and longevity. Dr. Patrick provides actionable protocols for obtaining key micronutrients from food and/or supplement-based sources. Additionally, Dr. Patrick outlines protocols for deliberate cold and deliberate heat exposure to benefit metabolism, cardiorespiratory fitness, mental health, and lifespan.

#HubermanLab #Longevity

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Supplements from Momentous
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Rhonda Patrick Links
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/foundmyfitness
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/foundmyfitness
Twitter: https://twitter.com/foundmyfitness
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/FoundMyFitness

Article Links
Vitamin D and the omega-3 fatty acids control serotonin synthesis and action, part 2: relevance for ADHD, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and impulsive behavior: https://bit.ly/37XbqBF
Role of phosphatidylcholine-DHA in preventing APOE4-associated Alzheimer's disease: https://bit.ly/3wfwDPB
Skin exposure to UVB light induces a skin-brain-gonad axis and sexual behavior: https://bit.ly/3OP5Tha
Human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures: https://bit.ly/3F1ZwCN
Sauna use as a lifestyle practice to extend healthspan: https://bit.ly/3OKdRbv

Other Links
NRF2 Pathway, Moringa & Sulforaphane Supplementation: https://youtu.be/Q0lBVCpq8jc
International Fish Oil Standards: https://bit.ly/3vzqoXI

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Rhonda Patrick – Micronutrients, Cold & Heat Exposure 
00:03:12 Momentous Supplements
00:04:27 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:05:30 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, InsideTracker
00:09:42 Stress Response Pathways, Hormesis
00:16:38 Plants, Polyphenols, Sulforaphane
00:21:12 Tools 1: Sulforaphane - Broccoli Sprouts, Broccoli, Mustard Seed 
00:23:50 Tool 2: Moringa & Nrf2 Antioxidant Response
00:25:25 Sulforaphane: Antioxidants (Glutathione) & Air Pollution (Benzene Elimination) 
00:27:10 Plants & Stress Response Pathways, Intermittent Challenges 
00:29:35 Traumatic Brain Injury, Sulforaphane, Nrf2 
00:35:08 Tools 3: Omega-3 Fatty Acids (ALA, EPA & DHA), Fish Oil, Oxidation 
00:48:40 EPA Omega-3s & Depression 
00:52:02 Krill Oil vs. Fish Oil Supplements? 
00:54:23 Benefits of Omega-3 Fatty Acids, Omega-3 Index & Life Expectancy 
00:59:24 Tool 4: Food Sources of EPA Omega-3s 
01:06:07 Omega-3 Supplementation, Omega-3 Index Testing
01:10:22 Benefits of Omega-3s 
01:14:40 Tool 5: Food Sources of DHA Omega-3s
01:17:07 Vitamin D & Sun Skin Exposure 
01:22:18 Role of Vitamin D, Gene Regulation 
01:25:30 Tool 6: Vitamin D Testing & Vitamin D3 Supplementation 
01:33:15 Tool 7: Skin Surface Area & Sun Exposure, Vitamin D 
01:34:23 Vitamin D & Longevity 
01:36:46 Sun Exposure & Sunscreen
01:40:30 Role of Magnesium, Magnesium Sources, Dark Leafy Green Vegetables
01:44:50 Tool 8: Magnesium Supplements: Citrate, Threonate, Malate, Bisglycinate 
01:50:57 Tool 9: Deliberate Cold Exposure Protocol & Mood/Anxiety
01:59:22 Tool 10: Cold Exposure, Mitochondria UCP1 & Heat Generation
02:02:30 Tool 11: Cold & Fat ‘Browning’, PGC-1alpha, Metabolism
02:05:08 Cold Exposure & High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT), PGC-1alpha, Muscle 
02:08:04 Tools 12: Exercise, HIIT, Tabata & Sauna 
02:13:30 Tool 13: Sauna, Endorphins/Dynorphins, Mood 
02:17:45 Tool 14: Mild Stress, Adrenaline & Memory
02:19:53 Sauna, Vasodilation & Alzheimer’s and Dementia Risk 
02:25:30 Sauna Benefits, Cardiorespiratory Fitness, Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs) 
02:31:29 Insulin signaling, FOXO3 & Longevity 
02:33:22 Tools 16: Sauna Protocols, Hot Baths & Fertility 
02:37:41 Tool 17: Exercise & Longevity, Osteocalcin 
02:41:37 Tools 18: Red Light Sauna? Infrared Sauna? Sauna & Sweating of Heavy Metals
02:47:20 FoundMyFitness Podcast, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Momentous Supplements, Huberman Lab on Instagram & Twitter

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. Rhonda Patrick. Dr. Patrick is known to some of you as a podcaster and one of the premier educators in the landscape of mitochondria, metabolism, stress, and other aspects of brain and body health. Her podcast, FoundMyFitness, is one of the premier podcasts in the world for disseminating knowledge about how the brain and body work and how we can use behavioral tools, micronutrients, supplements and other protocols in order to maximize our immediate and long-term health. Dr. Patrick did her formal training in cell biology, exploring the links between mitochondrial metabolism, apoptosis, which is naturally occurring cell death, which is a healthy form of cell death that occurs in our brain and body throughout the lifespan, and cancer biology. She then went on to do postdoctoral training with Dr. Bruce Ames, investigating the effects of micronutrients, meaning vitamins and minerals, and how they affect metabolism, inflammation, DNA damage, and the aging process. She has published landmark review articles and primary research, meaning original research articles, in some of the premier journals in the world, including Science, Nature Cell Biology, Trends in Cell Biology, and FASEB. Indeed, Dr. Patrick is an expert in an extraordinarily broad range of topics that impact our health. For today's episode, we focus primarily on the major categories of micronutrients that are essential for brain and body health. I have to confess that before the discussion with Dr. Patrick, I was aware of only one of the categories of micronutrients that we discuss, and so you'll notice that I'm wrapped with attention throughout the discussion. And I think that you'll want to have a pen and paper handy because she offers not only a very clear understanding of the biological mechanisms by which other micronutrients operate, but some very clear and actionable tools and items that we can all embark on if we are to optimize our brain and body health. We also discuss behavioral protocols. Dr. Patrick is well known for her understanding of the scientific literature on sauna and the use of heat and cold for optimizing things like metabolism, longevity, cardiovascular health, and I'm delighted to say that we discus that as well, and how behavioral protocols can interface with supplement-based and nutritional protocols. I'm confident that you'll learn a tremendous amount of information from Dr. Patrick, much of which is immediately actionable. And if you're not already following and listening to her excellent podcast, you'll absolutely want to do that. It's foundmyfitness.com is the website where you can get access to that podcast. It's also on Apple and Spotify and YouTube as FoundMyFitness. Dr. Patrick also has a terrific newsletter that I recommend signing up for. It's foundmyfitness.com/newsletter is where you'll find it, and it includes research on fasting, micronutrients, sleep, depression, fitness, longevity, and far more, along, of course, with actionable protocols. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous supplements. Our motivation for partnering with Momentous is to provide people one location where they can go to access the highest quality supplements in the specific dosages that are best supported by the scientific research and that are discussed during various episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. If you go to livemomentus.com/huberman, you will see those formulations. I should mention that we are going to add more formulations in the months to come. And you'll see specific suggestions about how best to take those supplements, meaning what dosages and times of day, and, in fact, how to combine those supplements with specific behavioral protocols that have been discussed on the podcast and are science supported in order to drive the maximum benefit from those supplements. And many of you will probably also be pleased to learn that Momentous ships not just within the United States but also internationally. So, once again, if you go to livemomentus.com/huberman, you'll find what we firmly believe to be the best quality supplements in the precise dosages and the best protocols for taking those supplements along with the ideal behavioral protocols to combine with those supplement formulations. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington, on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon, on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled "The Brain Body Contract," during which I will discuss science and science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I should point out that, while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast and on various social media posts, most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere. So, once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th. You can access tickets by going to hubermanlab.com/tour, and I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one, vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day, is that it helps me cover all of my basic nutritional needs. It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have. In addition, it has probiotics which are vital for microbiome health. I've done a couple of episodes now on the so-called gut microbiome and the ways in which the microbiome interacts with your immune system, with your brain to regulate mood and essentially with every biological system relevant to health throughout your brain and body. With Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins I need, the minerals I need, and the probiotics to support my microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. There are a ton of data now showing that vitamin D is essential for various aspects of our brain and body health. Even if we're getting a lot of sunshine, many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3. And K2 is also important because it regulates things like cardiovascular function, calcium in the body, and so on. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes what are called nootropics, which means smart drugs. Now, to be honest, I am not a fan of the term nootropics. I don't believe in smart drugs in the sense that I don't believe that there's any one substance or collection of substances that can make us smarter. I do believe, based on science, however, that there are particular neural circuits and brain functions that allow us to be more focused, more alert, access creativity, be more motivated, et cetera. That's just the way that the brain works. Different neural circuits for different brain states. And so the idea of a nootropic that's just going to make us smarter all around fails to acknowledge that smarter is many things, right? If you're an artist, you're a musician, you're doing math, you're doing accounting, a different part of the day, you need to be creative, these are all different brain processes. Thesis understands this, and, as far as I know, they're the first nootropics company to create targeted nootropics for specific outcomes. They only use the highest quality ingredients, which, of course, is essential. Some of those I've talked about on the podcast, things like DHA, ginkgo biloba, phosphatidylserine. They give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month, discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics and goals, and, with that personalization, design a kit of nootropics that's ideal for the different brain and body states you want to access. I've been using Thesis for more than six months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game-changer. My go-to formula is the Clarity formula, or sometimes I'll use their energy formula before training. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take a three-minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout for 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. What's unique about InsideTracker is that, while there are a lot of different tests out there for hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, with InsideTracker, you get the numbers back in terms of your levels, but they also give you very clear directives in terms of lifestyle, nutrition, and supplementation that can help you bring those values into the ranges that are best for you and your health goals. And that's very different than a lot of the other programs, where you get a lot of information, but you don't really know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that all very easy to understand and very actionable based on the very easy-to-use dashboard at InsideTracker. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. And now for my discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. Rhonda, welcome. This has been a long time coming. Even longer than you know because, even before we discussed you coming on this podcast as a guest, I've been watching your content for a very long time. So I want to start off by saying thank you. You were the spearhead to break through from academic science to public education. So I consider you first in, and the rest of us are just in your wake. So, thank you for that. It's been- - Oh, that is so kind. Thank you. Thank you so much. Well, it's absolutely true. - I am so excited to be here having a conversation with you. - Thank you. It's absolutely true. If anyone does their research, they'll realize that the statement I just made is absolutely true and there isn't even a close second. Any other public facing educators that have formal science training and do regular posting of content came in several years after you initiated it, so we're all grateful. I have so many questions, but I want to start off with kind of a new but old theme that you're very familiar with. So temperature is a powerful stimulus, as we know, for biology, and you've covered a lot of material related to the utility of cold but also the utility of heat, and, as I learn more and more from your content and from the various papers, it seems that there's a bit of a conundrum in that cold can stimulate a number of things, like increases in metabolism, brown fat, et cetera, et cetera. Hopefully, you'll tell us more about those. But heat seems to be able to do a lot of the same things. And I wonder whether or not the discomfort of cold, deliberate cold exposure, and the discomfort of heat might be anchoring to the same pathway. So, would you mind sharing with us a little bit about what happens when we get into a cold environment on purpose, and what happens when we get into a hot environment on purpose? And I'm hoping that this might eventually lead us to some point of convergent understanding, so if you would. - I would love to. Let's take a step back. I think you brought up a really important point here. And I think that point has to do with the intermittent challenging of yourself and whether that is through temperature changes, like cold or heat, or through other types of stressors, like physical activity, or perhaps even dietary compounds that are found in plants. These are things like polyphenols or flavanols. Humans, we evolved to intermittently challenge ourselves. And before we had Instacart, where you could basically just get your food delivered to you, before the Industrial Revolution occurred, we were out hunting. And I say, we, not us but humans. We were out gathering. We were moving, and we had to be physically fit. You couldn't catch your prey if you were a sedentary slob, right? You were moving, and you had to pick your berries. You had to move. And so physical activity was a part of everyday life, and caloric restriction or intermittent fasting was also a part of it. This is another type of challenge. We didn't always have a prey that we caught, or maybe temperatures were such that there was nothing for us to gather, right? So food scarcity was something common as well as eating plants, so getting these compounds that I mentioned. These are all types of stress, intermittent challenges, that activate genetic pathways in our bodies. These are often referred to in science as stress response pathways because they respond to a little bit of stress. Physical activity is strenuous. Fasting's a little bit stressful. Heat, cold. These things are all types of little intermittent challenges. And there is a lot of crosstalk between these stressors and the genetic pathways that they activate. And these genetic pathways that are activated help you deal with stress. And they do it in a way that is not only beneficial to help you deal with that little stressor, exercise or heat, it stays active, and it helps you deal with the stress of normal metabolism, normal immune function happening, just life, aging, right? So this concept is referred to as hormesis. This is a little bit of stressful challenge that activates these stress response pathways in a beneficial way, that is a net positive, that actually has a very profound antioxidant, anti-inflammatory response, or whatever the response is. It could be the production of more stem cells. These are cells that help regenerate different cells within tissues, or something like autophagy, which is a process that can clear away all the gunk inside of our cells, pieces of DNA, protein aggregates. So you'll find that the stress response pathways are activated by a variety of stressors. So, for example, one pathway is called heat shock proteins, and, as their name would imply, one would go, "Oh, they're activated by heat." Well, correct. They are activated very robustly by heat. And we can talk about that. You can eat a plant like broccoli sprouts, which is high in something called sulforaphane. This is a compound that is sort of like a hormetic compound, or, as David Sinclair likes to say, it's a xenohormetic compound. I love that. I love that term. And it activates heat shock proteins among other things. It also activates a very powerful detoxification pathway called Nrf2, which helps you detoxify things like carcinogens that you're exposed to. Well, guess what? Heat activates that. So what I'm getting at is there is overlap. Cold also activates heat shock proteins. You're like, "Really? Cold?" Yes, it activates. These are stress response pathways, and they are activated by various types of stressors. Now, you're going to more robustly activate heat shock proteins from heat versus cold, but there is some overlap. So I think that sort of forms the foundation there. - Yeah, that's very helpful. And it brings to mind, in the context of the nervous system, I always tell people you only have a small kit of neurochemicals to work with. There isn't dopamine for Netflix, and then dopamine for relationship, and dopamine for work, et cetera. Dopamine is a generic pathway by which motivation, craving, and pursuit emerge, et cetera, just like adrenaline is a generic theme of many different behaviors. It seems that it is the job of biological systems to be able to take a diverse range of inputs, even unknown inputs. Like, we don't know what technology will look like in three years, but you can bet that some of those novel technologies will tap into the very systems that I'm talking about now. And there certainly will be other stressors to come about that will tap into these pathways. I have two questions related to what you just said before we talk a little bit more about cold and heat. You mentioned plants as a route to creating intermittent challenge. There's a lot of debate, mostly online, about whether or not plants are our friends or plants are trying to kill us. The extreme version from the carnivore types, pure carnivore diet types, is that plants are trying to kill us. From the plant-based diet folks, it seems like it's more about what's healthy for the planet, animals, and maybe for us. But, if we set aside that argument, and we just raise the hypothesis that plants have compounds that are bad for us, but maybe by consuming them in small amounts, they're creating this hormesis type scenario, so then I think we conceivably solve the problem. We could say, yes, plants are bad for us, but, in small amounts, they provide this hormetic response and they're good for us, right? So, in the same way that too much heat is bad for us, too much cold is bad for us, can kill us, can kill neurons, but, appropriately dosed, in an intermittent challenge type of scenario, it can be good for us. Is that how I should think about plants and these compounds? Do you think of them as good for us or as bad for us? They're a very sharp blade, and we want to use them potently. - I actually think that it's almost impossible. I mean, you'd have to eat nothing but the same plant all day, every day in large. The bioavailability of these compounds in the plants, they're attached to a food matrix. It's not like taking it in a supplement form as well. It's such that it's very difficult to make it toxic. Now, there are some cases, for example, if you eat cabbage, and I think there's some group in Africa or somewhere that that's all they eat is cabbage, and there is a goitrogen in cabbage. It's not sulforaphane. It's another compound. But that's all they eat, every day. Nothing but that. - They get goiter. The thick neck. - Yeah, and they're iodine deficient on top of that. So I do think, you can, of course, make. I mean, there are types of plants that are toxic in small quantities, right? - Hemlock. - [Rhonda] Hemlock, exactly. - Will kill you. Folks, don't play this game with hemlock. - But you're not going to get poisoned from eating your serving of broccoli at dinner, right? So, I mean, it depends on the plant. These generalizations are kind of, they're just not useful, and I think that a lot of people online in the blogosphere, they gravitate towards them because it's just easier, and it's a lot more sensational. - I eat plants, meat, and starches. I'm one of those rare omnivores out there now. - I do, too. - I feel like it's rare to be an omnivore. But I think, once you step out of the social media, as you said, the blogosphere, most people, I would say, 99% of people on the planet are probably omnivores. - Right. - And someone will probably correct me, but I doubt the number falls below 98. - I think, if you look at data, and when we have carnivore data, I can't wait to see it, but, right now, it's a lot of, okay, well, this is a lot of anecdotal evidence, and there's a lot of good starts with anecdotes, but people change a thousand things at once, and they don't realize that, but they do. And so anecdotal data is only so good, right? It's a starting point. And so we don't really know long-term what carnivore diets are going to do. They may be beneficial short-term. They may be beneficial for reasons of elimination of other things. Who knows, right? Lots of possibilities. But I do think, with respect to plants, that there's so much evidence, like, for example, sulforaphane is one that I really like because there's just evidence that sulforaphane is a very powerful activator of the Nrf2 pathway. And this is a pathway that regulates a lot of genes, a lot of genes that are related to glutathione production, genes that are involved in detoxifying compounds that we're exposed to from our food, like heterocyclic amines. In fact, there have been GWAS studies. These are studies that are genome-wide associated studies, for people listening that aren't familiar. People have a variety of versions of genes, and we have a gene that's able to make heterocyclic amines to basically detoxify it so it's not as harmful. And people that don't have a certain version of that that's doing it well are very prone to colon cancer and increased cancer risk, but if they eat a lot of broccoli and cruciferous vegetables, that negates that risk because they're getting sulforaphane, which activates a lot of the glutathione transferase and synthase genes. So glutathione's a major antioxidant in our brain, in our vascular system, in our body, basically. So there's evidence that eating things like compounds that are like sulforaphane or broccoli or broccoli spouts, which have up to 100 times more sulforaphane than broccoli, are activating glutathione in the brain. There's human evidence of that. I mean, that's amazing. - [Andrew] That is amazing. - In Plasma. Yeah. - Sorry to interrupt. I just want to make sure. So broccoli sprouts are different than broccoli, and you just told us that they're much richer in these compounds. So, note to self, I should have broccoli sprouts, not just broccoli. Can we cook the broccoli and still get these nutrients, or do we have to eat it raw? I confess, eating raw broccoli is really aversive to me. - So the sulforaphane is formed from a compound called glucoraphanin, which is in the broccoli, and the enzyme that converted into sulforaphane is myrosinase, and it's heat sensitive. So you do somewhat lower the sulforaphane levels when you cook the broccoli. However, there was a study a few years back that showed adding one gram of mustard seed powder, ground mustard seed powder, which also contains the myrosinase enzyme, to your cooked broccoli increases the sulforaphane by fourfold, so... - This is great 'cause, I confess, I like broccoli if it's cooked to the appropriate density, not too mushy but definitely not raw. The idea of eating raw broccoli to me just sounds horrible, but I like the way mustard seed sounds. So just a little bit of mustard seed powder added to the cooked broccoli can recover some of these compounds. - Yes, so what I do is I will lightly steam my broccoli, and then I add a little bit of my Kerrygold butter, and then I add some mustard seed powder on the top of that. And it's got a little kick. It's just a little spice. And if you don't taste that, it's expired. It should have a little kick. - And because I know people will want to know how often and how much, are you eating this every day or most days of the week? - Well, I had shifted to supplementation with sulforaphane. I'm admitting right now that I've been terrible about it the past, I don't know, six months or so. - The supplementation or the broccoli? - Yes, the supplementation. And so there's another way to get. There's another compound, and it's actually called moringa. And Dr. Jed Fahey, who's really the expert on sulforaphane. He's a good friend of mine. He's been on the podcast a couple of times. He basically thinks, and has done a lot of research on marina as well, that it's like the cousin, and it activates the Nrf2 pathways similarly to sulforaphane. And so I've been buying this Kuli Kuli moringa powder. I don't have any affiliation with him. - Kuli Kuli is a brand? - Kuli Kuli's the brand. - That you have no affiliation to. - I have no affiliation, but Jed Fahey has researched it, like that specific brand, and so it's legit. It's science backed in terms of actually containing moringa and activating Nrf2. And I add it to my smoothies. So that's what I've been doing. - What are some dose ranges? And, of course, we give the usual recommendations that people should talk to their physician, et cetera, et cetera. But, if people are going to, what do you take? That's always the... - A big, heaping tablespoon. - Let's take the David Sinclairian approach, where he'll talk about what he does, as a way to deal with this. Of course, everybody's different and should, in all seriousness, anytime you add or delete something from your consumption should consult some trusted healthcare professional, trusted by you. Do you recall the dosages? - I do a big, heaping tablespoon. - So Kuli Kuli moringa. It sounds like a song. - It's with a K. I know, it does. But, for people also listening, it's like, "Well, why would I do that?" I mentioned the glutathione in the brain. I mentioned it in plasma. It's been shown to lower DNA damage in people, in white blood cells. There's been several different studies in China. In China, there's a lot of air pollution. And I mentioned that it's a very powerful activator of Nrf2. And I know you're familiar with Nrf2. Nrf2 is a transcription factor that is, it is binding to a little specific sequence in a variety of different genes, and it's turning them on, or, in some cases, turning them off. It's regulating what's being activated or what's not being activated, being turned off. And some of the genes are basically these detoxifying pathways. We talked a little bit about the glutathione, but there's also ones that are involved in airborne carcinogens, like benzene. So benzene's found in air pollution. I mean, cigarette smoke. If you're smoking cigarettes still, please try to quit. - Yeah, you're mutating your DNA. - [Rhonda] Yeah, it's the worst. - To say nothing of the lung cancer, you're mutating your DNA. - And heart disease risk. Heart disease risk. But, anyways. People, and this has been repeated in more than one study, that literally after 24 hours of taking, I can't remember off the top of my head what the dose of sulforaphane from broccoli extract, broccoli seed extract was, or broccoli sprouts extract, not the seed. It was the sprouts. Anyways, they started excreting 60% benzene and acrolein. That's something that we get in cooked food. - It's coming out in their urine? - Coming out in their urine. Yeah. - Well, I'm not a smoker, and I have to be honest. It's rare that I hear of a supplement for the first time 'cause I've been deep-diving on supplements since I was in my teens. This is fascinating, and it brings back to this question that we had before, and I appreciate that you've answered it very clearly. Plants have compounds that are good for us. They're not just stressing us. They're activating pathways that are reparative. That's what I'm taking away from everything you're telling me. - Right, and that our bodies, we're supposed to be getting that stress to have those pathways activated. You know, right? I mean, this is conserved among different animals. This is something that is, it's supposed to happen. And, in our modern day world, we don't have to eat plants. We don't have to move anywhere or exercise. We don't have to go through periods of not eating food because we can have it at our fingertips at any second, right? So, I mean, we've got this conundrum of, we're never activating these stress response pathways that we're supposed to activate. We're supposed to. - I find that fascinating, and again, drawing a parallel to the nervous system, so what I'm hearing you say is that, historically, we would have to go through some stress, some confront cold or confront heat, or confront effort or hunger, have to exercise, essentially, in order to obtain these compounds, and then those compounds are reparative. Yeah, I feel that resembles the dopamine pathway. I always say there's nothing wrong with dopamine. People think about dopamine hits as bad or dopamine is bad. There's absolutely nothing wrong with dopamine. The problem is dopamine, especially high levels of dopamine, released without the need for effort to access that dopamine is problematic. So a line of cocaine gives you a ton of dopamine with no effort except to ingest the drug, whereas working for four years or more to get your degree will release a lot of dopamine and a lot of cortisol along the way, as we know, and it's considered a healthy accomplishment in most cases, a tremendous amount. We're approaching the spring, and there'll be a lot of graduations. Weddings are coming up now that the pandemic is hopefully slowing. And there'll be a lot of dopamine. High levels of dopamine are great, but only after the effort of having done something in order to access it. And so that's what I'm taking away from what you're saying is that we need to go through this intermittent, different types of intermittent challenge, and we are rewarded with particular compounds that are reparative, both for the challenge, but then make us stronger. Hormesis really is, it seems, a case of what doesn't kill us, makes us stronger. So you mentioned- - Can I add to that one thing you just said? - [Andrew] Please, please. - Because this has been shown with, for example, sulforaphane in animal studies, you precondition, give the animal sulforaphane, and then you expose them to hypoxia or some kind of ischemic stroke condition, whatever they do to induce that, and the sulforaphane, it basically protects them. Their precondition and their stress response pathways are primed, and so, when they're then exposed to the ischemic stroke, their outcomes are so much better, so much better than the animals that didn't get the sulforaphane 48 hours before or whatever it was. And this has been shown in multiple animal studies with sulforaphane specifically in the brain. I know Mark Mattson. Dr Mark Mattson. He's often thought of as the intermittent fasting king, but he's a neuroscientist, and he did publish some work and talks about sulforaphane as well. - I'm really glad you brought that up, that example up, because many of the questions I get on social media and elsewhere are about traumatic brain injury. And TBI is just one example. And people always think, "Oh, sports. It's football." Whenever you say TBI, people always think football. And I just want to just take a moment to editorialize. 90% or more of traumatic brain injury is construction work, at-home accidents. Football players, hockey players, martial artists are a tiny fraction of the people who have TBI and concussion of various kinds. It just so happens that, within those communities, many of them, 75% or more, experience those. So it's salient within those communities, but concussion is prominent. People are always asking, "What can I do "in order to offset brain injury? "I had a concussion two years ago. What can I do?" And it's been a tough question because we really don't have anything for them. I mean, you tell them sleep well, eat well, exercise, but it sounds like some of these reparative pathways either should be explored in the context of brain injury or, I'm guessing, are being explored in the context of brain injury. - Yeah, so a couple of things there. One is that, I mean, traumatic brain injury, it's terrible, but it's so interesting because it's also like literal, real-time brain aging. You're able to accelerate it and understand. So I often think of, when I think of traumatic brain injury, I think of so much overlap between Alzheimer's disease and dementia and these neurodegenerative diseases because there are a lot of similarities there. And so, sulforaphane, I personally think, and I do think there's been some animal research with TBI and sulforaphane, mostly preconditioning rather than treatment. So, again, it's like, well, if you want a healthy lifestyle thing and you're a construction worker, or you're fill in the blank, that's going to. I mean, anyone that drives a car, you're at risk to some degree, right? - [Andrew] Or bicycle. - Bicycle, yeah. - Around Stanford, I would say people demonize motorcycles, people demonize a lot of things, but moving fast through space on a small object next to a 3,000 pound vehicle, I mean, we have a number of friends that have died. We have a number of people with traumatic brain injury. I'm not against cycling or cyclists, but it's a risky sport by any stretch. So, in taking things like moringa or eating my broccoli sprouts, maybe cooking them a little less than I'm currently cooking them, putting on the mustard seed. Is there evidence that? Well, first of all, Nrf2 is expressed in neurons, so those cells should be protected. Are there other cells of the body that could possibly gain protection from these pathways? - Well, lungs for one, but just even in plasma cells. I think Nrf2 is pretty ubiquitously expressed. Liver. There's so many animal studies that have looked at all those things. I try to kind of gravitate towards human ones 'cause it's a lot more relevant. But I think, overall, like I mentioned, DNA damage lower. It was like 24 or 34% lower in human blood cells after broccoli sprout powder supplementation. - [Andrew] Wow. - And I made a video on this years ago, 2016 maybe, and I think I have the references on there to exact amounts. I can't remember. - We can link to the video. - But it's kind of an old video. It's 2016. But I also had Jed on the podcast, and he did talk about this. But it's also been shown in randomized controlled trials to help treat autism and autistic symptoms. Yet again, it's doing interesting things in the brain, and I think it does have something to do with the oxidative stress, the glutathione, which would be relevant for TBI treatment. It hasn't been shown empirically that that helps with treatment, but I do think someone could do that study. I think that it should be done, honestly, because it's a low-hanging fruit, I mean, if there's any impact. And there is at least one preliminary study that glutathione is increased in the brain after humans are basically taking sulforaphane. - Which is, really, for people listening, that's so important because a number of compounds that people take in supplement form don't cross the blood-brain barrier, or they get metabolized in ways that what's listed on the bottle almost becomes irrelevant for what your cells actually experience. So that's very reassuring. We will get back to heat and cold and this theme that I tried to surface, but I just find this too interesting to diverge at this point from these themes. So, what other compounds or micronutrients do you place in the top tier of useful, interesting? There are animal studies. Maybe there are hopefully also some human studies. We've talked about a few. I know you've talked a lot about omega-3 fatty acids. So, if you had to do your top three, your superstars of nutrients for the brain and body, sounds like we've got one set, what would you put alongside them? - Omega-3, the marine omega-3 fatty acids. So these are found in marine types of animals, fish, cold water fish, fatty fish. So there's three fatty acids. There's one from a plant, and that's often referred to as ALA, people call it short, alpha-linolenic acid, and then there's eicosapentaenoic acid, or EPA, and docosahexaenoic acid, which is DHA. Yeah, but EPA- - I'm amazed you can pronounce two of the most difficult words to pronounce and spell right next to ophthalmology, which, if you can spell it. I know people who have appointments in ophthalmology departments that don't know how to spell ophthalmology. Little secret. There's an extra P in there. So the ALA. I'm not going to attempt to pronounce it because your pronunciation was perfect of both of these two compounds. And you said are marine sources, so fish, so sardines, cod, this sort of thing, but what about krill? I've seen krill oil. A few years back, people were saying krill is a better source for omega-3s than is fish oil. I took some krill oil capsules, made me itch all over, so I stopped. - Do you have a shellfish allergy? - No, I don't think so. - No, okay. - I don't think so. I'm not a big fan of shellfish, but I'll have oysters every now and again, or shrimp or something, and feel fine. - Yeah, we can talk about sources. So krill is a source mostly of a type of DHA and EPA that's in phospholipid form. So it's a phosphatidylcholine omega-3 fatty acid, and that's different than most of the, well, if we're talking about fish oil supplements, that's a different story, but if you're talking about comparing fish to eating krill, like we're talking about the food. - Oh, I would never eat krill. - Okay. Are we talking about the supplements? - Yes, I apologize. - Fish oil supplements. - Yeah, krill supplement versus fish oil supplement, and, if it fits in the conversation, talking about great sources of omega-3s in their whole form. I have a bad feeling you're going to tell me sardines. - Sardines are, yeah, they're awesome. Anyways. - Except for the taste. - And for the potential contaminants. Mercury, I think, was one. No. Yeah, it was mercury. And Joe was telling me about, he used to eat sardines everyday. Joe Rogan was telling me that he used to eat sardines every day, and then he had really high mercury levels. And I was really shocked because sardines are low in the fish groups. The higher up you get, like swordfish and sharks, like, really high mercury 'cause they're eating all the other fish, right? But I think some brands, and if you look at ConsumerLab. ConsumerLab, it's like a third-party site that I'm not affiliated with, but I'll use them because they do a lot of analysis of different foods and supplements. And so you can look at some of their sardines, and they have a list of ones that are pretty decent. But, anyways, back to your question about fish oil supplements versus krill oil supplements. So one of the major differences is that fish oil supplements, if you get a high quality one, it's in a triglyceride form. So you've got a glycerol backbone with three fatty acids that's attached, and those are either DHA or the EPA. Or, if you have a lower quality fish oil supplement, then you have what's called ethyl ester form. And, typically, the reason for that, when fish oil is purified, it's run through this column with alcohol or something. They cleave it off, the glycerol backbone, and then it's just kind of easier to leave it like that than re-esterifying it, which costs more money. So you can get it in ethyl ester form, which isn't as bioavailable. And, in fact, if you don't take it with food, you're going to be in trouble. You're not going to absorb much of it at all. - Would you see this on the packaging? Is it going to say it's in this ethyl form? - Some official brands will put it on their website, perhaps on their packaging, but, most of the time, you'll have to dig for it on the website and/or call them. But I think, for the most part, ones that are higher end will market it, like triglyceride form. And it's not that ethyl ester's bad. It just means take it with food. So one of the major prescription omega-3s out there is, both of them actually, Lovaza, which is a mixture of DHA and EPA, as well as Vascepa, which is a highly purified EPA. These are both prescribed by physicians to patients with hypertriglyceridemia, so high triglycerides among other things, I think maybe dysregulation of lipids as well. - This is amazing. For people, so these are prescription drugs that are essentially very high-potency, purified omega-3s, but they're given to people for lipid issues. So this is the treatment of issues with fat metabolism by giving people fat. - Yes. - I just want to push home, again, I'm not carnivore keto or anything, I'm an omnivore, but to just push home that one thing that's so wonderful that you've done over the years and you continue to do is to move away from these very broad, sweeping statements about fat is bad. Here's a case where we're saying fat is not only good, it can be used to combat issues with fat metabolism. And fats are not just one thing. They're many things. So anyway, I just want to put a little highlighter and a point of appreciation there and make sure that people are sensitized to the fact that, if you hear that fat is bad, you have to ask, what kind of fat? And here we're talking about these omega-3s. Okay, so the triglyceride form can be taken with or without food, and there's prescription forms. I don't know if I can get ahold of the prescription form unless- - You have high triglycerides. - Or I have a friend with high triglycerides. No. It's illegal, folks. Don't share prescription drugs. - Or you talk to your doctor and you say, "I'm already taking this from..." I mean, I don't know how it works. Anyways. - What's the dosage that you recommend people get? One way or another. - All right, okay, so the dosage that physicians prescribe for high triglycerides, for example, is four grams a day. - Four grams of EPA. - Yes, of the Vascepa. I think Lovaza's also prescribed at four grams a day. And you can get either of those from your physician. My father-in-law just got one of 'em prescribed. We were buying our own omega-3 for years and years. It's like, hey, you can actually get this and health insurance can cover it. And it's a really purified form, but you have to take it with food. That was the bottom line. I've totally gone on tangents, but you're asking more interesting questions anyway. - Well, normally I ask about mechanism and then I talk about protocols, but in the- - Or the why. - [Andrew] Or the why. - I mean, we haven't gotten there yet. - And we definitely will get there, but I think a number of people nowadays are just really excited about what they can do for their health, and so, here, we're just raising the importance of omega-3s, and then we'll definitely get to the why and the underlying mechanism. - Yeah, I think four grams is, I mean, in fact, Bill Harris, Dr. Bill Harris, he's just one of the pioneers on omega-3 fatty acid research. He was on our podcast last August. And he was saying the reason FDA chose that was literally just because how much they could get people to take. It wasn't like an upper end, like anything above that is unsafe. That wasn't the case. I mean, it was just purely cost and compliance, so what they can get into a pill, the amount they can get, and how many pills they can get people to take. - I'm smiling because our good friend Satchin Panda at the Salk Institute, who's done a lot of important work on intermittent fasting and other incredible work on circadian rhythms, et cetera. When I was talking to him in preparation for an episode on intermittent fasting, I said, "Why the eight-hour feeding window?" And he said, "Well, the graduate student "who ran those studies had a partner." I think it was a girlfriend, as I recall. Hope I didn't get that backward. And the partner said, "Listen, you can be in lab "10 hours a day, but you can't be in lab 14 hours a day "if you want this relationship to work." And so it was eight hours of feeding window, plus some measurements and time to walk into the lab, park the car, et cetera. And so the eight-hour feeding window that everyone holds so holy was actually just born out of this relationship between these two graduate students. Had they been single, I was single all through graduate school, or most of it anyway, and I lived in the lab. So, if it'd been me, intermittent fasting would mean eating 14 hours a day. That was a joke. Not a good one, but just want to make clear. I'm joking. But the point that you're making is a really good one, that the four gram amount is not a threshold based on anything except the threshold of people's willingness to actually take this stuff. And I think that's important for people to hear. Because so often we hear the eight-hour feeding window, four grams of EPA, 150 minutes of cardio, and it's really a question of what you can reasonably do in a study. - So I take four grams a day. I take two in the morning, two grams in the morning, and I take two grams in the evening. I take my EPA in the morning, and I take my DHA in the evening. - You split them. - I do. I don't know. I don't think it's necessary, necessarily. I just happen to get a certain fish oil supplement that separates them. And so, like Lovaza, Lovaza's a great one, and it's all in one, and it's easier. - What if someone doesn't have a prescription? So I take over-the-counter fish oil. I know I feel better 'cause I've done the experiment of going on and off. I take them mainly for, I don't have depression, but my mood is better. My joints feel better. I just feel better. And I like to think that my platelets are slipperier, and they're cruising through any little obstructions in my veins or arteries. That's the image I have in my head, but I don't have any data to support that part. - Yeah, I mean, so, if you're asking for, like, where do people get these fish oil supplements? - Let's say I look at the bottle, and it says two grams per serving, but then I look, and it's 750 milligrams of EPA or 1,000 milligrams of EPA. Let's say half of it is EPA. Then, do I want to hit a threshold of EPA or a threshold of what's listed on the bottle, on the front of the bottle? Because my understanding is that we need to hit a threshold level of EPA in order to derive these important benefits. - I think two grams is a good threshold. Now, the International Fish Oil Standards, IFSO, they have a website where they do third-party testing of a ton of different fish oil supplements from around the world, and they measure the concentration of the omega-3 fatty acids in the actual supplement, because nothing is ever what it says on the bottle, and then they also measure contaminants, so mercury, PCBs, dioxins, things that you'd find potentially in fish that are harmful to humans, and they also measure mercury and then oxidized fatty acids. So these omega-3 fatty acids are polyunsaturated fatty acids, which are extremely prone to oxidation. So please keep your fish oil in the refrigerator because it's colder. Yeah, they're extremely prone. - Mine's in the cupboard, so now I know. - The shelf life's increased. Lower oxidation. - No, it makes perfect sense. Yeah. - So, anyways, they measure that. And I typically like to look for, they give you a total oxidation number. It's called T-O-T-O-X. TOTOX is what we call it for short. And I like it to be at the least under 10, ideally under six. It's really hard to find all the right mixtures of things, but people can go to this website, and they can browse through the products. I've put together an Excel sheet, which I have a YouTube little screencast that I'm yet to publish, press the publish button on, but it, basically, you have to go back and check and update 'cause these are from different lot numbers of the products. They do have up to like 20, 27 or something. And so I've gone through and found my top picks of high EPA brands and high DHA brands. If I were to buy some, the ones that I would choose because of the low total oxidation and the high concentration of either EPA or DHA. Now, people can go and do this themselves. It just takes some work. - No, I'm glad that you did the work. I'm going to put up a tweet every week. - Oh no! - With you tagged until this list is published online. Sorry, Rhonda, but I'm going to do it. I know it's very sadistic of me, but in service to the community and myself. - Yes, and I chose five brands from each, and I tried to find one in Europe and one in Canada. - Great. - So there's a great selection of US and other. - Thank you for doing that work. I don't want to do that work, and I trust you. So, yeah, I try and get two grams per day of EPA from supplementation. I'll now put it in the refrigerator. Mood is better. I made that decision mainly based on the data that I'm aware of, looking at comparison of people doing that anywhere from two to four grams of EPA per day compared to SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, in treatment of depression, and I don't want to take an SSRI if I don't have to, and fortunately, I don't have to, but the data, by my read, are remarkable. People that take these things in sufficient doses, meaning the EPAs, are able to get by with much lower dosages of SSRIs for depression relief or, in some cases, to come off their SSRIs completely or avoid going on antidepressant medication. Now, of course, this is not something people should cowboy. Mental health issues are serious. But what other reasons, I'd love your thoughts on that, on the mental health part, so maybe you could tell us what are some things that getting to two to four grams of EPA per day is going to help with in our brain and the rest of our body. - So, do you know? So I actually published a paper back in 2015 about the role of omega-3 and vitamin D in depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and impulsive behavior. But, so, within that paper, doing background research, and this was a review article, by the way, I was just connecting dots 'cause I love doing that. - I'm going to grab that paper. I confess, I don't know the paper, but I love quality reviews because the references they're in are so useful. - Well, there's a huge role for inflammation, the cause of inflammation in depression. And I think we did a short animated video on this as well, years ago, back when I was publishing that work, where people are injected with lipopolysaccharide. This is something that we're generating from our gut, mostly from our gut permeability, which happens a lot. Endotoxin, it's also called. It's endotoxin lipopolysaccharide. It's basically the outer membrane of bacterial cells when bacteria die, so like when the immune cells in our gut come into contact with the bacteria because we drank alcohol five days in a row or whatever, we release endotoxin, or something stressed us out. We release endotoxin into our body, and that causes inflammation. And so you can inject people with lipopolysaccharide and cause depressive symptoms. However, if you take those same cohort of people, give them EPA, and I think it was somewhere around two grams, and then inject them with lipopolysaccharide. We're establishing causation here, right? It totally, the depressive symptoms, versus a placebo. So the placebo was saline control. So this was a placebo controlled because obviously it's hugely important for depression. It ameliorated the depressive symptoms that was caused by lipopolysaccharide. - Amazing, and LPS, lipopolysaccharide, is no joke. Years ago, when I was working on thermal regulation, we would inject animals with LPS to induce fever. The vagus nerve registers the presence of LPS signals to these particular hyperglycemic areas and cranks up body temperature because, basically, it's a signal that the body is infected. Amazing. So I will continue with my two grams per day. Maybe I'll ramp it up to four. I'm not doing the DHA separately. There's DHA in the same supplement. - Yes. - [Andrew] Is that okay? - Yes. Yeah, yeah. And to kind of... Boy, we've got a lot of things to hit back on because one of your original questions was krill oil versus fish oil. - Yes, still in the cue. - DHA, specifically, in phospholipid form, it's more bioavailable. So, if you're comparing exact quantity or concentration in triglyceride form versus phospholipid form, you will get more in your plasma cells, in your plasma, plasma cell, in your plasma with krill oil. However, krill oil supplements are so low dose. I mean, good luck getting two grams of omega-3 from krill oil. And also, krill oil supplements are notoriously rancid. I don't know for whatever reason. - Maybe that's what made me itchy all over. - I think they're just... I haven't found a good krill oil supplement. I pretty much stay away from it. I mean, if you smell it too, I mean, it just smells rancid. So, but the thing is, and I also published a paper on this back in 2019, yeah, something like that, about DHA in phospholipid form getting into the brain through a different mechanism than DHA in triglyceride form. And so it's going through a transporter called the MFSD2A transporter. And I think it's very relevant for people with an APOE4 allele, so- - People with an Alzheimer's susceptibility. - Right, so like 25% of the population has an allele and a gene called APOE4, and, basically, it's APOE, but the four is referred to as the bad kind of version of it. This is something in our bodies. It's also in our brain. And if people have one of these versions, if they got one from their mom or their dad, they have a twofold increased risk for Alzheimer's disease. If they get two, which is much more, it's less common. I think it's like 2% of the population or something has two alleles, but they have like a 10 or 11-fold increased risk of Alzheimer's disease. So there is a role for phospholipid form DHA in the brain, but you also make phospholipid DHA inside your body. And you can do that by taking in more triglyceride forms. So two grams or more is the magic number, I think. So kind of back to the why for fish oil. I personally think it is one of the most powerful, anti-inflammatory things, dietary lifestyle, things that we can get easily, relatively easily, that is going to powerfully modulate the way you think, the way you feel, and the way you age. And a variety of different types of studies kind of led me to that conclusion, a variety of observational studies. So there's been lots of work by Dr. Bill Harris and his collaborators looking at, it's called the Omega-3 Index. So this is actually the omega-3 level in red blood cells. So red blood cells turn over about every 120 days. So it's a long-term marker of omega-3 status. This is very different from 99.9% of any study you see or any lab that you go to to get your omega-3 levels tested. You're getting your plasma phospholipid levels tested, which is kind of like you can think of it as, what did I eat a couple days before? Oh, I had fish. My omega-3 levels are great. But did you eat fish like that every week, or was it like you went out to dinner? So it's not a great biomarker for long-term omega-3 status. It's kind of like the fasting blood glucose levels versus the HbA1c, which is like a long-term marker of your blood glucose levels. So the Omega-3 Index. He's done a variety of studies, observational studies. So, for people listening, these are studies that are obviously flawed because they're not establishing causality. You're looking at people's lifestyles. But, in the case of Bill Harris's work, he's measuring something. So he's measuring the Omega-3 Index. And he's measuring the Omega-3 Index in people, and then looking at their mortality risk, for example, or their cardiovascular disease risk. And what he has found is that, first of all, standard American diet has an Omega-3 Index of 5%. Japan, by contrast, has an Omega-3 Index of around 10 to 11%. Big difference there. And they also have about a five-year increased life expectancy compared to people in the US. - Do you think that's mainly due to their fish intake, seafood intake? - So what he showed was, I think it's a big part of it. I mean, you can't says it's the only thing, but what he showed in his data was that, and I think it was Framingham Study, where he looked at the Omega-3 Index, and people that had a Omega-3 Index of 4% or lower, so close to what the standard American is but a little bit lower, they had a five-year decreased life expectancy compared to people that had an 8% Omega-3 Index. And so big difference there, right? Five years life expectancy. But here's the really interesting thing, Andrew. He also looked at smokers, smokers and their omega-3 levels, and so he stratified it, and he found smokers that had no omega-3 were like the worst of all. I mean, it was just like worse, right? We all know smoking is bad for us and will take years off our life expectancy. - [Andrew] Absolutely. - But smokers that had the high level, like smokers that were taking their fish oil or eating fish or whatever it was they were doing to get them up to 8%, they had the same life expectancy as non-smokers with the low Omega-3 Index. - [Andrew] Wow. - Right? - Wow. That's amazing. And it's also amazing to me that people still smoke cigarettes. But I see a lot of people vaping, and I know a lot of people consume cannabis. Have there been any studies specifically of vaping or people smoking marijuana? - Life expectancy? - All-cause mortality. - I haven't seen those. I haven't seen those. - They're not motivated enough to come in as research subjects. That was, again, a poor joke. It is hard to study people, marijuana use, unless, I'm told by my colleagues that study this stuff, unless you offer people marijuana, in which case they'll do it. But, again, they're actually not very good research subjects in all seriousness 'cause they are not very motivated or consistent, and they forget their appointments. So that's incredible. And you mentioned that the data on pollution related to the plant compounds earlier. So it's almost like these things are, again, are acting in a reparative way. - The omega-3s are, I mean, they are resolving inflammation. They're blunting inflammation. They're doing so many different. They affect so many different parts of the inflammatory pathway, which is, I think, plays a huge role in the way we age, the way our brain ages, the way we feel, our mood, our joints, all that. And so it's amazing that it's not, you know. - I love fish oil. I feel better when I take it. I try to eat some fatty fish a couple times a week. I do want to just touch on food sources for a moment. First of all, are there plants that are rich in omega-3s? And second, I have some friends who are really into meat. I like meat a lot, my dad's Argentine, but I don't eat very much of it. I try and eat high quality meats in relatively limited amounts, but I do eat pretty often. But I've been told by these sources of a questionable authority that, if an animal grazes on really good grasses, for instance, that the meat can contain a lot of omega-3s, which, in principle, makes sense based on this Omega-3 Index. 'Cause you're telling me that a lot of this omega-3 is sequestered into the red blood cells. So, if I'm eating high quality, grass-fed meat and the grasses had omega-3s, do my steaks have omega-3s or no? - So there was a study published that compared conventional meat, so meat that animals are fed corn or soy or whatever it is. - Which is terrible. - [Rhonda] Yeah. - For animals and people, as far as I can tell. I'm sure I'll get some attacks, but that's okay. I won't read those comments. Again, a joke. I read all the comments. But it seems to me that these animals have to either be taking fish oil or eat plants that are very rich in omega-3s in order for the meat to actually contain sufficient omega-3s. - So the meat, comparing the conventional meat to the grass-fed or pasture-raised cows or cattle, there were higher levels of alpha-linolenic acid. And ALA, it can be converted into EPA and DHA, but the conversion is very inefficient and very dependent on a variety of factors, including genetics. Genetics, a huge regulator. Some people can do it much better. Others, you're getting like 5% of conversion to EPA. Estrogen is a major regulator of making that more efficient. It makes sense because pregnancy, when your estrogen just goes through the roof. These omega-3 fatty acids play a very important role in brain development. Women are supposed to be converting any ALA they can into the longer-chain omega-3 fatty acids. So estrogen does affect that, but I would say plant sources. So, if you're looking for the ALA, plant sources would be walnuts, flaxseeds. Those are probably the highest. But, if a person is a vegan or a vegetarian, their best bet is to actually get microalgae oil. And you can supplement with microalgae oil because microalgae, they do make the DHA. And so that would be a better source for people that are vegetarian and vegan rather than doing the flaxseed oil because that conversion inefficiency, the enzymes that convert ALA into EPA and DHA, again, it's inefficient. - And then, for people that eat fish, sardines, you said. - [Rhonda] Salmon. - Salmon, and you have to eat the skin, as I understand. - You don't have to, but it's good. - [Andrew] It's rich with omegas. - The oil, yeah. And the reason I say, I think the best would be wild Alaskan salmon versus the farm-raised because the farm-raised, again, they're feeding 'em corn. They're feeding 'em grain and stuff. - [Andrew] Really? - And then, they give 'em astaxanthin. So astaxanthin is a carotenoid. It's the carotenoid that's in things like krill, crustaceans that make their red pigment. - Yeah, it's also being used now as a supplement, and there's a prescription form to try and rescue some age-related vision loss because of the role of the vitamin A pathway and photoreceptors. - Yeah, well, actually the carotinoids themselves, so like lutein, zeaxathin, they're really good at sequestering singlet oxygen, which is damaging, right? - Yeah, as we age, because the retinal cells, the cells of the eye are so metabolically active, they accumulate a lot of reactive oxygen species, and mitochondrial repair and limiting reactive oxygen species is a major theme of trying to rescue vision. That's a whole other podcast and story. There's some really interesting data now on the use of red light to try and trigger these pathways. - I've seen some. That's my good friend of many years and amazing scientist Glen Jeffery's lab at University College London. We should talk about that at some point, if not today. - I saw that study, like 2020, was it? - Now, they have a second study. - Oh, do they? They've done, okay. - It's looking real. - [Rhonda] That's exciting. - I mean, they're cautious. They're appropriately British and cautious about it. I always joke if those studies had been done over here, everyone would already know about it. Glen is a very conservative guy, but they've done this stuff now in pigs, in rodent models, and now also two studies in humans. It's looking pretty interesting. So sardines but also anchovies. By the way, I hate all the food items that I'm describing. I can barely tolerate salmon. I don't like fish at all. Actually, I like live fish. - So fish oil's good for you. - I had fish tanks when I was a kid. No, I find fish, unless it's in sushi form, I find it absolutely repulsive, and I don't know why. I probably have some mutation. - So raw fish is actually higher in mercury than cooked. - Okay, well, that's good. I don't really like sushi that much anyway. You're giving me great reasons to not eat fish, except I should eat these other fish sources or supplement more heavily. That's the message I'm getting. - I eat sardines. Every day, my first meal almost is a can of sardines and an avocado. - Avocado is good. - I love it, yeah, with a little bit of lemon and then some little hot sauce. - Does avocado have omega-3s? - Avocado is very good in monounsaturated fat. It's not really high in polyunsaturated fat. Omega-3, really, it's either the DHA and EPA that's in the marine sources fish, or it's the plant ALA source, which is the flaxseed or the walnuts. - It's rough. I mean, all these companies now are making these plant-based products that taste like meat. My wish is that they would just make a fish that tastes like a steak, but that's- - The fish come out albino, the ones that they farm raise, because they don't eat any of the- - I'm joking. I don't want a genetically modified fish that tastes like a steak. Although, I love the taste of steak. The point here is that, if one doesn't see themselves regularly consuming these fish sources of omega-3s, it seems to me that the only way to really get them is from supplementation. - And supplementation is a good way to get a high dose. And to get back to your dose point, there was a couple of studies that, basically, I think there was some way they showed that people that are in the 4% Omega-3 Index range, in order to get to the 8%, the five-year increased life expectancy if we're comparing the two groups, was to supplement with at least two grams. It was about two grams a day. And I think it was a little bit less if it was triglyceride form, but I think two grams is a good, safe number. So most Americans that are not eating a lot of fish and they're not supplementing are probably around a 4 to 5% Omega-3 Index. And to get to the 8%. And I think that's a good empirical way of thinking about it, right? Okay, well, I want to get to that 8%. By the way, I'm almost 16% Omega-3 Index. - Yeah, I was going to ask about testing. So, where and how can somebody measure their Omega-3 Index? Which, again, just to remind people, is essentially the percentage of omega-3s that you have in your blood with the caveat that the Omega-3 Index will be heavily biased by what you ate in the previous days. - Not the Omega-3 Index. Okay, so, the Omega-3- - Sorry, I misunderstood. I thought you said, in red blood cells, if I ate salmon two days ago, my Omega-3 Index is going to go up. - No, that was plasma. - [Andrew] I misunderstood. - So most people are measuring, if you look at a lot of studies, and honestly, Andrew, I think a lot of the reason for conflicting data is because people are measuring plasma omega-3 levels. - [Andrew] Okay. - The phospholipids. It's in a phospholipid, right? Your phospholipids are carrying things. These are lipoproteins. They're carrying things like omega-3 and triglycerides and stuff and shuttling 'em around. The Omega-3 Index is actually in the red blood cells, and red blood cells take 120 days to turn over. So, if you're going to do a baseline test, if you want to know before supplementing what your level is, you have to wait 120 days before doing the second test after supplementing to know how much you went up because that's how long it takes for your red blood cell to turn over. So the Omega-3 Index. Bill Harris has a company that he co-founded. It's called OmegaQuant, and they measure the Omega-3 Index. They have a variety of different index tests. You can do a basic one or a little more advanced. - This is from a blood draw. - It's a little blood spot thing, yeah. And he uses money to funnel back into doing lipid research. He's out there doing all sorts of interesting studies on omega-3s, so it's great. But the Omega-3 Index is great. I think that, honestly, more people and more researchers should be using it because the conflicting data, it always comes down to what we're measuring, the sensitivity of it. Are we even measuring anything? So you're giving someone 500 milligrams of DHA, and you don't see any effect. Well, did you measure what their levels were? And did you measure the Omega-3 Index? There's all sorts of problems with randomized controlled trials, and I think that we need to, as scientists, we need to come together and make some progress. I mean, you know? Let's all talk to each other. Let's figure things out. This test is out there. It should be used. It should be used not just by Bill's group, but everyone. - Yeah, well, and I'm learning so much from you. And I agree we need more collaboration. I've always enjoyed really fruitful collaborations in my lab at Stanford. Collaborating is just so much more fun. Online, there seems to be a bias more towards creating silos as opposed to bridges, but I appreciate that you bring up the need for more collaboration. And knowing which measures are best, and, in this case, now, thank you for the clarification, I understand this Omega-3 Index is going to be best. So, basically, now, when I look at you, I think, you are 16% omega-3. - And dolphins are 19%. I'm almost- - Is that your goal? You're trying to get there. - It is. [laughs] - Interesting. Actually, they should probably do something where you're trying to achieve the omega-3 ratio of your favorite species. Now that we've covered a bit of how to get these things into one system, depending on what one eats, et cetera, and some of the better measurements, how is omega-3 and some of these other related lipids, how are they having these positive effects? In my mind, and this is incredibly elementary, but my understanding is that, at some level, they're making platelets more slippery. Is that true or not? I'm happy to be wrong. How is it possibly impacting my mood? Is it through the synthesis of membrane on neurons that allows neurons to release more transmitter, like serotonin and dopamine? What are some of the purported, reported, and known mechanisms? - I think some of the most well-known mechanisms do have to do with the omega-3 fatty acids being very powerful regulators of the inflammatory process in some way, shape, or form, whether that has to do with resolvins that are produced from the metabolites of DHA, for example. Resolvins play a role in resolving inflammation. You want your inflammatory response to be activated when it's supposed to be, but you want to resolve that inflammation and the inflammatory response in a timely manner, right? And resolvins help do that. And so resolvins are one, and then there's these specialized pro-mediating molecules, the SPMs, that also help resolve the inflammation. There's, like you mentioned, the leukotrienes and prostaglandins, and these things are being affected by EPA, and they do affect platelets and platelet aggregation, and they do affect that whole pathway as well. I think there's just so many different ways and inputs. And so, when we talk about inflammation, honestly, that's a big general term, but when you're talking about serotonin release at the level of neurons, we know that these inflammatory molecules cross the blood-brain barrier. I just mentioned ago about injecting people with lipopolysaccharide and causing and depressive symptoms. It's known that omega-3, actually specifically EPA, is able to help serotonin. Inflammation inhibits the release of serotonin, and so EPA is actually able to blunt inflammatory responses along with DHA as well. DHA does that through resolvins and stuff. And this then helps more serotonin be released because you're not having so much inflammation getting into the brain and affecting serotonin release, right? That's one mechanism. And then, another would be, well, DHA itself has been shown, it's a very important fatty acid that makes up cell membranes, many cell membranes, including in our neurons. And, as you very well know, Andrew, the structure and function of receptors of transporters, these membrane-bound proteins on the surface of our cells, including neurons, are affected by the membrane fluidity, like how rigid and how fluid the cell membrane is, and DHA plays a role in that. And so, for example, in animal studies, if you make an animal deficient in DHA, their serotonin receptors, dopamine receptors, they're affected because the structure of them is affected through the fluidity of the membrane. And so I think that's another mechanism. And I'm talking sort of general 'cause I'm not a neuroscientist. - No, but it makes perfect sense. We know, for instance, neuroplasticity almost always involves the recruitment of more receptors or an improvement in some feature of receptors to neurotransmitters. And they literally move laterally in the membrane. They kind of float around like little rafts. Sometimes they are, in fact, in lipid rafts. So it makes perfect sense that these molecules like DHA, which are part of the structural fat of the neuron, because, of course, the outsides of neurons are basically fat, not just the myelin that people have heard of, but the actual membranes, that getting that right, you wouldn't want it as rigid as concrete, but you wouldn't want it as soft as... Need to come up with something here. What's that gooey stuff that kids play with? It's like that goo. Anyway. - Oh, yeah. - Yeah, it's disgusting, and it's too soft to be a membrane for a neuron. - You get it in those machines, like the claw machines. - Someone put it in the comments and tell me what that disgusting gooey stuff is. You don't want your neurons to be that gooey, and yet you don't want them to be like concrete either. - It's a balance. Yeah. - It's a balance. And, in mentioning DHA, I realize I'm backtracking, but I want to make sure that we close all the hatches for people. We talked a lot about EPA, but are food sources of DHA that you find particularly attractive, either by taste or by potency for DHA, what are just a few that we could throw out? Because I am aware that there are supplements where you can get a nice ratio of EPA to DHA, or you take them separately, as you do. But if I want to make sure that I'm getting enough DHA, what do I need to be sure I'm eating on a regular basis? - Well, the fish is packaging the DHA and EPA in the ratio, but I also do eat salmon roe, which is very salty, and it's a really high source of the phosphatidylcholine DHA that we talked about. - So this is fish eggs. - It is, and actually- - [Andrew] That I like for some reason. - Oh, do you? - Yeah, so I'm discovering something about myself. This was not meant to be nutritional psychotherapy, but you're doing that for me anyway. I'm discovering that, yeah, I like eating embryonic fish. I just don't like eating the actual fish. - Okay, well. - Okay, so fish eggs are okay. So caviar, basically. - Caviar, yes. And that's a good source of the phospholipid form. And I was consuming that a lot because I wanted to get the phospholipid form. - [Andrew] Yum! - And it's actually really good. There's been some animal studies in piglets and rodents as well showing that consuming phospholipid DHA during fetal brain development gets like 10 times more DHA in the brain. Again, it's- - Makes sense based on fetal development. So, do I need to buy beluga caviar? Stuff can get pretty expensive at $200 a tin. - I don't think you need to. I think it's a matter of preference. And if you're supplementing with your two to four grams of fish oil, I mean, you're going to get phospholipid form anyway 'cause your body's going to make it. - Okay, I've seen some containers of what I assume to be quality fish eggs that are not at the caviar level that you can find in the better grocery stores that aren't super expensive. - [Rhonda] Right. - I wouldn't dip as low as to go eat, for instance, like fishing bait. Like, when we were kids, we used to go fishing, and you'd put the fish egg on the thing. That's probably not good. - No. - Although it's good enough for the fish apparently. Okay. Only half joking here, folks. I'm just trying to protect you from yourselves. Don't get any crazy ideas about eating fishing bait. Okay, so that's great to know. So we have these plant-based compounds, we have the omega-3s, so EPA, DHA, and then you mentioned there's a third category. What would you place in your third category of foods or supplement-based nutrients that our health, brain and/or body health, can really benefit from? - I mean, I think the most obvious would be vitamin D, which is actually, as you know, a steroid hormone that we produce when we're in the sun. Depending on the time of year, we can make it in our skin. And depending on how much melanin we have on our skin, or whether or not we're wearing sunscreen or how old we are, there's a sliding scale on how efficient that process is. - As I understand, there's an inverse relationship, where the darker your skin is naturally, the more vitamin D you need to consume. Is that right? - Well, the darker your skin is, the harder it is. So there was a study out of the University of Chicago, this was several years ago, where they looked at African Americans and compared African Americans to Caucasians with light skin, fair skin, and how well they could make vitamin D from sun exposure, and how long they had to be in the sun to make X amount. And it turns out that African Americans with darker pigmentation, which protects them from the burning rays of the sun, it's a natural sunscreen, had to stay in the sun six times as long as someone with none of that natural sunscreen. So I think the take-home there is a lot of people with darker skin living in Sub-Saharan Africa, or people living in India with darker skin, or in the Philippines, you know, these equatorial regions where you tend to see darker skin because it's protection from the burning rays of the sun. - An adaptation. - They are in the sun more, and they're getting more vitamin D, but people that maybe moved to United States, to like Minnesota, or in a place where UVB radiation isn't getting to the atmosphere 12 months out of the year. It's only getting there four months, for example. Or even living in our modern day society, where people just don't go outside anymore. I mean, we're inside. We're at our laptops in school. We're at work. We're in our cubicle, whatever. So supplementation does play a major role, not only for people with darker skin that aren't outside all the time, but for everyone. 70% of the US population has inadequate vitamin D levels. 70 of the whole US. - [Andrew] Amazing. - So this is everyone. And so I think that insufficient levels defined as less than 30 nanograms per milliliter, and that's defined by the Endocrine Society, looking at a lot of different aggregate studies, all-cause mortality, for example. There's been a lot of different meta analyses of all-cause mortality studies, where vitamin D levels really seem to be ideal between 40 to 60 nanograms per milliliter. And so, in order to get to that level, if you are not outside all the time, live in Southern California, where you're always outside without sunscreen on. I always wear sunscreen because I'm trying to protect my skin from so many wrinkles and stuff, but also skin cancer is somewhat of an issue as well. So, basically, the point is that vitamin D is a steroid hormone, meaning it actually binds to a receptor and another receptor dimerizes with it, the retinoid receptor, and that complex goes into the nucleus of a cell, where your DNA is, and it recognizes little sequences of DNA called vitamin D response elements. They're called VDREs. They're specific sequences of DNA that this complex, vitamin D bound with the vitamin D receptor, goes inside and recognizes and turns on a whole host of genes, turns off a whole host of genes. I mean, this is important stuff. Imagine 70% of the population having insufficient testosterone, right? It's a steroid hormone. - We might be headed there, but probably not. No, I think that names are very important, and I think that one of the issues is that vitamin D is called vitamin D. It's not called DHEA or variant blah, blah, blah. It doesn't sound like a hormone. I'm glad that you're mentioning skin as the major interface between the environment and vitamin D synthesis because a lot of people think of skin as just a protective sheath around us or something to adorn ourselves with earrings or tattoos or whatever, but skin obviously serves those roles, but the skin is an endocrine organ. It has the capacity to make things that impact hormones and to make hormones. There's this beautiful study out this last year. This took place over in Israel, where they had people get outside for 20 or 30 minutes a day, three times a week, exposing a culturally acceptable yet substantial amount of their skin during that time, and saw big increases in testosterone and estrogen. And this is through a keratinocyte-linked pathway involving p53. This was done in humans, but they did some knockout studies in parallel. And what this study told me or reminded me is that skin is an endocrine organ. So the idea that sun could trigger the activation of production of a hormone is really interesting and makes total sense. So, when vitamin D gets into cells, and it's binding to these VDR - [Rhonda] Es. - Es, what sorts of things are they triggering? So, for testosterone, we know it's going to trigger protein synthesis, muscle growth, tendon strength, et cetera, With estrogen, it's going to keep your neurons going, your joints feeling good. I always remind people that, by the way, 'cause guys always seem to want to increase their testosterone and reduce their estrogen. Just remind people, if you reduce your estrogen, guys, your libido will plummet to near zero. Don't crush your estrogen. It'll also make you stupid. If you're not already stupid, it will make you stupid. So estrogen's vitally important for males and females. When vitamin D gets into cells, what sorts of things is it stimulating? - Okay, so, first of all, it's regulating more than 5% of the protein-encoded human genome. I say more than because, when I was looking at this data really in depth starting in 2012 to 2014, it was that, and then it's now grown. But one of the important things that you'll find interesting that I published on back in 2014 was that I'd gone through this big, published database, where someone had published all these genes they found VDREs in, and basically I found that tryptophan hydroxylase-1 and tryptophan hydroxylase-2 was on there. And so then I started looking at the sequence, and I was doing some in silico work, and it turns out that the VDREs in tryptophan hydroxylase-2. So, for people listening, tryptophan hydroxylase is an enzyme that converts tryptophan into serotonin. So tryptophan is an amino acid that we get from our food. You convert tryptophan into serotonin in the gut, but you also do it in the brain. However, serotonin does not cross the blood-brain barrier. So tryptophan has to get into your brain, and then you have to convert it to serotonin in your brain. Well, the enzyme that does that in your brain is called tryptophan hydroxylase-2, and it's activated by vitamin D. The one in the gut is actually tryptophan hydroxylase-1. Some of my published work hypothesized that it might actually be repressed by vitamin D because it has a sequence. The sequence itself, this 12 nucleotide sequence, can determine, to some degree, whether it's going to be activated or turned off. And I was able to kind of look at that and think, oh, maybe this and that. Since then, there have been some groups that have confirmed more with in vivo and/or in vitro studies. Mine was all in silico and all that stuff, but anyways. So serotonin, a really important one. This is regulating our immune cell, immune system. It's regulating our blood pressure. That's water retention. Bone, of course, homeostasis. 5%. More than 5%. I can't tell you. Like, so much. - And with 70% of the US population deficient, I'm beginning to think that this could be the linchpin on a number of really important issues. So supplementing vitamin D3 is what I normally hear. I do. I think I end up taking 5,000 IUs, sometimes 10 IUs of vitamin D3 per day. Just done that for a long time, and I've had my levels tested and they're in range. But I have a family member, I'll just mention this. I have a family member who was not feeling well, just kind of feeling off, a little low, had some digestive issues, this went on a long period of time, was taking, on my recommendation, 15,000 IUs of D3 and was still deficient in D3. Now takes, and I'm not suggesting anyone do this. This is a special case, perhaps, but no chronic illness that we're aware of. Needs to take 30,000 IUs per day in order to bring their D3 range just into normal, which, to me, is striking because they eat quite well, they're a healthy weight, et cetera, and it's made a tremendous difference in terms of their mood. Now, of course, this is correlative. Now they feel better. They're doing it. Who knows? They're probably also getting outside more. But I think people need to get tested. They need to get their D3 levels tested. But where and what is a good starting range for people to think about D3 supplementation, and, again, foods that can increase D3? - So vitamin D3 is a good way to supplement with it. Vitamin D2 would be a plant source. You often find it fortified in foods like milk, usually D2. - Does anyone still drink milk besides kids? - Out here, it's like you can't find cows milk. - [Rhonda] I mean, all the lattes that you're getting. - Oat milk, soy milk. What's the other one? - [Rhonda] They're fortified in those as well. - Oh, they are. Okay. - [Rhonda] They are, yeah. They're fortified in- - I have a hard time finding cows milk. - Almond milk and oat milk and all that stuff, yeah. They're in all that stuff. Vitamin D is naturally to some degree in fatty fish. You think about cod liver oil, right? It has vitamin D, but you're not going to correct a deficiency with eating fish for your vitamin D. You're either going to correct it with sun exposure, being in the right area, having the right amount of sun, and being the right age, because, as you get old, you become very inefficient at converting vitamin D, making vitamin D3 in your skin. - Well, that's probably what was going on here 'cause this person is getting up in their age. - There's a lot of single nucleotide polymorphisms. We talked about APOE4 before previously, but there's a variety of genes that people have, very common, actually. In fact, I've had many people that have done that exact same thing. So measuring your vitamin D levels before and after supplementation is the only way you're going to figure that out, right? Very important. If you don't measure it, you don't know. You can't know what you don't measure. So there's a variety of SNPs that basically make that conversion inefficient. And, in fact, there've been a lot of these Mendelian randomization studies. So these are studies where scientists will look at commons SNPs, people that have these common variations of a gene. That's more than 1% of the population. So it's not a random mutation. It's actually found in a sizeable percent of the population. And then, they've looked at various outcomes. And a lot of times, they'll look at genes that are also involved in some kind of lifestyle factor, so vitamin D, and SNPs that basically make the conversion of either vitamin D precursor into D3, or D3 into 25-hydroxy vitamin D, or into the active steroid hormone, which is 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. And there's a variety of different SNPs that show. So you're not looking at vitamin D levels at all. You're looking at just the SNPs. And you know, if they have it, they have low vitamin D. So it's really a way of doing a beautifully randomized controlled trial with an observational study because you're not biased. Vitamin D levels are also associated with health. People that have higher vitamin D are either outside more, they're more physically active, or they're aware of their health and their supplementing, right? So you always have to worry about that when you're doing an observational study. Dealing in randomization is beautiful for that reason, where you're now just random. People randomly have these genes, and there's no health status. If you have the SNP, like your friend, like your family member was healthy and all. They were healthy, and yet they couldn't get their D levels up, right? So these Mendelian randomization studies have found that people that can't convert into the precursor, the 25-hydroxy vitamin D, which is usually what's measured. It's the most stable form of vitamin D in the body. They have a higher all-cause mortality, if they can't do it. So people that don't have it have a lower all-cause mortality. They have a higher respiratory-related mortality. They have a higher cancer-related mortality. So, to me... Now, why did I get on this rant? Oh, because your family member. So, basically, they also are more likely to get multiple sclerosis. This has all been done with Mendelian randomization. And so it really does hammer home the importance of measuring your vitamin D levels and being very proactive about that. I mean, you can get it done anywhere. Your doctor will do it. You ask 'em to do it, you know. So supplementation wise, typically, if you don't have one of those SNPs, for the most part, taking 1,000 IUs of vitamin D will raise blood levels by around five nanograms per milliliter. So let's say you're deficient, you're 20 nanograms per milliliter, and you want to get to 40. You're going to need at least 4,000 IUs, if you are normal and don't have any of these SNPs that change your metabolism of vitamin D, right? - Does it matter when you take it relative to sun exposure, time of day, with or without food? - I've seen some not so great preliminary evidence suggesting maybe time of day is important. I don't think it. Like, I can't seem to find anything that really suggests. Because for it to actually be converted into the hormone, I mean, it's stored. - It's slow-acting. These steroid hormones are slow-acting. - Yeah, it's not like immediate thing. So maybe we'll get some new data that's like otherwise, but I just don't, yeah. - It simplifies the problem anyway. So, for people who are going to be stubborn and not get their D3 levels tested or their D levels tested, and simply say, "Oh, I'll just take some D3." That was me, by the way, until I got tested. I threw 5,000 IUs into the mix and figured, well, it's not going to kill me. It'll bring my vitamin D levels up. I realize that's a bit of a coarse way to approach it, but I feel fine, and I'm still breathing and ambulatory. So, is that reasonable? 1,000 to 5,000 IUs for most people will be reasonably safe. Again, just assuming that people are going to just jump to it without the blood test. - Of course, I think that, if we look at the literature, the scientific literature, it is extremely hard to get hypercalcemia, which would be the major concern with really high levels of vitamin D3 supplementation. I mean, we're talking like hundreds of thousands of IU a day for a long time. - Hundreds of thousands. - Yes, yes. Now, the upper tolerable intake was set by the Medicine Institute to be 4,000. It was kind of like one of those things where it's safe. I personally take 5,000 IUs a day as well, and my levels really hover around 50 nanograms per mill. I don't put sunscreen on all the time. I do put it on my face and I wear a hat, but some of my skin is being exposed, so I do make it from the sun as well. - I'm glad you brought up the fact that you keep arms exposed. Because, in these studies that I mentioned before, looking at sun exposure on skin and increases in other hormones, testosterone, estrogen, mainly, it became clear from looking at those data that the amount of skin that you expose is important, which makes perfect sense once you hear that, but I think most people are thinking, oh, I'm out in the sun, but are you wearing shorts and a t-shirt, or are you wearing a sweatshirt and it's a hoodie? Are you all covered up out in the sun? Well, that might be great for setting your circadian rhythm by way of light through the eyes 'cause that's the primary mechanism for that. But seems to me that the more of your body surface that you can safely and appropriately, please, folks, appropriately expose to the sun, the more vitamin D you're going to create. So laying out on your back deck in shorts and a t-shirt with arms exposed and legs exposed is a very different stimulus than walking around in jeans and a sweatshirt. - Absolutely. - Right? Okay, okay. Especially if you have sunscreen on your face. I know it almost seems like trivially simple, but I'm not sure that people are used to thinking about their skin as a interface to create these hormones. - Yeah. - So surface area matters. - And by the way, there have been studies looking at people that are deficient in vitamin D. In this case, it was African Americans that were given a 4,000 IU a day vitamin D supplement to bring them back to sufficient levels. This was a smaller study than I would like, but it reversed their epigenetic aging by three years. Because, again, it's a hormone. It's regulating more than 5% of your protein-encoding human genome. There's been studies looking at vitamin D receptor knockout mice. And I use this a lot in my presentations when I'm talking about vitamin D and longevity. If you look at these animals, the vitamin D receptor, as I mentioned earlier, vitamin D binds to the receptor, and then it complexes with the retinoid receptor, and they go into the nucleus as a complex and turn on and turn off genes. Well, if you get rid of that receptor, which is what you can do in animal studies, you can determine what effects there will be with no vitamin D. Like, how do you study no vitamin D? And so what was found was that these animals, and, in fact, I don't think it was a complete knockout 'cause I think it might be embryonic lethal, but- - [Andrew] Some hypomorph. - Yes. - Which is basically geek speak for a gene is vastly reduced in its function, number and function, number, people know what I mean, but isn't eliminated completely. - Right, well, these animals, if you look at them after the age of four months, I mean, the mice look like. I mean, they're accelerated aging. They're wrinkled. They have no hair. Their lifespan's shorter. I mean, you can look at this animal and not know anything about mice or work with them and be like, "That animal looks like it's..." Of course, mice lifespans are only like two, two and a half years, but, like, 500 years old. - Looks like it went to graduate school twice. - [Rhonda] Yeah. - Actually, graduate school's a lot of fun. I like to think I aged backwards in graduate school, which is not true. I look at the photos. I definitely aged forward. You, on the other hand, look exactly the same way you did 10 years ago. I'm not saying that to flatter you, but it's absolutely true. I mean, the data or the data. It's remarkable. So I'm definitely going to try and get my omega-3 percentage up there. I'm not going to hinge it all on that, but clearly you're doing a lot of things right. So, if I'm taking vitamin D3, I still need to get out into the sun. Correct? - Absolutely. - Okay, I think a lot of people don't know that, or, at least, I have family members that have been a little bit resistant. Like, "I take my vitamin D "so I don't need to get outside as much." I think people are really afraid of getting out into the sun because they're worried about melanomas. And, to be honest, I'm as scared of sunscreen as I am of melanoma. Some of the things in sunscreen are really spooky, mainly the compound. And here, I'm not one of these conspiracy. I drink tap water. Listen, folks. People cringe, but I drink tap water. I have the occasional croissant or donut. 90%, 80% of the time, I'm doing the right things, the right way, I think. Although, I'm now going to improve on them with this new knowledge. But I don't like what I see in most sunscreens. Because, if you look at these compounds, they cross the blood-brain barrier. I don't want compounds crossing the blood-brain barrier. - Titanium dioxide? - Dioxide, some of the triclosans that are also in these cleansers. I mean, once you know a little bit about neurons, folks, you realize the neurons you got are basically the ones you've got for your entire life. There's a reason why there's a blood-brain barrier, a blood-ovary, and a blood-testes barrier. It's because the genetic material resides in the testes, the ovaries, and the brain. Those neurons don't turn over. There are a few new neurons but not that many unless you're a mouse, frankly. And so protecting those is very key, and a lot of the things in sunscreen are downright dangerous. So I think there are sunscreens that are safe, but it's very hard to figure out which sunscreens are free of these compounds. I'm amazed that they're still on the market, frankly. - I've always geared towards the ones with the minerals that are reflecting it. It is somewhat difficult to penetrate things all the way through the skin and get into the bloodstream, but I don't know. Maybe some of these compounds get in there easily. I have seen the evidence with some of those things. - Yeah, there is some evidence they go transdermal. - And they get in. Okay, well, I know that some of them react with the sun and, while they do protect from the UVA and/or B, they form massive reactive oxygen species and carcinogen. I mean, it's like the very thing you're trying to protect yourself from might actually cause- - [Andrew] Right. - We don't know. It's completely speculation. There is, I think, some more and more evidence coming out with some of those compounds. I can't remember all of 'em off the top of my head, but a lot of high-end ones also have. It's the chemical sunscreen ones. - Right, right. - [Rhonda] The chemical ones. - I'm proposing that we do a journal club. A journal club, folks, is where academics get together. Well, they read papers, then they get together, and they pick apart the papers. There's a strong correlation between being an early graduate student and being the most critical. 'Cause once you've actually published some papers, you realize that, most studies, people are doing their best within the context of what they can do. But it'd be great to do a journal club at some point about sunscreens 'cause I'd love to really figure out what's in these compounds. People are using them like crazy. And I'm not one of these people who's like, oh, I won't use commercial toothpaste or anything like that. Like I said, I drink tap water. I use commercial toothpaste, whatever. But when it comes to sunscreen, it freaks me out because some of these compounds do go transdermal and some of them cross the blood-brain barrier, and I'd like to keep my neurons free of that stuff. Anyway, we're speculating now. - Wear a hat. - Wear a hat, but get out in the sun and get your D3 levels up. Okay, so, we talked about these plant-based compounds, the omega-3s, and D3. Unless there's something else that you just absolutely must throw into the mix, I probably will return us to the conversation that I opened up with, which was about cold and heat, which, admittedly, I pulled us off that path, so I take full responsibility for that. But before I do that, I just want to offer you the opportunity. Is there anything to supplement-based or food-based compounds that you think are especially useful for brain and/or body health? - I do think magnesium is important in there as well. I mean, I think, again, about 40% of the US population doesn't get enough magnesium. It's an essential mineral we're supposed to be getting from our diet. - Involved in everything. - It is. It's also involved in vitamin D metabolism. And, in fact, being deficient in magnesium may make it more difficult for you to actually make vitamin D hormone, so that 1,25-dihyroxyvitamin D. So one of those other factors, again, we talked about genetics, but there's also magnesium status as well. Considering 40%, that's a big number. Now, magnesium's also involved in making ATP, the energetic currency of our cells. Basically, all of our cells need ATP to do anything. It's also involved in utilizing ATP as well as DNA repair enzymes. These are enzymes that are involved in repairing damage to our DNA. I personally think that magnesium insufficiency causes an insidious type of damage daily that you can't look in the mirror and see. When you're deficient in vitamin C, you're like, "My gums are falling apart. "I have scurvy, right?" But you can't see DNA damage. You can't see it, but it's happening. It's happening right now in my body, and it's happening in your body. It's happening. Normal metabolism is happening every day. But we repair that damage. We have repair enzymes in our body called DNA repair enzymes. They require magnesium. Magnesium is a co-factor for them. What that means, a co-factor means, enzymes need it to function properly, and so, without that co-factor, they're not doing it properly. The way I like to think about magnesium. It's easy. 'Cause people go, "What food should I eat?" Naturally, that's the next question. Well, magnesium is at the center of a chlorophyll molecule. Chlorophyll is what gives plants their green color. So dark, leafy greens are high in magnesium. Basically, what does the 40% insufficiency in the US tell us? People aren't eating their greens. They're not eating their greens. They're eating their packaged food. They're eating their processed food. The standard American diet isn't really high in dark, leafy greens. So dark, leafy greens are how I like to get my magnesium. I think it comes along with all these other important. I mean, you get calcium in them. You get vitamin K1. You're getting a lot of other micronutrients, and you're getting other compounds that we don't know about, and ones that we know about, like sulforaphane, right? - As with broccoli, do I need to eat the dark, leafy greens raw? And, in this case, I'm a little more open to it because I actually like the taste of, dare I say, kale. And kale's a dark, leafy green, right? - Yes, and it's high in lutein and zeaxanthin as well. - I'm a trichromat, meaning I'm not color blind, but I just want to make sure it falls under the strict category. 'Cause every once in a while, I'm like, "Oh, I eat my vegetables." I like avocados, and people remind me avocados are not a vegetable. I love vegetables also. So kale, what are some other examples? - Kale, spinach, chard, like Swiss chard, rainbow chard, romaine lettuce. - Is the bitterness an important component to this? - For magnesium, no, but for sulforaphane, for cruciferous vegetables. That would be the brassica family. But your question about cooking them. So magnesium, it is bound to the food matrix, and it can be somewhat less bioavailable. So cooking it can somewhat release the magnesium, but it goes into the water too. So you have to either steam it or kind of like get your water in. - You can drink the water. - Yeah, I personally don't worry about it. - Okay, great. - [Rhonda] I just don't worry. - Well, if you don't worry, I'm not going to worry. - But I also do supplement with magnesium. So supplementation with magnesium, I mean, we could go on and on. Let's keep this short and sweet because we're going to get back to the other stuff. But it can cause GI distress at high doses. I personally like to take around 130 or 135 milligrams. That way, it's not like a huge bolus to my gut. - But I think it depends on the form of magnesium too. - Yes, yeah. I mean, you can take magnesium threonate, for example, and it doesn't affect the gut as much. - Magnesium citrate. - Citrate is what I take. - [Rhonda] I take Thorne. - It's a pretty potent gut stimulus. I feel like it's a little bit harder to digest. - 135 milligrams should be pretty good. And citrate, actually, oh boy, do we want to go here? - I mean, it's up to you. We don't have to. Personally, I've been supplementing with magnesium for a long time. I use threonate and bisglycinate and malate for different reasons. So, yes, I would love to go there if you're willing. - I would say malate would be the best, and that has to do with the short-chain fatty acids being good for the gut and a lot of work done by a former colleague of mine and good friend, Mark Shigenaga, showing that the short-chain fatty acid, citrate, malate, lactate, but specifically malate, really, and lactate are the major ones that get into the gut epithelial cells and are an energy source for the mitochondria and the goblet cells, so anyways, whole other topic. - That's okay. I take malate because I was told that it would be helpful. First of all, it doesn't make me sleepy like some of the other forms of magnesium, which act as a mild sedative for me. They do tap into the GABAergic pathway, a neurotransmitter, folks, that, in general, broad sweeping generalization here, can have somewhat of a sedative quality, which is why I take magnesium threonate and/or bisglycinate before sleep, 30 to 60 minutes before sleep. Definitely enhances my transition time to sleep and the depth of sleep. No question, in my experience. There's some data that threonate can be neuroprotective, although those studies are still ongoing. I'm getting the sense that maybe you're a little more skeptical of that than I am. - Yeah, no, I've seen the studies with the threonate. I think, looking at the actual data from the one clinical study, there wasn't statistical significance until all three of the pieces of data were pulled together, but that really could just be because their sample size was too small, right? - Yeah, I'm thinking that paired with the, there's some work- - [Rhonda] The animal stuff. - Yeah, Guosong Liu's work on. This is getting kind of inside ball of neuroscience. The quality of the labs matters, folks, and that's something that's not accessible to people outside of fields. Guosong Liu and some of the other folks at that time at MIT, I think very highly of their work. And so the animal studies are indeed just animal studies, but I was pretty impressed by what they did in those studies. Very pioneering when you think about this being done 10, 12, 15 years ago. And then, yes, we need more human clinical data. But, for me, I figured that, given the safety profile of mag threonate, given that it helps me sleep better, and sleeping better is just better for everything, frankly. That's why I take it. And bisglycinate and threonate seem to be somewhat interchangeable, but I don't know of any reports that bisglycinate can be neuroprotective. But malate I take during the daytime. For me, and, again, this is subjective, it has a tangible effect in improving the recovery time from exercise. I don't know that I've been sore from a workout since I started taking malate, and I used to get very sore from even kind of trivial workouts. So I don't know what's going on there, but I keep taking it. - Malate, again, the short-chain fatty acid, and when you do intense exercise, you release endotoxin from your gut. I'm just going back to the interesting work 'cause the malate being the short-chain fatty acid and Mark Shigenaga showing, this is all an animal research by the way, but it was feeding these animals malate. It really protected the gut, endotoxin release, and it affected metabolic syndrome and all sorts of things. But I think malates awesome, and I always try to eat green apples. They're really high in malic acid. - [Andrew] Oh, good to know. - And tart cherries. Tart cherries are really high in it as well. - They also taste really good. - But I was really interested in the magnesium threonate stuff. I take a supplement called Magnesi-Om by Moon Juice. And it's like a little powder. It's got a little bit of monk fruit, but it tastes good. So I do it a little bit before bedtime as well. Probably several more hours though because I don't like to drink tons and tons of fluids before I go to bed. And it has magnesium threonate, and a variety of other versions of magnesium in it as well, and I really like it. But I thought the magnesium threonate stuff was super interesting. I would love to see more clinical data as well, but I think, once we get it, it'll probably be like, oh yeah, it's getting into the brain, and it's awesome, so, you know, why wait? - And along those lines, I once put out a post that said, I feel like there are a number of different categories of health information consumers online and understanding which one you're in for which topic can alleviate a lot of the strain and stress of finding the information. There's some people that are perfectly comfortable with data from a mouse study. It's like, "If it's done in mice, great. I'll try it." Other people say, "No, it has to be done in humans." Double-blind, placebo-controlled studies. Randomized clinical trials, et cetera. Then, other people just say, "You know what? "I don't even care about any of that. "Just tell me what you do." And then, other people say, "You know what? "I don't even care what you do. Just tell me what to do." And then, there's this other category which are, if it's in pill form or powder form, they'll take it. And so I think a lot of the battles of people picking apart people's posts and things have to do with the fact that people don't realize that people are showing up to the table in one or some combination of those stances. We know people that will try anything, and we know people that won't take anything. So the idea here is to create an array of possibilities for people, and I think the animal data are very impressive. We should have you back on to talk- - I take it with the hope of, because I feel like the animal data is very promising. - Right, there you go. - And so I'm like, it probably is, so why not? - Well, and obviously you're doing things right. So cold and heat converge on some common pathways related to what you called intermittent challenge, which I love. I think, intermittent fasting, cold, heat, exercise, I mean, maybe even intermittent sleep deprivation. I keep waiting for the intermittent sleep deprivation movement. I will say, I pull a few all-nighters per year just for work demands and procrastination and deadlines. I'm the worst combination of academic 'cause I'm both a procrastinator and a perfectionist, so you end up pulling some all-nighters. The sleep I get the next night is pretty amazing. I must say, it's the sleep of gods, but I don't recommend anyone use sleep deprivation for that. But I could imagine that we also evolved having some sleepless nights. So this idea of intermittent challenge is a really attractive one, and I want to make sure that we credit you with the phrase intermittent challenge. - No, credit Dr. Mark Mattson. - Okay. Dr. Mark Mattson gets credit. - Who's published, and he has used that- - He used those words. - Oh, that phrase. - Yes. - Okay, great. We'll make sure. - Just like Dr. David Sinclair, I love the xenohormesis. It was in one of his publications so many years ago, and I just love it. Brilliant. A brilliant term. So Mark Mattson gets credit. - Those Harvard guys are pretty smart. I mean, it's a good school, I guess. Of course it's a good school. We will credit the appropriate people. Thank you for that clarification. So you've talked a lot about the use of what I call deliberate cold exposure, only to distinguish it from cold that you might just be accidentally exposed to, but it's sort of obvious when we say cold exposure. There are some amazing data on cold. The other day I saw a post from you, and you've included this in talks before. I did not know this until I learned it from you, so credit to you, that even 20 seconds of immersion in, I think, it was four degree. - 49 degree Fahrenheit. - 49 degree Fahrenheit. Okay, I was translating to Celsius, but 49 degree Fahrenheit water, so cold water, can lead to long-lasting increases in epinephrine, adrenaline, and I have to presume other neuromodulators and neurochemicals as well. What are some cold protocols that you find particularly interesting or attractive from the standpoint of, I dunno, pick your favorite, metabolism, neuro/mood effects, brown fat stimulation, which, of course, weaves back to metabolism. We could do an entire episode all about cold, but what I'd love to know is, what sort of activity or stimulus do you think is a reasonable and particularly potent one to use in terms of cold? - So, today, I did three minutes at 49 degrees Fahrenheit. I have a cold tub. - So you get in up to your neck? - Well, I try. I keep floating up. It's like really hard. I would say maybe most of my shoulder. I mean, really I'm floating up. I was telling my husband. I was like, "There's too much water in here for me." - Or too much salt in there? Is it like the Dead Sea where you float on top? - Is there salt in there? I don't know. He takes care of all the stuff that, you know. It's the Plunge. - By the way, the podcast nor I am sponsored by Plunge. They did give me one. That thing is fantastic. Also, 'cause it circulates the water. - It does. - Which makes sure that you break up the thermal layer, and it's even colder. - It is even colder. It sucks! Anyways, so look, I'll be honest here. I wish I did more cold than I do. I do cold when I'm going to go on a podcast. I definitely do cold when I'm going to do a podcast, when I'm going to give a talk or when I'm anxious. I need to make it more of a ritual. I love doing the sauna. I hate the cold. I hate it, unless it's summertime. It's a lot easier for me to get in the cold in the summertime. But what I do love about the cold is how I feel after. And I feel less anxious. I feel good. I feel more focused, which is why I'll usually do it before any type of public speaking, or when I'm just anxious, I'll just get in there. And so the 20 seconds at 49 degrees, I think it was 49 degrees Fahrenheit was really a good number because time and temperature, time, or duration, I guess, would be a better word, and temperature do matter, but you can do 20 seconds at a colder temperature, which is I prefer, or you can do a minute or longer at a warmer temperature. I think there was another study showing 59 degrees Fahrenheit at one hour was like two to three, but who wants to do one hour at 59? - Yeah, I'm familiar with that study. So this really reveals just how absolutely nerdy I am and maybe why some times and relationships in my life were challenged. I love reading the method sections of papers. So people can come at me with a number of things about papers, and I might miss something. Surely I miss certain things, like anybody does, but the methods I relish in reading the methods, and that paper is really interesting 'cause they had people sit in lawn chairs basically in swimming pools for an hour. It was chilly. It wasn't super cold. I mean 60 is not. It's not warm, but it's not ice-cold obviously. But an hour is ridiculous at some level. But the increases in dopamine were massive and lasted hours. So the mood enhancing effects that you report, you're not imagining that. Those are almost certainly a consequence of having slowly elevating but significantly elevated dopamine that goes on for hours. That's almost a dreamlike profile for dopamine. Because most everything else, like an Adderall or Ritalin, a cup of coffee and a pre-workout drink or something, is going to give you a big spike in adrenaline and dopamine and a big crash. And somehow, it creates this really nice, contoured profile. So whatever you're experiencing there is very nicely supported by the data. - Well, I need to get doing it more. I've had a couple of scary experiences going from hot to cold. - Can you explain? - Blood pressure changes, I think, where I basically went straight from a really hot jacuzzi. I was in there for like 30 minutes. I was doing heat stress. - Jacuzzi, okay. - Yeah, 104 degrees Fahrenheit. - [Andrew] That's toasty. - For 30 minutes, and then I went straight into, at the time, it was our pool, it was in February, it was wintertime, and it was 50. It was in the 50s. It was cold. And I was in there, and I was listening to Simon and Garfunkel, I was trying to stay in a long time, get on my cold, and I was trying to impress Dan 'cause he'll stay in there for like 15 minutes. - [Andrew] Wow. - But I started to feel really blinkey, like low blood pressure or something, and I got scared, so I got out, and then I couldn't stand, like I had vertigo or something, and I was so scared. I was so scared. And I've had a couple of times too where just going straight from the sauna to it, to the Cold Plunge, where I'm starting to feel, I'm like, ooh, I feel a little blood pressure change or something. It makes sense. The sauna is causing vasodilation and the Cold Plunge or cold exposure is causing vasoconstriction, so it's like a very just shock to my system. And so, now, I wait. I wait like a few minutes before going in. But I do need to kind of like make the cold more routine. Because I talk all about the science. I'm familiar with all the science, and the norepinephrine or noradrenaline, it's affecting brain and mood. You know way more about that than I do. I know how I feel, and I know it's a neurotransmitter, and it is released, at least, in rats, they've shown. Or was it mice? I think it might've been rats. But multiple studies showing that it's released from the cold in the brain. - And now, in humans as well. - Oh, in the brain, they've shown. - So, in that study, we could put a link to this, it's published in 2000 in European Journal of Physiology, that big dopamine increase. They also looked at epinephrine and cortisol and saw some really. Yeah, so this has been done. - They did brain. Oh- - [Andrew] Oh, no, no- - The plasma, yeah. Yes, plasma. - Very hard to measure dopamine directly from the brain unless you're doing microdialysis. No, unfortunately, unfortunately, their skulls were intact. Fortunately, for them, unfortunately, for the research community, their skulls were intact, so they couldn't measure directly in the brain. But obviously, there's a correlate there. It's a very real effect. But the advantage of not doing it too often is that you're not cold adapted. Now, it's very hard for anyone to get truly cold adapted. Some people start to look forward to the cold. And what I think they're looking forward to is the feeling afterward, that dopamine rush. But, if you get cold adapted, then it certainly blunts some of the effect. - But I want to be cold adapted because that means I have more mitochondria in my adipose tissue and perhaps even muscle. That's been shown. - So maybe there's a good opportunity to, so cold and UCP1, if you could educate us on UCP1. I find this really interesting, and I learned about it from you. - Yeah, well, so norepinephrine actually released in the plasma. It does act as a hormone. Vasoconstriction is one thing it does, but it also regulates a variety of molecular functions that have to do with adaption to cold, one happening to be, shivering is a very inefficient way to produce heat, which is what your body's trying to do when it's exposed to cold, and your muscles are basically contracting and producing heat from that, but that's just not very efficient. So the more eloquent way to do it, or elegant, I guess, way to do it is to basically have your mitochondria produce tons and tons of heat. So the way it does this is by activating a gene called UCP1, uncoupling protein 1. Norepinephrine is upstream of that, activating it. What that does is, essentially, so mitochondria are these little organelles inside of your cells that are responsible for producing energy. Usually, that's in the form of adenosine triphosphate, ATP, and that's what lets everything function inside of your body, from your neurotransmitter production to your heart beating, et cetera. However, you can uncouple your mitochondria. Basically, your mitochondria, they're like a little battery, so they have, well, they have a double membrane, first of all, their structure, but they have a negative charge on the inside, and they have a positive charge on the inner membrane, so in between the outer membrane and the inside part. - Like a neuron. - Like a neuron, yeah. - [Andrew] Yeah, cool. - So I guess, it's like a neuron. It's like a battery, negative and positive. Well, basically, you can uncouple that charge, and so that positive charge proton start leaking out of the mitochondria, and your mitochondria freak out. So this is called uncoupling it. It's maximum respiration, as we call it. They try to make as much energy. They're like, "I got to get that proton back, "that gradient, electrochemical gradient." And so they just go insane. In this case, it's uncoupled energy, so the energy they're making is actually heat, not ATP, but you're essentially burning substrate, so who cares? You're burning glucose. You're burning lipids. You're basically burning things and making heat. And so that's what uncoupling does, and that is a much more efficient way of producing heat than shivering. So, as you become more adapted, maybe the longer duration that you've stayed in the cold or the more times you've done it, you'll no longer shiver anymore. You will start to then just do this uncoupling type of thermogenesis, as it's called. And another type of adaptation that occurs is you actually produce more mitochondria in your adipose tissue. And that actually happens, also regulated by norepinephrine or noradrenaline, through a protein called PGC-1alpha. And what that protein does is it makes more mitochondria in your adipose cell. So, per adipose cell, you're getting more mitochondria. It's a beautiful way to basically make more heat. It's one of those things where it's like, your body's going, "Okay, I'm going to be exposed "to this cold next time. "How can I make sure I don't die? "Oh, I can have more mitochondria, "and I'm going to make more heat." And so you're making more mitochondria in your adipose tissue. And this is often referred to as the browning of fat. And the reason for that is because, if you look under a microscope at a lipid droplet, basically, a fat cell, not a lipid droplet, adipocyte, you'll find that it looks darker because there's more mitochondria in there. So it's referred to as browning fat. I don't want to get into the whole beige fat, brown. You know, there's this whole, I'm sure you've had experts on that talk all about that. - No, not yet. I always think of white fat, beige fat, brown fat. And beige is kind of, white can be converted into beige. - Right, and beige can take on thermogenic characteristics essentially, and so you can activate beige fat so that it's thermogenic in the sense that it's burning glucose and/or fatty acids and producing heat. So the more you expose yourself to cold, the more you can brown your fat, so to speak, and therefore you can tolerate the cold for longer periods, which people do notice, and you can then have the thermogenic qualities of having more brown adipose tissue or beige, activated beige, adipose tissue. You'll get a lot of naysayers out there saying, "Oh, brown fat doesn't regulate metabolism at all." And the reality is there's thousands of researchers trying to pill up brown fat and thermogenic. They're trying to make it a pill because it does affect metabolism. It's not the only thing. It's certainly, if you're obese and trying to lose weight, you're not going to do that just by doing cold exposure. You need to do dietary and exercise changes predominantly, but it does affect metabolism. And this has been shown in human studies, so it is an interesting, it's another possible mechanism for affecting metabolism, and that's an adipose tissue, but you also make more mitochondria and muscle tissue. And this is regulated, not via norepinephrine, but it is still PGC-1alpha, interestingly, not that anyone else really cares but me, and maybe you do, Andrew. - I'm eating this up. - So PGC-1alpha responds to norepinephrine in adipose tissue to make more mitochondria, but, in muscle tissue, it's unclear what the regulator is. Cold exposure does it. So this was shown at least in a couple of studies I've seen, where people that were exercising, I believe, or maybe it may have been men only that were exercising, did some training, and then did cold water immersion, something like 50 degrees Fahrenheit, 15 minutes, and PGC-1alpha, which is a biomarker for mitochondrial biogenesis, which is the generation of new mitochondria. By the way, that's awesome. You want more mitochondria in your muscle. It's associated with improved muscle mass, improved endurance. Mitochondria are essentially, they're making energy in your cell. We don't make more mitochondria normally. You have certain inputs, high-intensity interval training, exercise can do it. - Can actually make more mitochondria. - Yes, yeah, and that's been shown in people. - Weight training or just high-intensity interval training? - I haven't seen weight training. I've seen it in high-intensity interval training, endurance training, but that doesn't mean that it hasn't been shown, I just haven't seen it, or that it hasn't been looked at. - That's good to know. I'm always looking for reasons to finally do more HIT type, high-intensity interval training work. I do weight training, and I do low-intensity cardio. - There was a brilliant study by, at the time, he was a postdoc, Matthew Robinson, and he's now gone on to start his own lab at the University of Oregon Health Science Center. - [Andrew] Great place, yeah. - And he did a study where both young and older people, they had this whole high-intensity protocol, which I can't remember what it was, but their protocol for X amount of time. I'm sure it was at least a month. They then measured biomarkers of mitochondrial biogenesis in their muscle tissue, and the amount of mitochondrial biogenesis in old people specifically, it happened in both young and old from HIT, from the high-intensity interval training, was, I mean, it was enormous, at least 50%, I think. - [Andrew] Fantastic. - So it was just like, whoa! And so, why would you want that? Well, mitochondria, your cells are turning over. You make new cells. You replace old ones. With your mitochondria, you don't really do that for the most part. You can. Mitochondrial biogenesis does happen, but you have to stimulate it to happen. And what happens with your mitochondria is they essentially are bobbing around inside of your cells, and then they fuse with other mitochondria, exchange all their content, mitochondrial DNA, and then fizz back apart. And that's how they kind of stay young-ish. But, as you age, you keep doing that with the same pool of mitochondria, then you're going to get a bunch of old mitochondria mixing old stuff together, right? So, why wouldn't you want to bring up new, healthy, young mitochondria into that pool, right? So, in my mind, when I hear mitochondrial biogenesis, I'm like, aging. That's the first thing I think of. So, anyways, cold exposure does that. Other things as well, so. - Amazing. And please, thank you for offering to somehow filter the level of detail, but I assure you that listeners of this podcast are familiar with drinking from the fire hose of mechanism, and that was really helpful. And, again, this is just one example of maybe four or five other things that you've said, at least, that are going to inspire me to change my behaviors. I'm going to start doing some high-intensity interval training. Dr. Andy Galpin was on this podcast recently, and he told me that the subtle zone 2 cardio and the weight training's great, but that I really should be doing some max heart rate work per week, going into max heart rate for 90 seconds, then resting and repeating that, maybe even mild repeats. I'm just curious, as a brief aside, before we talk about heat, what sort of cardiovascular or other types of training do you do? Do you do HIT? I imagine you are doing high-intensity interval training. If you could just give us a sense of the contour of your week as it relates to exercise. Because you've been very gracious in sharing some of what you do for supplements and food, what about exercise? - So it all depends on my week, of course, and what I've got going on with my son and my work schedule. But I do a lot of high-intensity interval Tabatas on a stationary cycle. I use Peloton because I just like that instructor there telling me what to do, and then me competing with everyone else. I'm like, ah, you know? So it works for me. - You're revealing something about your psychology. This is good. We just learned about. So this podcast is actually just a decoy for psychological assessment of the guest. No, I'm kidding. So, now, we know you're competitive. Good. - [Rhonda] Yeah. - That explains a lot of how you got through graduate school and then do what you do. So you're getting on the Peloton, and what does it look like for someone who's not familiar with Peloton? I know what they are, but I've never been on one. You're pedaling against the instructor for how many seconds? - So there's a bunch of people that are online, either doing the class with you at the same time or all time doing it, so you can kind of toggle on what you want, and you can try to compete against the all time number. - So it's really competitive. - [Rhonda] Oh, yeah. - Okay. - And the instructor is just there to, like, whip you. You know, make you. The brilliance with Peloton is... I used to do what's called rush cycle. It's basically you go in and group cycle and have an instructor there, and you do all this high-intensity interval training stuff. And I loved it because there was a competitive aspect to it that had me working harder than I would work if it was just me in the room, like without an instructor or anyone there, and it was just like, I'm at a gym, any gym, and I'm just on a stationary cycle listening to a podcast, doing something, which is fine if that's your groove, right? But there is something about that group setting that kind of holds you accountable too, right? And the Peloton made it somehow virtual. It was amazing. And I remember being back at rush cycle, this is before pandemic, and people talking about Peloton in my class, and I'm like, "Oh, that's ridiculous. Why would I do that? "That's never going to work. I need to be here." And then, the pandemic hit and I was all over the Peloton, and it works for me really well. So I tend to do that at least three times a week. Sometimes I do it more, like I'll do four. And I do a 10 minute, just 10, because it's efficient, and I push my ass. I push myself really hard. - That's the Tabata. - It's 20 seconds on, 10 seconds off, and it's 10 minutes. - And on means you're pedaling like your life depended on it. - [Rhonda] You're maxing it. - And there's a lot of resistance in the pedals? - I always do resistance. I like the power. I do the power. There's a part where you're sitting cycling, and you're trying to go really fast, but I always crank the resistance up. I always go above what they give me. And then, there's a part where you're standing, and then you really crank the resistance up, which I really do, and you feel it in your glutes. - It's like going up a hill. - Yeah, exactly. And so they break it up, and most of the time you'll have those two parts. And I love the efficiency of it. You get it done. And people sometimes hear me, go, "10 minutes? "Oh, really? You think you work?" I'm like, look, you do max Tabata for 10 minutes, and it's intense. - Yeah, most people can't sprint for the gate of an airplane they're about to miss, carrying a backpack. So, if I think about that, and I've just described myself, sprinting through the airport and going, "All right, Andy Galpin, "I got my 90 seconds max heart rate in for you, "carrying this thing." But 20 seconds on, 10 seconds off, repeating that over and over for 10 minutes, so, by the time you're done, you're cooked. - And then, because I'm competitive during the recovery that they give you at the end, I'm pushing it max, so I get the numbers higher. - Great. So three times a week. - [Rhonda] It's a trick. - Yeah, three times a week, and then I always have my sauna on preheating up, takes about an hour and a half, and I get it to about 189 degrees Fahrenheit. I hop right in the sauna after my Peloton. - So the elevated heart rate continues. Is that the rationale? - Yeah, I literally down a bunch of water, and then I get in, and then I either read a science paper, prepare for a presentation or a podcast, or I hash over things in my mind. And it's interesting because something about getting in the sauna, I think the stress, the heat stress of it. So I started doing the sauna in 2009 in graduate school. - You're an early adopter. - I started doing it every day. I lived across the street. I lived in a studio apartment with Dan. We lived in this small studio apartment, smallest apartment you could ever imagine, and it was across the street from a YMCA, 'cause I was poor in graduate school, very poor, very poor. - I recall. I lived in my lab. - Wow, really? - But, then again, I lived in my lab as a postdoc. I admit, I lived in my lab with my bulldog as a faculty member for other reasons. But I get it. When you're a graduate student, you're poor, basically. - Yes, and so I used to go to the sauna before going into the lab, and I started noticing that I was, all of a sudden, able to handle stress better, like the stress of my six-month setback because of a failed experiment, which is crushing, on top of the pressure from my advisor and my own pressure 'cause I'm very competitive with myself, and I put a lot of pressure on myself. So I was having a hard time. I was very stressed out in graduate school. And this sauna started to really noticeably affect my anxiety and my ability to handle stress. And I was like, what is going on here? So I started looking into the literature and started getting interested in the effects on the brain. And, in fact, at the time, I had a friend who was not actually experimentally but theoretically looking into the opioid system. So, when you get in the sauna, you release a lot of endorphins. Endorphins are the feel-good opioids that make you feel good, but you also release something called dynorphin. And dynorphin is an endogenous opioid that binds to a receptor called the kappa opioid receptor. Dynorphin is responsible for that dysphoric feeling when you're in the sauna and you're hot, and when you're running, doing exercise, and you feel uncomfortable. Well, I think that's dynorphin. I'm speaking absolute, but I think it is. - No, I think it is. I mean, there's evidence in alcoholics that some of the symptoms of withdrawal that they experience are related to dynorphin. And dynorphin is known to negatively impact the dopamine receptor system. So, basically, it's the feel-like-garbage pathway. - Right, you feel like garbage, and so you think that that would not be good, but this is where my friend comes in. He was looking at the effects of treating morphine or heroin addiction. And people that are using those drugs, they, basically, the endorphins or the morphine or heroin, they bind to a receptor in the brain called the mu opioid receptor. And, as they take these drugs, that mu opioid receptor becomes downregulated, and so you need more and more of the drug to feel as good as you did. Well, endorphins also bind to that receptor. And he was looking into some of the other drugs that are like salvinoria, salvinorin, or something. Salvia it's called. It binds to the kappa opioid receptor. It also makes you kind of feel uncomfortable. Anyways, he had put some studies in front of me that showed basically binding of either dynorphin or whatever ligand to the kappa opioid receptor basically sensitizes the mu opioid receptor to the feel-good endorphins and also changes, I think it also upregulates it or something, so, basically, there's a lasting effect of feeling good. So the endorphins that you release later from hugging someone, or a joke you're laughing at, or whatever, you feel it for longer, right? And so, anyways, with respect to the sauna, it's a big sort of hypothesis of mine. I did kind of publish that part of my hypothesis in a review article, but I do wish more people would kind of look into that. That'd be amazing. But what I was getting at, I think, was, I would use the sauna to memorize things. This is way back in the day, and I still do it. And I wanted to talk to you about this because you're a neuroscientist, that there's something about being in the sauna. And I don't know if it has to do with the stress response. Like, when you have an emotional trigger, you remember things better, right? - Absolutely. There is a clear and known explanation mechanism for this. - So, in the sauna, you also release norepinephrine, just like you do in the cold. There's a lot of overlap. It is a stressor, but I use it to remember things. Like, I'm going through something. I want to go through a presentation, or a talk, or a podcast, or whatever. And I go in that sauna. And you should try it, if you haven't already. I don't know if you have. - I have a sauna and Cold Plunge now, and I haven't tried preparing. I read books in the sauna in the evening. It's a time I insist on having my phone out of there, initially because I thought I'd cook the phone, but also just to get some separation from the phone and screens in the evening, so I read books. The only challenge, sometimes you're dripping sweat onto the books, but I'm willing to forego a few pages of a book. The idea that being in this semi-stressful environment would aid in the learning and retention of information is really well substantiated. There's this beautiful work by a guy named James McGaw. I don't know if his lab's still active, but he was at UC Irvine for a while, and then I think at University of Arizona as well. They have a great memory group at both places, very strong in learning and memory, both places. And he was the one that really defined this kind of inverted, u-shaped function for the relationship between adrenaline and memory. Basically, if you're too relaxed and not stressed enough, you're not going to remember any information. At peak levels of stress, you actually are a memory machine, at least within the context of whatever it is you're trying to learn. So what you're describing very well matches with that. Then, of course, it tapers off as you really increase adrenaline to the point where people are starting to lose autonomic function, where they're panicking basically, but obviously, you're keeping it in range. The other thing that I would like to ask you about is, in the sauna, of course, there's vasodilation, and perfusion of blood to the brain is a wonderful way to enhance cognition. There's even some really nice data showing that, during inhales as opposed to exhales, people are better at learning information. Believe it or not, during the inhale, you're taking in and absorbing and remembering more than during exhales. And these are beautiful studies done in humans, of course. So I can imagine that vasodilation, getting more perfusion of blood to the brain, plus a little bit of stress, or maybe a lot of stress from the epinephrine, and then, of course, there's going to be the, I don't want to call it placebo, but there's going to be the context, the condition, place context of it. Like, if we had a good experience remembering something in the sauna once, the positive association effect of that location is real. Just like, if people go to a new city and they get robbed, like, if you go to Cincinnati, I've never been to Cincinnati, but you get robbed in Cincinnati, your purse gets taken or your wallet gets taken, you kind of hate Cincinnati as a tourist. But that could happen in any number of different cities, right? The opposite is also true, so if something good happens someplace. So I'm imagining that it's a combination of those effects, but it would be very hard to do this in the cold. I feel like the cold is a very potent. I think it takes you too far down that curve, the McGaw curve. - I have to sing songs or something when I'm in there. - [Andrew] Distract yourself. - Oh yeah, I sing songs. - But afterward, you're very efficient at learning. - After I am. With respect to the sauna, the vasodilation does occur, so there's a lot of overlap between moderate-intensity aerobic exercise and heat stress. As you can imagine, when you're exercising, you're elevating your core body temperature. You're sweating. When you're actually in the sauna, blood does get redistributed to the skin to facilitate sweating, but, much like exercise, blood flow in general is improved to the brain, to the muscles, everywhere. So, I think, generally speaking, and there's studies showing that sauna use is associated with a much lower risk of dementia and Alzheimer's disease. People that use it four to seven times a week have greater than 60% reduction in dementia and Alzheimer's disease risk compared to once- - Amazing, how many? Oh, sorry, I didn't mean to cut you off. You said people who use it, I apologize, but maybe you could tell us again, people use it four to seven times per week have... - They have a greater than 60% reduction in dementia risk and Alzheimer's disease risk compared to people that use it only one time a week. People that use it two to three times a week have something like a 20, a little greater than 20% reduction in risk. There's a dose-dependent effect on dementia risk and Alzheimer's disease risk. It also has a profound. There's a big link between the cardiovascular system and the brain. Obviously, blood flow, a big one, right? You need to get blood to your brain. But cardiovascular mortality, so mortality from cardiovascular disease. If people use, or actually this was men. If men use the sauna four to seven times a week, it's a 50% reduction in cardiovascular related mortality compared to one time a week. Again, dose-dependent manner, two to three times a week is something like 24% lower death from cardiovascular disease. There's also lower sudden cardiac deaths, like a heart attack. That's like 60 something, greater than 60% lower, if men use it four to seven times a week versus once. Again, a dose-dependent thing. The thing that's so profound there also to me when, again, looking at the methods, when I look at the data, and this is all work from Dr. Jari Laukkanen. He's in the University of Eastern Finland and just one of the world experts on sauna use, especially with respect to cardiovascular health. What some of his data has also shown is that, if you look at the duration, the time spent in the sauna, so I mentioned the temperature I do is about, I do 189 degrees Fahrenheit. Typically, I go in there. I'm pretty heat adapted. So the more you do the sauna or any sort of heat stress, whether it's a hot tub or jacuzzi, you become adapted. You basically start to sweat at a lower core body temperature to cool yourself down. All these sort of physiological changes start to happen earlier. And so, I stayed in for like 30 minutes, so I stayed in a long time. That's a lot. You have to listen to your body. Most of the studies that I just talked about, the duration, the time spent in the sauna, when I said 50% reduction in cardiovascular disease related death, what was shown was that men that were in the sauna for only 11 minutes, even if they used it four to seven times a week, that reduction was only like 8% instead of 50. It had to be greater than 19 minutes, so like 20 minutes is the sweet spot, at about 174 degrees Fahrenheit. And most of the saunas in Finland, by the way, they're humid, so they put hot water, they put water on hot rocks to create steam, so it's usually between 10 to 20% humidity in the Finnish sauna. So those studies were, I would say, most of the time, you're going to find that their humidity is also elevated. But, to me, the dose-dependent nature of it and the duration, to me, that's very strong data that this is more causal than some corollary thing. Because that's always the problem with observational studies, including these, which they corrected for a whole host of factors, like cholesterol, exercise, just everything, everything under the sun, they corrected for those. And, on top of that, you have the dose-dependent nature of the duration, the time spent in the sauna, and the frequency. So, to me, it's like, something's going on here. - Yeah. - Plus there's been studies, intervention studies, where it's comparing directly, head-to-head moderate-intensity aerobic exercise on a stationary cycle to 20 minutes in a sauna. Physiologically the same things happen, so heart rate elevates while you're doing the activity, blood pressure increases while you're doing the activity, but then, after, heart rate decreases, resting heart rate decreases below baseline, blood pressure is improved, so it decreases below baseline. This is happening the same in moderate-intensity cycling versus sauna. So, again, the sauna, this heat stress, there's something about it that really mimics this moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, which is really great for people that can't go for a run, that can't even get on a bike, so disabled people. Granted, there are some safety concerns. They're pretty mild, but they do exist. So people that had a recent heart attack or have some rare kind of heart disease or problem. Drinking alcohol, never do that. Elderly people prone to low blood pressure. Always talk to a physician before doing the sauna. It is stressful. - Pregnant. - Pregnant women, yeah. I definitely avoided saunas when I was pregnant. I think it's very relevant for disabled people and also people that are sedentary or been sedentary most of their life. Like, my mother, I've been able to get her in the sauna because she's not. I did get her on the Peloton once, but it's really much easier. She feels like it's a spa treatment, and she can listen to her music in there. Like, I care about her health, but she's mostly been a sedentary person. And so I find it much easier to convince her to get in the sauna than to get on Peloton. Ideally, you do both. The question would be, well, I exercise, I run, I do my high-intensity interval training. Why do I need to get in the sauna? And the reality is, and so I published all this in a review in the Experimental Dermatology last year, I guess, late last year. Basically, cardiorespiratory fitness, which is a marker of, it's a marker of health. Cardiorespiratory fitness is improved in people that do exercise and sauna compared to exercise alone or sauna alone. So, for those healthy, fit people out there already exercising, there's a synergistic effect by also adding a sauna into that routine. And, to me, that's great. And there's so many beneficial things happening with the heat stress. In addition to mimicking aerobic exercise, there's the heat shock proteins that we talked about earlier. And those, it kind of brings me back to my early days of science when I at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies doing research on little nematode worms that we or someone else injected amyloid beta 42, the peptide, the 42-amino acid peptide that is involved in amyloid plaques found in the brain correlating with Alzheimer's disease and other brain disorders. We injected those into the muscle tissue of worms. And, basically, these worms become paralyzed with age because the aggregated proteins, these proteins aggregate. Well, heat shock proteins, one of the main things they do is they basically make sure the proteins inside of your cells maintain their proper three-dimensional structure and are folded right, and so they don't, they're not prone to aggregating and forming these plaques in your arteries and also in the brain. Back to my worm studies I was doing, I would elevate heat shock proteins in these worms, and it would totally correct the problem, where they would no longer become paralyzed. They'd move around like they were young. So, many animal studies have been done looking at Alzheimer's disease, a human-like Alzheimer's disease in a rodent, and heat shock proteins protecting from it. Heat shock proteins are robustly activated in humans. This has been shown to, even 50% higher over baseline levels after just 30 minutes at 163 degrees Fahrenheit in the sauna. And they stay activated, at least, in rodents, for 48 hours, at least. So having these heat shock proteins around, making sure they're properly taking care of our proteins so they're not aggregating in our brains and in our plaques, could be another potential way that sauna's protecting from Alzheimer's disease and other cardiovascular health as well as longevity. There's people that have SNPs in heat shock protein factor 70 that, if they have one of them, so they got one from their parents where they have more active heat shock protein 70, they live on average one year longer than people that don't have that SNP. And if they have two versions, if they got one from their mom and one from their dad, they live on average two years longer than people that don't have that SNP. - [Andrew] Wow. - So it's also been associated with human longevity as well as in lower organisms. So you can heat shock a worm or a fly and they live 15% longer. This is work done by Gordon Lithgow at the Buck Institute years and years ago. So, anyways, I guess what I was getting at was the heat shock proteins are part of that stress response pathway that we talked about earlier. They're also activated by cold as well. Cold shock does activate heat shock proteins. Not as robust. Sulforaphane activates them. Again, it's one of the reasons I think we should get all of these things because they are more robust inputs. The input activating mechanisms are more robust for different ones. So there is crosstalk. I guess it'd be more accurate to say there's overlap. But it's also like, you want to get the most robust from all of them, right? I do, so that's why I want to do the sauna and exercise and eat my broccoli sprouts and all that stuff. - It's super interesting. A couple of questions came up for me. One is, you mentioned these SNPs, these nucleotide repeats, basically genes that some people have more of or less of than others that can predict longevity in some sense. Is that the FOXO3 pathway? - That's one that can. Yeah, I mean, FOXO3 is, in fact, if you go back to the worm studies I was talking about, that was one of the first things when you see it with your own eyes. You can take these worms that, you basically decrease their insulin signaling pathway and their IGF-1. Worms have what are called homologous genes, so they have a lot of similarities to humans. They have an insulin-like receptor, they have an IGF-1-like receptor, and they make something like FOXO3, which we have. And, basically, if you decrease that insulin signaling pathway, then FOXO3 is always active in those worms, and they live like 100% longer. And not only do they live longer, they are like a very young worm. I mean, you look at this thing and you're like, "This looks like the worm that was just born like hours ago. "What's going on? This thing's at the end of its life." Now, as a side note, the thing that always got me on this was, by the way, this was discovered by Cynthia Kenyon. This was back in the '90s. Honestly, I'm not sure that anything has been as exciting in the worm world since then, but I thought it was a really big finding. The only caveat there is that the worms go through this dauer. It's called a dauer stage when this happens, when you decrease their insulin signaling and stuff, and they go into this like metabolic stasis. They're not eating as much or moving. And so it's like, okay, well they live 100% longer, but they go into this weird state, you know? - I know people like this, some in the longevity community. They know who they are. But they'll get the last laugh 'cause I'll be dead, well fed but dead, and they'll still be going. So, in terms of the many data on sauna, and I also just want to acknowledge these Finnish groups that did this work. It's really pioneering, right? When you think 20 years ago, long before social media or any of this, and they're out there, up there, I should say, measuring cortisol and growth hormone and all this stuff in people getting in and out of sauna. Very, very interesting. So 20 minutes seems like the threshold at 170 degrees Fahrenheit. More times per week seems to be better than fewer in terms of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular risk according to what I just learned from you. - Four would be a good, I think, minimum effective dose. - Four times a week, and you combine it with the cold. I've also seen a protocol, where, it's a very extreme protocol, I don't recommend this to people right off the bat, where they had human subjects get into the sauna for 30 minutes, get out for five, 30 minutes, get out for five, 30 minutes, for a total of two hours of exposure, but that was what led to these massive 16-fold increases in growth hormone. And they had to do it very seldom. So it sounds like these protocols you're describing, 20 minutes done four times per week, are far more reasonable for most people to access. But I know people are probably desperate to know, what if they don't have a sauna? A sauna is kind of a unique item, so I have a couple questions. Can people use hot baths? With the appropriate warning, of course. Without getting into description of the mechanics and the underlying biology, it's pretty obvious that the testes, if they get too warm, you'll kill sperm. That's the reason why the testes are housed in a structure called the scrotum that can move around, so just to be, you know, we are biologists, just talking about realities here. So, if you're trying to conceive children or keep your sperm healthy, guys should probably stay out of warm, hot baths. - For at least six months. That's been shown. - [Andrew] Six months. - So sperm motility goes down and sperm production goes down, but that is completely corrected if they stay out of the sauna for six months. So through six months later, it's back to normal. - Great, that's a very useful information, I'm sure, to a number of people out there. So, if people don't have access to a sauna, and we get this about cold too. People always say, "What about cold showers?" And I always say, well, the studies have mainly been done on immersion 'cause it's hard to keep things controlled in cold showers. It just doesn't make for a very good experiment 'cause you get a bigger person, less of them is under the shower, and so it doesn't make for a good experiment. So it's not as good as immersion, but, with heat, I could imagine that a hot bath would work almost as well. - Yeah, so there's been some studies looking at, for example, activation of heat shock proteins, also brain-derived neurotrophic factor increases with heat stress. And so the hot bath at around 104 degrees Fahrenheit, which is typically what studies will use for temperature, which is actually cooler than what I. I crank my bath hot. It's so hot. - But you're very heat adapted. - I'm very heat adapted, yeah. And it's 20 minutes from the shoulders down, and that is a very robust activation in heat shock proteins and in brain-derived neurotrophic factor. And then, heat shock proteins are also protecting against muscle atrophy, so that's also having to do with the protein structure and the muscle tissue as well. And this has been studies in animal data as well as some recent human data as well. It was local hyperthermia or local heat treatment, but essentially it showed that it protected. There was a study where they were looking at muscle disuse, and it was something like the local heat treatment prevented almost 40% of the muscle atrophy from disuse. And it's funny 'cause I used to use the sauna when I was injured and stuff. I would go in the sauna. Because I didn't know at the time 'cause I was a graduate student, but I knew just from experiments that I'm not losing as much muscle. I feel better. At the time, I was reading all about the growth hormone and stuff back then. And I knew about heat shock proteins, so I kind of knew, but that data wasn't around yet, and so now we have the data. And I've always felt like I wasn't losing my muscle, like I should've been, when I was doing the sauna. And I was doing it literally seven days a week. It was hardcore. - This is also during graduate school? - Yeah, now, I'm doing the sauna, like a bare minimum, I do three, but I try to do four. It all depends on my schedule. I also like to do long runs. Long being like three miles, not like campaigns, which are long. But I really, for me, and we were talking about this earlier off camera that the runs, for me, are for my brain. And I'd get this mind-wandering effect, where I daydream and I think about things. I work through problems. I get creative. I come up with ideas. And this is all happening on the runs. And so I miss my runs if I don't do 'em, and I miss it because of the brain effects I get from it. And when I exercise, it's funny, because I'm a female, and you'd think that I'd be exercising to stay fit and in shape and care about my figure, but, when I exercise, literally what I'm thinking about is my brain. And I'm like, "This is the best longevity drug there is. "This is it right here, Rhonda. "You're always wondering. You're always wanting to know. "You're wanting to do the best." If you don't exercise, you're missing that essential dose. And so that, for me, is the motivation, the dopamine seeking thing I'm looking for. Admittedly, I do not do enough strength training. And I have to do it. Have to, have to, have to. I'm so after the endurance and the HIT, and I really need to add that in. Because muscle mass is also extremely important for aging as well, you know? So that's my fault. - Well, the brain effects are really interesting. I also run. I try and get one longer run per week and a few other runs, and I do it without a phone. I don't listen to podcasts. I occasionally will listen to music, but I really try not to. I also find that my mind solves problems. I feel like it washes out the cobwebs, so to speak. Some of the most brilliant and prolific neuroscientists that I know who've had very long careers. Eric Kandel, Nobel Prize winner at Columbia, comes to mind for all his work on memory, used to swim a mile a day, and now I think swims half a mile a day, but he's in his late 90s and he's still sharp, which is incredible. And his lab has done some work showing that any load-bearing exercise repeated, so endurance work, unlike the Peloton or cycling, that's really load-bearing, although you're cycling really hard with the resistance, but causes the release of osteocalcin from the bones, which acts in an endocrine way, sort of like a hormone, can actually travel to the hippocampus and, at least in these animal studies, induce the proliferation of neurons, growth of synapses, BDNF, a number of downstream things, which kind of makes sense, if we were to put a just so evolutionary story on this. A body that's active can signal to the brain that the body still needs cognition. An inactive body, in some ways, is depriving the brain of any signal about what the body is doing, right? Obviously, I'm making this up as conjecture, but we know in various ocean animals that they'll swim around for some period of their life, and then they'll have a completely stationary portion of their life, and basically, the brain degenerates. You don't need much of a nervous system if you're not moving. So I think there's really something there, and also just letting the ideas and mind drift. I love that you, and I appreciate that you shared your protocols, because I think, right now, we're in an interesting time in public health information history, where people are just kind of getting bombarded with cold is good, heat is gold. Cold is good. Heat is good. Excuse me, I misspoke. There are all these micronutrients, and, of course, macronutrients are important too. Today, you've really enriched us with the description of the underlying mechanisms and the logic behind them, but also sharing what you do is really informative because I think people need a jumping-off place, and obviously they need to start someplace, and getting heat adapted, et cetera, takes time. But I really appreciate that you're willing to share your protocols and that you do the things that you teach and educate people about. As a final question, because I have to ask, red light sauna or no red light sauna? I've been a little bit vocal about my feelings that none of the red light saunas I've ever been in got hot enough, and it was frustrating, so I feel like it's neither here nor there. However, I do acknowledge that red light and low-level light therapies are now known to do a number of interesting things. There was a Nobel Prize in 1908 for phototherapy for lupus, so it's not like a new thing the idea that light could do things positive for our biology. But, do you have a red light in your sauna? Do you think it's useful? And I mention this because this is the number one question I get about sauna, red light or no red light, or some intermediate answer. - So I don't have an infrared sauna, but I have a sauna that has lights. It makes red light, but I don't think it's the red light that you're talking about. - Okay. - It's not activating it at a specific wavelength, which is... - It's usually, so the range that seems to be helpful, and, I confess, I use a red light panel for other things, is 670 nanometer out to about 720 nanometer, so it looks like red and very dim lights, dim red and bright red. And the idea is that red light can travel, the photon and energy is such that it can travel down through the deep layers of the dermis of the skin. - I don't have a red light in my sauna. I don't know if it's essential or not. I don't think so. Based on all the studies I've talked about, I think, the potential effect on mitochondria is interesting. I do think there's a lack of really good, solid evidence in humans, but that might only be because it's just not studied enough. And that's usually the case, so perhaps. There's the Joovv, right? The Joovv. They have those red light panels and stuff. - Joovv and KOZE are the two ones I know, K-O-Z-E and Joovv. As far as I know, I'm probably going to insult both companies at the same time, but I'd rather insult them both at the same time than just compliment one or insult one. Both of them seem excellent for getting the appropriate wavelengths of red light. And I do not have a relationship to either of those. - Yeah. Well, I personally think that the sauna in and of itself, it's about the heat stress. And typically the question I get is, infrared sauna or regular sauna? And there are some differences as well. Infrared saunas. Maybe the infrared saunas are the ones that have the red light that you're talking about. Infrared saunas only get up to around 140 degrees Fahrenheit. So, as I mentioned, the studies were about 174 degrees Fahrenheit. And so you really have to stay in a longer period of time. However, there have been some studies coming out of Japan. They use infrared sauna. They have this whole protocol. It's called Waon therapy. They get people in infrared saunas, and then they wrap 'em in a towel, and they stay warm for X amount. So the whole protocol ends up being like an hour long, but, again, it's 140 degrees Fahrenheit, so it's an infrared sauna, and it's been shown to improve a variety of, like, coronary heart disease and conditions, heart-related conditions. There have been some improvements. So, obviously, there's evidence that infrared saunas can be beneficial for cardiovascular health. I've used infrared saunas many times at my in-laws. They have an infrared sauna. And I have to crank that thing up for a while until it's maxed, and then I have to sit in there for an hour at least. I do sweat a lot, and that's another thing we didn't talk about. You do sweat some heavy metals. And some heavy metals are excreted predominantly through sweat and others through urine. So, for example, cadmium, there's like a 125-fold increase in cadmium excretion from sweat when you get in the sauna. Also, lead is something like 17-fold excretions higher. Another one is aluminum. It's about fourfold higher. So infrared, you do sweat a lot too, and that's because the main difference is that you're heating your body up through thermal radiation versus the ambient air. A standard sauna is a heater, and the heater's heating up the air, and that's how you're heating yourself up. So it is a little bit of a different mechanism. I prefer regular saunas. Most of the data out there is from the heat stress itself. Like, your heart rate's elevating when you're in there. You're feeling hot. You're getting that cardiovascular. That's what you're feeling when you're in a hot sauna. And that, for me, takes a really long time in the infrared sauna, like at the very end. But I do think there are some benefits from infrared. And they are more affordable. They're less of a fire hazard. But, again, hot baths are, I think, a good alternative modality for heat stress compared to like a regular sauna. - Great, that's a really helpful answer. Like I said, I use the red light, but not in the sauna. And thank you for reminding us of that 174 degree Fahrenheit threshold that is mainly used in all these studies. We covered a lot of territory, but I just want to thank you again. It was extremely thorough and extremely informative. My notes always look a little bit like they were drawn out by a macaque monkey who has no knowledge of the English language, but I can decipher this to tell you that there are at least 10 additions to my current protocols that I'm going to add. And I'll have lots of questions, so I apologize in advance for that. But, on behalf of the listeners and just directly from me, thank you so much for your time. I learned a ton. - My pleasure. Thanks for having me on. It was a really awesome conversation, so I enjoyed it a lot. - Let's do it again. - Totally. - [Andrew] Great. Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick. I hope you found it as interesting and as actionable as I did. Once again, if you'd like to learn more about Dr. Patrick's work, sign up for her newsletter, and, to listen to her excellent podcast, go to foundmyfitness.com. You'll find links to the newsletter as well as the podcast there, or you can go direct to the podcast by going to FoundMyFitness on YouTube, FoundMyFitness on Apple, or FoundMyFitness on Spotify. And, once again, the newsletter is foundmyfitness.com/newsletter. If you're enjoying and/or learning from the Huberman Lab Podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific, zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And, on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If you have suggestions of topics or guests or feedback of any kind, please put that in the comments section on our YouTube page. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. As also mentioned at the beginning of the episode, we are now partnered with Momentous supplements. So, if you go to livemomentus.com/huberman, you'll find what we firmly believe to be the highest quality supplements available in the specific dosages that match the peer-reviewed science and recommendations made on various episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. You'll also find specific protocols of how much to take and when, what time of day, what time of night, et cetera. And you'll also find behavioral tools that can synergize with those supplements. Many of you will also be pleased to learn that Momentous supplements, of course, ships within the United States but also internationally. If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. It's hubermanlab on both Instagram and Twitter. There, I teach science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Thank you, once again, for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Rhonda Patrick, and, as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 278 ---
Video ID: EQ3GjpGq5Y8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EQ3GjpGq5Y8
Title: The Science & Health Benefits of Deliberate Heat Exposure | Huberman Lab Podcast #69
Published: 2022-04-25 12:00:11 UTC
Description:
I describe the mechanisms by which deliberate heat exposure impacts body temperature, metabolism, heart health, hormone production, exercise recovery, cognition, mood, and longevity. I detail specific protocols for deliberate heat exposure, including exposure times, temperature ranges to consider, time of day, and delivery mechanisms (sauna vs. hot bath vs. open air heat, etc.) in order to achieve different specific outcomes, including dramatic growth hormone releases, or reduction in cortisol levels. I also discuss the ability of locally applied heat to heal or otherwise improve various bodily tissues and new data on how local application of heat may induce the conversion of metabolically sluggish white fat to metabolically robust beige fat. 

#HubermanLab #Sauna
  
Thank you to our sponsors
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
Tuesday, May 17th: Seattle, WA
Wednesday, May 18th: Portland, OR  
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Momentous
I am pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous. Momentous supplements are of the very highest quality; each is third-party tested for purity and accuracy of dosage. To learn more about the Huberman Lab Podcast-Momentous partnership, the supplements I that take, and stay up-to-date with future product announcements, visit: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast:
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
Sauna bathing is associated with reduced cardiovascular mortality and improves risk prediction in men and women: a prospective cohort study: https://bit.ly/3EIC6C4
Endocrine Effects of Repeated Hot Thermal Stress and Cold Water Immersion in Young Adult Men: https://bit.ly/3LiREPt
Endocrine effects of repeated sauna bathing: https://bit.ly/3kaSD8C
Growth hormone response to different consecutive stress stimuli in healthy men: is there any difference?: https://bit.ly/3rNhSBU
Sauna Bathing and Risk of Psychotic Disorders: A Prospective Cohort Study: https://bit.ly/3vJN6Lg
Local hyperthermia therapy induces browning of white fat and treats obesity: https://bit.ly/3vFhLto

Timestamps
00:00:00 Heat & Health 
00:03:37 Momentous Supplements
00:04:52 The Brain-Body Contract
00:05:46 LMNT, InsideTracker, ROKA
00:09:31 Body Shell Temperature vs. Body Core Temperature
00:13:28 Thermal Regulation, Hyperthermia
00:17:36 Heat Removal Circuits, Pre-Optic Hypothalamus (POA)
00:26:30 Protocols & Benefits of Deliberate Heat Exposure
00:33:37 Tools & Conditions for Deliberate Heat Exposure 
00:38:47 Deliberate Heat Exposure, Cortisol & Cardiovascular Health
00:44:50 Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs), Molecular Mechanisms of Heat Regulation
00:47:56 Longevity & Heat Exposure, FOXO3 
00:52:30 Deliberate Cold & Heat Exposure & Metabolism
00:54:48 Deliberate Heat Exposure & Growth Hormone
01:04:32 Parameters for Heat & Cold Exposure  
01:08:26 Circadian Rhythm & Body Temperature, Cold & Heat Exposure
01:12:00 Heat Exposure & Growth Hormone
01:16:20 Tool: Hydration & Sauna
01:17:10 Heat, Endorphins & Dynorphins, Mood 
01:28:44 Tool: Glabrous Skin To Heat or Cool  
01:35:33 Local Hyperthermia, Converting White Fat to Beige Fat, Metabolism 
01:47:00 Hormesis/Mitohormesis & Heat/Cold Exposure
01:49:11 Benefits of Heat Exposure 
01:51:10 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous Supplements, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter 

Disclaimer: The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are talking about the science of heat, and more specifically the science of heating, the verb, meaning how our body heats up from both the outside and the inside. Heat is a remarkable stimulus, meaning when we are in a hot environment, it has a profound effect on our biology. And heating up from the outside, or as you'll soon learn, from the inside, has a profound effect on many different aspects of our health, including our metabolism, both in the immediate and long term; our cognition, meaning our ability to think more or less clearly. And if you're immediately thinking that heating up makes you less capable of thinking, you're wrong. Heat applied properly as a stimulus can engage certain neurochemical systems in your brain and body that can allow your brain to function far better. We will talk about those data today. So we're going to talk about the science of heat and heating, both in terms of their mechanisms. And, as I know many of you are interested in, the tools related to the use of heat, things like sauna, how often to do sauna, how long to be in the sauna, how hot to be in the sauna for particular goals and outcomes. We're also going to talk about the very exciting new science around local heating. That is the use of heat applied to specific areas of the body in order to heal or improve tissues at that location that you are heating as well as your biology and health overall. In fact, we are going to talk about one very recently published paper that came out in the journal Cell. Cell is one of the three apex journals, meaning three of the most competitive, most rigorous scientific journals. Those are Nature, Science, and Cell. This particular paper was published in Cell, and I will go into it in more detail later, but basically what this paper shows is that by locally heating up skin and fat, you can change the identity of certain fat cells at that location and elsewhere. We have three kinds of fat, white fat, beige fat, and brown fat. And as you will learn more about soon, white fat is not very metabolically active. It's more of a fuel reserve. It's what we typically think of as blubbery fat. Beige fat and brown fat are rich in mitochondria, and those mitochondria provide a sort of furnace or heating mechanism for your entire body and increase your metabolism and the burning of white fat. So in other words, having more beige fat and brown fat is a good thing. And it turns out that the proper application of heat to specific areas of your body can increase the conversion of white fat to beige fat. In other words, turn an innocuous fuel source into a metabolically active tissue that can help you burn off more white fat. I think many people are going to be interested in this paper and the tools that emerge from this paper. It's a fascinating set of findings that actually emerged from an understanding of the biology of burn and people who receive intense burns. And that is not what I'm going to recommend to you as a tool, of course, but understanding a little bit about how burns impact our biology and health has allowed these pioneering researchers to develop new tools to combat obesity and metabolic disorders, and that you can apply for basic things like fat loss. I'm pleased to announce that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered with Momentous Supplements. Our motivation for partnering with Momentous is to provide people one location where they can go to access the highest quality supplements in the specific dosages that are best supported by the scientific research and that are discussed during various episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. If you go to livemomentous.com/huberman, you'll see those formulations. I should mention that we are going to add more formulations in the months to come, and you'll see specific suggestions about how best to take those supplements, meaning what dosages and times of day, and in fact, how to combine those supplements with specific behavioral protocols that have been discussed on the podcast and are science supported in order to drive the maximum benefit from those supplements. And many of you will probably also be pleased to learn that Momentous ships not just within the United States, but also internationally. So once again, if you go to live momentus.com/huberman, you will find what we firmly believe to be the best quality supplements in the precise dosages and the best protocols for taking those supplements, along with the ideal behavioral protocols to combine with those supplement formulations. I'm pleased to announce that I am hosting two live events in May 2022. The first live event will take place in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will take place in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled The Brain Body Contract, during which I will talk about science and science-based tools, many of which overlap with the topics covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, but most of which will not and will be completely new topics and tools never discussed publicly before. Both live events will also include a question and answer period, during which you, the audience, can ask me questions directly about any aspect of science or science-based tools, and I will attempt to answer them. Tickets for the two events, again, Seattle on May 17th and Portland on May 18th, are both available at hubermanlab.com/tour. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and none of what you don't need, meaning sugar. It has electrolytes, and the main electrolytes are sodium, potassium, and magnesium, which you need in the proper ratios in order for your brain and body to function correctly. LMNT was designed to get you the proper ratio of electrolytes in order to optimize mental and physical performance. People out there with pre-hypertension and hypertension, of course, should be cautious about increasing their sodium intake. But many people can actually benefit from increasing their sodium intake, both for health and for performance. LMNT contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of 1000 milligrams. That's one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium, and 60 milligrams of magnesium. I consume LMNT when I first wake up in the morning, during exercise, and after exercise, and sometimes again, if I've been sweating profusely, for instance, after doing a sauna or taking a run on a hot day, things of that sort. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's lmnt.com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack. You only cover the cost of shipping. Again, that's drinklmnt, lmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and longterm health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. There are a lot of blood and DNA tests out there, but a major issue with many of them is that you get numbers back about levels of hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker has solved that problem by creating a personalized dashboard. So you take your blood and or your DNA test, you get the results back, and where certain values might be too high or too low for your preference you can click on that, and it will direct you immediately to lifestyle factors, nutrition, and supplementation, et cetera, that can help you bring those numbers back into the ranges that are ideal for you. So it not only gives you information about where your health stands, it gives you directives as to how to improve your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime studying the visual system, and I can tell you that your visual system is incredibly sophisticated. It allows you to do things like move from a shady area outside to a sunny area outside and to adjust your visual system so you don't even notice that transition. A lot of sunglasses and eyeglasses are not designed with those sorts of biological transitions in mind. ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses are different. Every one of their glasses is designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. First of all, they're incredibly lightweight, so you don't even notice that they're on your face. Second of all, they were designed to be worn during activities like running and cycling, et cetera, and they won't slip off your face even if you get sweaty. And they have a terrific aesthetic. So even though they were originally designed as active eyewear, they look great. So you can wear them out to dinner, to school, at work, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA sunglasses or eyeglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com, and enter the code Huberman to save 20% on your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about heat, more specifically, let's talk about the biology of heat and heating and the health benefits and tools related to heat and heating. The first question that we have to answer is how do we heat up? And the answer to that question is we heat up two ways. We heat up from the outside, meaning the things that we come into contact with, the clothing that we put on our body, whether or not there's heat in the room, or whether or not it's cold outside or cold in a room, and we heat up from the inside. Our body has the capacity to generate more heat or to cool down, meaning to turn off the heating process, and it can do that in ways that match the external environment. The simplest way to think about this is that we actually have two body temperatures. People will say, "Oh, what's body temperature? "98.6." That's actually not true. Body temperature varies between individuals. It varies across time of day within individuals. And at every point across your entire lifespan, you have two distinct temperatures. One is the temperature on your skin, what scientists call your shell, and the temperature of your core, your viscera, meaning your organs, your nervous system, and your spinal cord. And as you can imagine, the temperature of your core is always higher than the temperature at your surface. So the important thing to know is that you have a temperature at your shell and a temperature at your core. Now you don't need to know exactly what those temperatures are in most cases, but it is vitally important to understand that you have those two temperatures and that your brain is constantly sending out signals to your body as to whether or not it should heat up or cool down, depending on the temperature of the shell, which makes total sense. This is a lot like a thermostat in a room, which is essentially paying attention to how cold or hot it is, and then sending signals to the heating or cooling system to either heat up the environment or cool down the environment, depending on the temperature in that environment. Your brain has neurons that send signals to other cells in your body and deploy the release of chemicals in your brain and body to heat you up when you are too cold and to cool you down when you are too hot. So, if you can understand that you have two body temperatures, one at your shell, the surface, and one at your core, inside, and that your body and brain are always trying to balance those two temperatures in the appropriate way, well then you're halfway there to understanding the biology of thermal regulation and heating, and you'll be a lot further along in understanding how specific tools can be used to improve metabolism or improve cognition, for instance. In fact, later you will learn that one way that you can heat up is by cooling down the surface of your body. That's right. If I were to throw a cold towel, ice cold towel, onto your torso right now and ask you, "Well, how do you feel?" You'd say, "Oh, that's cold, that's chilly." However, because your brain is acting like a bit of a thermostat as the surface, the shell of your body felt cool, it would make sense that that thermostat would activate biological mechanisms that would heat up your core. Similarly, if I were to put you into a very hot environment, you'd say, "Oh, wow, it's really, really warm in here," but your brain and your body would go through a lot of effort to activate mechanisms to cool you down. So anytime we're talking about heat, meaning deliberate heat exposure, things like sauna, it's very important to understand, not just the stimulus, how hot something is, how long you're in a sauna, et cetera, but the effect that has on your shell and on your core. If you can understand that you can design protocols that are literally perfect for your goals. And as a final point about this, if you want to develop the best tools, leveraging heat for your biology and health and performance, you want to understand heat as a process, as a verb, as heating, not just heat, because there's the temperature that you are at before you encounter the heat stimulus, before you get in the sauna, for instance, during the heat stimulus, so while you're in the sauna, and then afterward. Everything in biology is a process. So as you'll soon learn, there is a specific sauna protocol that can allow you, can allow anybody, in fact, to increase the amount of growth hormone released into their brain and body 16 fold. That's right, 16 fold. However, it involves shifting from a hot environment to a cool environment, to a hot environment, to a cool environment, over and over and over again, over a very short period of time, because it engages a switch, a process, that compounds, it builds on itself, to increase growth hormone further and further. In fact, if you were to just get into a sauna for a very long period of time and crank up the temperature to match the exact temperature that was used in that study, you would not experience those increases in growth hormone. It really is the transition between hot and cool temperatures that engage the process of heating and reheating over and over again. So, today you're going to learn about the use of sauna. You're going to learn about the use of other heat-related tools for health and optimization, not just for growth hormone, but also metabolic health, for controlling cortisol, even to impact mental health in positive ways. And in order to do that, you need to understand a little bit about the mechanisms of how you heat up and how you cool down, where the cells and circuits are in the brain and body, how those cells and circuits work. I promise to make the description of that which follows very clear, even if you don't have a background in biology. And once you have that in hand, along with the understanding you now have about the fact that you got a shell and a core, and you need to think about both the shell and the core, well, then you will be in the best possible position to use sauna or hot tub or other tools, even just a hot shower, as a powerful stimulus to optimize your biology. Now, the science of heat and heating and cold and cooling, for that matter, goes back well over a hundred years. In fact, it's kind of amusing to me that nowadays there's a kind of renewed interest in the use of heat and cold and the science of heat and cold, because this was the first topic that I studied as an undergraduate. And in fact, I did my graduate thesis on thermal regulation. And at the time, thermal regulation wasn't really considered one of the hot topics in neuroscience. People were more focused on things like memory and consciousness. And of course those topics are still of vital interest to many people in many laboratories, but thermal regulation was considered more a thing for the physiologists. Nowadays, not just on social media, not just in the landscape of biohackers and athletes, but in the landscape of mental health, and frankly, in the general ethos around health optimization, people are really interested in heat and cold. And the reason they're so interested in heat and cold is that a lot of the science has been done both in animal models in mice and in humans and translates immediately to protocols that anyone can use. Now, a brief warning now and another brief warning later, anytime you're talking about heating up your body, you need to be very cautious, because unlike cooling down, where you have a fairly broad range of cold temperatures that you can go into before it's damaging to tissue, well, you don't get to heat up the brain and body very much before you start getting into the realm of neuron damage, and neuron's in the central nervous system, the brain and spinal cord, once they're damaged they don't come back. So hyperthermia is a serious thing to avoid. Later I'll talk about ways to rapidly protect against hyperthermia, but I do want to give everybody a cautionary note up front. Obviously, if you're pregnant, nursing, if you're very sensitive to hot environments, you want to stay out of saunas and things of that sort. I'm sure there are exceptions to that. You definitely have to talk to your doctor if you're going to violate that rule. And for everybody, you want to approach any kind of tool related to heating very cautiously. You always have the opportunity to increase the temperature later. So proceed with caution. Be smart about it. I don't just say of that to protect me. I say that also to protect you. So now let's talk about what are the circuits for heating up? How does that happen? Many of you have probably experienced a fever. How does that happen? What happens when you go into a cold environment and you're shivering, but you put on a coat and then you feel warmer. What's really going on there? Well, there's a very basic circuit, meaning neurons that exist in the skin, in the brain, and in the body that communicate with one another that allow you to heat up if you need to and cool down if you need to. I'm going to throw a little bit of nomenclature, a few new words at you. You don't need to memorize these words, except for one, actually you need to memorize one acronym, but it's very easy. It's called the POA. If you remember POA, you'll be home free for the rest of the episode, but I know that there are some aficionados out there and people interested in getting a little bit deeper mechanism. And I do think it's important to understand the circuit, because once you stand this circuit and the way it's structured, then you are going to be in a great position to use the tools related to heating. So here's how this circuit is structured. You have this shell, which is basically skin, and within the skin you have neurons, nerve cells. Those nerve cells have channels or receptors on them. They're called trip channels. There's some other ones as well, which basically sense changes in heat. So if I were to put a hot object on your hand or your arm, or for instance, if I were to put a hot object on your hand or arm, and then remove that hot object, those neurons would respond to that. They would send electrical signals into your spinal cord. And that's where the next station of the circuit resides. In your spinal cord you got a little cluster of neurons that exists at the top part of your spinal cord called the dorsal horn. The name, again, doesn't matter. And those neurons specifically relay heat information up to another area of your brain. Now here's where we get into some fancy names. It's the lateral parabrachial area. You don't need to know lateral parabrachial area, but it's a relay station. The lateral parabrachial area sends electrical signals to the POA. And I would like you to know POA. The POA stands for preoptic area. Neurons in the preoptic area basically reside over the roof of your mouth. These are neurons within the hypothalamus, and neurons in the preoptic area have the ability to send signals out to the rest of your brain and body to get you to heat up and actually to change your behavior so that you heat up. That's right. If neurons in the preoptic area receive an electrical signal through the circuit I just described, that goes from skin to dorsal horn of the spinal cord, to lateral parabrachial, they will start sending signals out to the organs of your body and the tissues of your body to get those organs and tissues to do things. And believe it or not, your POA, your preoptic area, will actually change the way that you think and feel immediately. For instance, if something warm contacts your skin, or something very hot contacts your skin, the preoptic area will send signals out to the endothelial cells, the blood vessels both of the brain and body that get them to dilate, to essentially increase their volume and their surface area in order to cast off heat. You will also start sweating. That sweating response is initiated, not by the hot day or the hot sun, but by the preoptic area neurons that send signals out to what's called the periphery of your and other chemicals are released, things like acetylcholine, that get you to sweat. And if you happen to be shivering, neurons in the preoptic area will make sure that you stop shivering. You're probably familiar with the feeling of being somewhat lethargic, or spreading out your limbs on a hot day. Well, that is the result of neurons in your preoptic area impacting your musculature to get you to increase your surface area so you can sweat off or release more heat. So there are all these different mechanisms by which we dump heat. Some of those are purely physiological, below our conscious control, things like sweating, which you can't just make yourself sweat on demand. Maybe you can through a set of stressful thoughts, but you can't just make yourself sweat. That is autonomic, it's below your conscious control. Things like vasodilation, the dilation of your veins in particular and capillaries in particular. These sorts of things. And, of course, there are these behavioral, somewhat voluntary aspects of dumping heat. And the lethargy, the kind of tiredness that we feel on a really hot day, that's also controlled by the circuit that I just described. In fact, I just got back from a visit to a very warm place, and it was remarkable to me how lethargic I felt in the afternoons. I just felt like a total slug. I just could not move or rally to do anything, except if I waited until the evening, even though it was later in the day, even though I hadn't napped, as the temperature in my environment cooled off, as my body temperature cooled off, I felt like I had more energy. I was actually waking up, even though I had been awake for longer. So the relationship between temperature and lethargy is a very intimate one. If we're warm enough, we feel active and like we want to move around. If we're too warm, we feel like we need to stay put and spread out our limbs and dump heat. And that brings me to a quick and kind of fun point about how we dump heat versus how other animals dump heat. Many of you know, of course, that we dump heat by sweating. Other mechanisms as well, some of which I described, but that's our main way of dumping heat. Other animals like dogs don't have the capacity to sweat, at least not very much, so they pant in order to dump heat. And still other animals, like rodents, when they get too hot they spit on their paws and they rub that spit on the surface of their body, which might sound kind of gross, and probably will get you to think twice before petting any of those animals or holding any of those animals again, unless that's your thing. Now, one other key thing to understand about this circuit related to heat is that the preoptic area also can send electrical signals to the amygdala, a brain area that is often talked about in the context of fear, but is really just a brain area that can activate your sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system is part of your autonomic nervous system and is the one associated with fight or flight, or with the stress response, or even just the excited response. The sympathetic nervous system is also what gets activated when you're really excited about something. The preoptic area has the opportunity to trigger the activation of the amygdala. Now, it doesn't do it every time, but it can. And it tends to do that when you are suddenly in an environment that feels too hot, that you feel is risky levels of hot. If you ever have gotten into a sauna that was very, very hot, maybe 210 degrees Fahrenheit, you sit there for a minute. You'll notice that your heart rate increases, and there are reasons for that, and we'll talk about some of the health benefits of that in a few minutes, but it's pretty uncomfortable. You may not feel like your skin is going to burn up, but you often will feel the impulse to get out, especially if you stay in there for a little while. That impulse is the consequence of this preoptic area communicating with your amygdala saying, "Hey, this environment is really hot, and I'm tryin' to cool down, and it's not really working. I'm dumping heat, but I'm not able to adjust the core of my body temperature in ways that are going to protect my neurons. And so it's a signal that you probably shouldn't stay in that environment too long. Now later we'll talk about the advantage of pushing yourself a little bit through some of these very hot environments, provided you can do it safely, but the impulse to get yourself out of a very hot environment is the consequence of the POA communicating with your amygdala, and the amygdala then, in turn, activating your adrenal glands, which sit right above your kidneys, the release of adrenaline, and this feeling of agitation like you want to move. Usually you want to move out of whatever hot environment you happen to be in. So now you know the circuit. Again, it's simple. It goes from skin to spinal cord, one brain area to another brain area. That's the key one in this discussion, which is the POA, the preoptic area. And then the preop area can kick off a bunch of autonomic subconscious responses to heat, which make us attempt to get cooler, things like sweating, vasodilation, et cetera, and it can kick off behavioral responses, spreading out our limbs in an attempt to dump even more heat; feeling lethargic, so a lack of desire to run and move; and it also has the opportunity to kick off a mild, or maybe not so mild, panic response to get us out of that hot environment. If you can conceptualize that circuit, or if you can even just understand what I just said, even at a top contour level, you're going to be in a great position to understand the rest of the information and the tools that follow. Next, I'd like to talk about the use of deliberate heat exposure, including sauna, but other tools as well, as a way to understand how heat and heating changes our biology. So, you're going to learn some mechanism and you're going to learn some tools. But first I'd like to just emphasize that the use of deliberate heat exposure can be a very powerful way to improve health and longevity. There's a wonderful study on this that was published in 2018 that includes a lot of data from a lot of participants, in a lot of different conditions, for instance, people that only did sauna once versus two to three times a week versus four to seven times a week and so on, and compares all those. The title of the study is Sauna Bathing is Associated With Reduced Cardiovascular Mortality and Improves Risk Prediction in Men and Women a Prospective Cohort Study. This is one of several papers that clearly demonstrate that regular use of sauna or other forms of deliberate heat exposure can reduce mortality to cardiovascular events, but also to other events, things like stroke and other things that basically can kill us. What I like so much about this and the related studies, and yes, I will provide a link to these in the show notes, is that they involve a lot of participants. So for instance, in this particular paper, which was published in BMC Medicine, they looked at a sample of 1,688 participants who had a mean age of 63, but there was a range of ages around 63, and of whom 51.4% were women. The rest were men. So it's a pretty nicely varied study in terms of the populations that they looked at. And basically what they found was the more often that people do sauna, the better their health is and the lower the likelihood they will die from some sort of cardiovascular event. What do we mean by sauna? We need to define some of the parameters around sauna, and I promise to provide you some alternative ways to access some of the health benefits that were observed in this and related studies without the need to have a sauna, 'cause I do realize that a lot of people don't have access to sauna. First off, the temperature ranges that were used in this and pretty much all the studies that I'm going to talk about, unless I say otherwise, are between 80 degrees Celsius, meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit, and 100 degrees Celsius, meaning 212 degrees Fahrenheit. So somewhere in that range. How hot should you make the sauna or the environment that you get into should you decide to use these tools? Well, that will depend on your tolerance for heat, how heat adapted you are. Yes, some people are better at sweating than others. And over time we all get better at sweating. Meaning if you go into the sauna more frequently, you become a better sweater, not sweater you wear, but the verb sweater, you get better at sweating, at dumping heat through the loss of water. So it's going to depend. I recommend starting on the lower end of the temperature scale, and if that's too hot for you that you even lower the temperature further. Now, how long were people exposing themselves to these hot environments? Anywhere from five to 20 minutes per session. And as you'll soon learn, very brief periods of just five minutes of heat exposure can be a powerful stimulus if the heat exposure is significantly great enough for you. 20 minutes can also be beneficial, but 80 to 100 degrees Celsius, meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit to 212 degrees Fahrenheit is the general range that this and most studies use. In this particular study, they compared the effects of people that did sauna once a week, two or three times per week, or four to seven times per week. And what they saw was really remarkable. What they observed was that people who went into the sauna two or three times per week were 27% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event than people that went into the sauna just once a week, again at the temperature levels and the duration that I talked about earlier. And as you can imagine, the duration, the temperature levels were related. So if people went into very hot environments that were really uncomfortable for them, maybe they only went in for five minutes. Whereas, if they were more comfortable and heat adapted in a given environment or their tolerance for heat was just simply higher for whatever reason, well then they tended to stay in longer. We can take a sort of average of this five to 20 minute range, and today we're mainly going to talk about exposures between 10 and 20 minutes at temperatures between, again, 80 degrees and 100 degrees Celsius, 176 degrees Fahrenheit, or 212 degrees Fahrenheit. So these data point to the fact that going in the sauna two or three times per week is really beneficial and can lower mortality to cardiovascular events. And in fact, the benefits were even greater for people that we're going into the sauna four to seven times per week. Those people were 50% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event compared to people that went into the sauna just once a week. So these are really impressive, and frankly, encouraging studies. Certainly they caught my eye and encouraged me to start using deliberate heat exposure on a regular basis. What's particularly nice about this study, and the related study that, again, is linked in the show notes, is that they looked at a number of potentially confounding variables, things like whether or not people smoked, things like whether or not people were overweight, whether or not they tended to exercise or not exercise, and they were able to separate out those variables. So the percentages that I described earlier, 27% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event for those that went in the sauna two to three times a week and 50% less likely to die of a cardiovascular event for those that went into the sauna four times per week, as compared to just once a week. Those effects really do seem to be the consequence of the sauna exposure and not some other effect that's correlated with sauna exposure, like going to the gym where people are working out seven times a week and then also happen to get into the sauna, or quitting smoking right about the same time they adopt a sauna protocol, these sorts of things. And now there have been additional analyses of the use of sauna for improving health, or I should say for offsetting mortality, that have found that it's not just reductions in cardiovascular events, but so called all-cause mortality. This is kind of medical geek speak for saying, how likely are you or somebody to die from a cardiovascular event, but maybe be also from some other event, some other health-related event, like cancer or something of that sort. And in every case, regular exposure to sauna starting at about two or three times per week, all the way up to seven times per week, greatly improves, meaning statistically significant improvements in longevity in the sense that people are less likely to die of cardiovascular events and other things that kill us. So I and many other people who are interested not just in our own health, but in educating about health-related tools to the general public, find this really exciting. But knowing what we know about how heat impacts our biology, it probably shouldn't surprise us that this sauna type exposure or deliberate heat exposure has these incredible effects. So before we get into the biological mechanisms of how heat can have all these impressive health effects, I want to just talk about the use of sauna as a tool and emphasize that you don't have to use a sauna in order to get these benefits. It is simply a matter of making sure that your shell and your core heat up properly a bit, not too much, not too little, but that you heat those up. And no, you do not need to carry a thermometer around or place a thermometer into your core. In laboratory studies and in humans, if you really want to know someone's core temperature, basically you try and put the thermal probe as close to the core as you can. So typically that's done rectally or a mouth thermometer or even up the nose. You don't need to do any of that. This isn't a laboratory study. There are ways to create a hot environment such that you heat up your shell and your core safely without having to measure your core temperature all along. If you want to do that, be my guess, but I'm not going to provide a protocol. So the question is, how are you heating up your environment? And I realize that there are dry saunas, there are steam saunas, there are infrared saunas, there are hot tubs, and there are simply rooms that you crank up the heat. There are also ways in which you can increase your shell and your core temperature by moving around a lot and doing that wearing a lot of clothing. There's nothing special about any one of these approaches or protocols. It just so happens that sauna is one of the more convenient ways to do this. And certainly for the studies that I've talked about, not just the ones I referenced before, but all the studies that I researched looking at this episode, it makes sense why they would use sauna, because it's very hard, for instance, to create conditions where you have five people go out jogging, wearing heavy sweaters and hats, wool hats on the middle of summer, it's very hard to set up those conditions in a way that's controlled for everybody. Whereas, it's pretty straightforward to have a sauna where you have one or several people just get into that one uniformly hot environment. That's a much easier study to run. So just to be clear, the temperature range is important. You want to get between 80 and 100 degrees Celsius. Now you know the conversion to Fahrenheit. You could, however, immerse yourself in a hot tub or hot water bath up to your neck. That's another way to approach it. If you didn't have access to either of those, you could also put on a hoodie or a wool hat and a hoodie, or you could do like the wrestlers do, and you could actually buy one of these plastic suits. They're literally called plastics that wrestlers or other athletes that wish to drop water weight will wear, and then go jogging in that. All of those will increase your shell and your core body temperature. Especially if you do it on a hot day, but of course be careful, hydrate and don't overheat. Don't become excessively hyperthermic, 'cause you can get heat stroke and you can potentially die. But if you're going to use sauna, often I get the question how hot should the sauna be? Well now you know. How long should you be in there? Five to 20 minutes per session. Although, I will talk in a minute about ways to optimize hormone output, in particular growth hormone output, by doing four very brief sessions. So maybe not a continuous session. We'll get into that in a few minutes. And, of course, you have to ask yourself wet sauna, dry sauna. You know what? Doesn't matter. Use what you prefer. Many people ask me, "Well, what about infrared sauna?" We have an entire episode all about the use of light and low level light therapy, including infrared light. It does have certain benefits for skin and other organs and tissues of the body, if used properly. My understanding, or at least my assessment, of most infrared saunas out there is that they don't get hot enough. They don't get up to that 80 to 100 degrees Celsius range. Some do, most don't. So what you end up with is a situation where you've got a red light, low level light therapy stimulus, and you've got a sauna that's not quite hot enough. And there are a lot of ideas and claims about how they work together in order to get you improved benefits. I personally am of the stance, based on the literature that I've read, that you want to get into those ranges of 80 to 100 degrees Celsius before you start considering whether or not you're also going to include red light therapies, et cetera. So there's nothing special about red light sauna. It's really the temperature of the sauna that you happen to get into. So which tool? Which sauna? Which stimulus? Do you run wearing plastics and a hoodie and a wool hat or do you get into a sauna? That's going to depend a lot on your circumstances, your budget, and what you have access to on a regular basis. This is a lot like our discussion about the use of cold. Most of the studies have looked at immersion in cold water up to the neck, because that's a very controlled situation that you can do in a laboratory. They have not explored cold showers as much, So there's just less data, or walking around in a cold environment. But we'll talk a little bit about those data, because as you'll soon learn, when you talk about cold, you're actually talking about heating as well. So what kind of mechanisms are activated in your brain and body that allow for the various health benefits of sauna or other forms of deliberate heating? Well, we talked about reduced risk of cardiovascular event related mortality and all-cause mortality. As you'll soon learn, there are also tremendous benefits in terms of increases in growth hormone, reductions in cortisol, et cetera. I will detail those. So what happens when you do get into a hot environment? What are the mechanisms that allow for the various health effects of that? Well, your shell, your skin, senses that. And through the circuit that I described earlier, activates neurons in the POA, the preoptic area, which in turn activates mechanisms in your autonomic nervous system, like vasodilation. So blood flow increases. Plasma volume of your blood increases, and stroke volume. The volume of blood that is mobilized with each beat of your heart also increases. And your heart rate increases to anywhere between 100 to 150 beats per minute. That general constellation of effects looks a lot like cardiovascular exercise. And in fact, for all intents and purposes, it really is cardiovascular exercise, except that there isn't the mobilization and the loading of joints and limbs and things of that sort. And of course there are additional benefits of cardiovascular exercise that relate to impact on the ground, improvements in bone density, et cetera, et cetera. But basically your heart starts beating, more blood starts circulating, your vasculature changes shape, literally, to accommodate those increases in heart rate and blood volume. And you're basically getting a cardiovascular workout in that hot environment, even if you're just sitting down. Another set of positive effects related to being in these hot environments are hormone effects, shifts in the output of hormones, both from or your adrenals and possibly from the testes and ovaries and even within the brain. One of the more striking examples of that comes from a study that was published in 2021. The title of the study is "Endocrine Effects of Repeated Hot Thermal Stress "and Cold Water Immersion in Young Adult Men." And indeed, this study was, in this case, just done on men. I'll just briefly describe the protocol they used. They had these men attend four sauna sessions of 12 minutes each. So again, well within that range of five to 20 minutes, 12 minutes. The temperature of those saunas was 90 to 91 degrees Celsius. So I'll just quickly do the calculation, admittedly, not in my head. That's 194 degrees Fahrenheit, and they did that four times. Afterwards they had a six-minute cool down break during which they did get into some cool water or cold water of about 10 degrees, which is, 10 degrees Celsius is 50 degrees Fahrenheit. And then they measured hormones at various times throughout this study, before, during, and after. They looked at testosterone, they looked at DHEA, which is in the androgen pathway. They looked at prolactin and they looked at cortisol. The significant effects of the protocol that I just described were on cortisol, a so-called stress hormone. So-called because when we are very stressed for long periods of time, cortisol levels tend to increase dramatically. But I should point out that a increase in cortisol each day right about the time of waking, and specifically right about the time of waking, is actually beneficial for our alertness and our energy. So having some increasing cortisol every 24 hours is a good thing, provided it happens early in the day. Late day increases in cortisol are associated with depression. That's been shown by studies at Stanford and elsewhere. The major effect of this study is a significant decrease in cortisol output in these subjects. I think this is really interesting and important, because many people suffer from acute, meaning immediate, and longterm stress, and are looking for ways to control their stress. Controlling your cortisol is tricky. In the episode on stress, I talked about supplements such ashwagandha that can be used to limit cortisol, but you have to be careful not to use ashwagandha for extended periods of time, meaning for longer than two weeks, because you can get into other issues. I talk about breath work protocols that can allow you to clamp or reduce the stress response in real time. Again, see that episode for those, but many people are overworked. They're overstressed. They're, for one reason or another, they're subjected to many too many stressors or their level of stress resilience isn't high enough to keep their cortisol levels clamped at a healthy level. So the protocol I described of 12 minute exposures to 90 degree environment, that's again, 90 degree Celsius, followed by a six-minute cool down break in cool water, 50 degrees or so, that's pretty cold. I can imagine that you could also just take a cool shower or a cold shower afterwards, that had a very significant effect on lowering cortisol. So there you have a tool that's not a completely zero cost tool, 'cause you need to heat the water and you need to have access to hot and cold water, at least hot and cold contrast of some sort, but it's fairly minimal cost for most people. Especially if you start getting creative about maybe taking a 12-minute jog wearing a lot of clothing if it's hot out, then getting into a cool shower. You might not get the same extreme or significant reduction in cortisol that was observed here with these very specific protocols, but it's likely that you would get a similar result over all. Now, I mentioned they did look at these other hormones, and I'll just tell you that they did not see significant shifts in testosterone, prolactin, DHEA, et cetera, using this protocol. As you'll soon see, there are other sauna protocols that can impact those other hormones. So if you're seeking to use sauna to reduce stress, I think this is a very interesting and potentially useful research-backed protocol. And again, we will provide a link to the paper if you'd like to read more about the data. So that is one set of biological effects on cortisol and the related protocol. What about some of the other benefits of sauna? Well, we'll talk about those, but I want to talk about those in the context of the underlying mechanisms, because if you understand those underlying mechanisms, you can really tailor your sauna protocols for your particular needs. One of the more dramatic and important effects of going into a hot environment for some period of time is the activation of so-called heat shock proteins, or HSPs. Heat shock proteins are a protective mechanism in your brain and body to rescue proteins that would otherwise misfold. What do I mean by this? Well, most of you're familiar with the fact that if you have protein in the kitchen, like a steak or a piece of chicken or a piece of fish, and you heat it up, it changes it's texture. Raw meat is different than cooked meat, to be quite blunt about it. Heat changes the quality of proteins, not just in terms of how they taste, but the way in which they are configured. It changes it right down at the molecular level. When your body goes through changes in temperature each day, and we'll talk about those changes, but in response to hot environments or cold environments, heat shock proteins are deployed to go and rescue and prevent the changes in proteins that would be detrimental to your health. So at least in the short term, activating heat shock proteins is a good thing. You don't want heat shock proteins to be activated for long periods of time, because that gets to be problematic for other reasons. But these heat shock proteins, of which there are many varieties, basically have the job of traveling in your brain and body and making sure that cells that contain proteins that are misfolding because they got heated up too much, don't misfold, and they also, sort of a protective mechanism, making sure that proteins within the cells of your brain and body don't fold in the wrong ways. Again, I'm describing this in very general terms, but it's well established in animal models and in humans, that sauna exposure of the sort that I described earlier activates these heat shock proteins. There's some interesting studies that were carried out in animal models that really nicely mechanistically support the role of heat shock proteins in some of the benefits of deliberate heat exposure. Some of these studies were done in flies, meaning Drosophila, fruit flies, 'cause there are great model organism, because you can delete genes or add genes easily. Other studies have been done in mice. And now there are also studies being carried out in humans, and I will talk about those. One of the more dramatic examples that's always touted in this field of deliberate heat exposure as it relates to longevity is that if they expose these flies, these fruit flies to 70 minutes of a heat stimulus that would, obviously didn't kill them, but activated heat shock proteins, it could extend their life by 15% in a heat shock dependent way. Meaning if they made flies that didn't have these heat shock proteins, well then they didn't see this extension in life. And this is one of the reasons to use model organisms. This is not an experiment that you could do in people. However, there have been interesting studies done in humans, examining some of the downstream molecular pathways of deliberate heat exposure that point to the mechanisms by which deliberate heat exposure can help protect against different forms of mortality, improve overall, and possibly, and I want to highlight possibly, possibly extend life. One such mechanism involves a genetic program involving a molecule called FOXO3. FOXO3 is a very interesting molecule, because it's involved in DNA repair pathways. DNA repair is part of the process of remaining healthy. We'd all like to think that we're born, and based on the genes we have, we are healthy, healthy, healthy, then eventually we age and then we die. But from the time we're born, until the time we die, there's a constant repair of our proteins in our cells in a modification of the genes that are being expressed, puberty being the most dramatic example. You see a kid before puberty and after puberty, looks like a different kid, sounds like a different kid, thinks like a different kid. In fact, it basically is a different human being. It's not just the hormones. It's that hormones themselves have the capacity to turn on and turn off certain genes, literally converting certain tissues and cells in the brain and body to do entirely different things. So it's not just the sprouting of new aspects of our biology. It's literally the conversion of different brain centers from one function to another. That's puberty. And we'll do a whole episode about puberty. We actually did an episode on sexual development that talks a little bit about those mechanisms. But the point is that throughout our entire lifespan, genes are being turned on, genes are being turned off. Genes are being turned on. Gene are being turned off. And DNA, the stuff of genes, gets damaged in that process. FOXO3 sits upstream in a pathway related to DNA repair, and again, clearing of the senescent cells. Sauna exposure, in particular sauna exposure two to three times or ideally four to seven times per week in that 80 to 100 degree Celsius range has been shown to upregulate levels of FOXO3. FOXO3 in turn upregulates pathways related to DNA repair and clearing out of these senescent or dead cells, which is known to be important for various aspects of maintaining cognition and other aspects of maintaining health. So these are the likely biological mechanisms for the improvements in lifespan, or rather, I should say, these are the biological mechanisms that apparently offset some of the cardiovascular risk and other forms of mortality that were described earlier. One especially interesting thing about FOXO3, there are individuals out there that have either additional copies of FOXO3 or who have versions of FOXO3 that are hyperactive, so to speak, those people tend to be 2.7 times more likely to live to 100 years of age or longer. So these are people that were just naturally, and fortunately for them, endowed with more FOXO3, more clearance of senescent cells, more DNA repair, et cetera. For the rest of us, at least to my knowledge, I don't have one of these health-promoting FOXO3 mutations. Remember, mutations can be beneficial or they can be detrimental. This, if your goal is to live longer, is a beneficial mutation. If you don't have these FOXO3 mutations that allow you to be a centenarian at 2.7 times high or likelihood than other people, deliberate heat exposure is one way that you can increase FOXO3 activity. At this point in time, meaning when looking at the research out there, it isn't clear what the optimal sauna protocol is going to be, specifically to increase FOXO3, and that's probably because there isn't one. There is no sauna protocol designed specifically to reduce cortisol or specifically to increase FOXO3 or specifically to activate heat shock proteins. Any deliberate heat exposure is likely to impact all of those mechanisms. Again, I encourage you to use this guide of 80 to 100 degrees Celsius as your kind of bookends for what you can tolerate and where you want to start and eventually transition to in terms of deliberate heat exposure. And I would encourage you to use that five to 20 minutes per session for the sauna as your rough guide of how long to remain in this sauna. Now, there was a study published just this last year that was mainly focused on deliberate cold exposure. I detailed this quite extensively in the episode on cold. This is the beautiful work of Susanna Søberg. And that study looked at deliberate cold exposure, but also sauna exposure. And that study found that 57, yes, 57 minutes per week of sauna exposure in conjunction with 11 minutes per week total of deliberate cold exposure was the threshold for getting improvements in metabolism and increases in brown fat, this very active fat tissue that improves mitochondrial function and thermogenesis, meaning heating of the body. We'll talk more about brown fat later. Why do I mention this? Well, for those of you that are interested in increasing metabolism, it does seem to be most beneficial to do that 11 minutes per week of cold exposure, again, divided up across two or more sessions. So it's not 11 minutes all at once, but shorter sessions, and to get 57 minutes minimum per week of sauna exposure, again, in the temperature ranges that I've talked about here. And again, it's not 57 minutes in the sauna all at once. That's 57 minutes total per week as the minimum threshold. So you might divide that into three sessions of 20 minutes. And again, I don't think 57 is the magic number. It could be 60, it could be 64. It probably could be 55. Remember your biological systems are not counting things off minute by minute, second by second, least not in most cases. So for those of you that are interested in improving metabolism, check out the episode on cold, or just take the Søberg Protocol, as I call it, which is 11 minutes total per week of uncomfortably cold, but safe, cold exposure. So uncomfortably cold means you really, really want to get out of the shower or the ice bath or whatever environment, but you can stay in, 11 minutes total per week divided across a couple sessions and then 57 minutes per week, or so, of deliberate heat exposure, again, uncomfortably, but uncomfortably hot, excuse me, but safe to stay in, probably divided up across three or more sessions. Okay, so we've talked about the use of sauna to decrease cortisol. We've talked about the use of sauna to increase heat shock proteins. We've talked about the use of sauna to increase FOXO3. Now I'd like to talk about the use of sauna to increase growth hormone. Growth hormone is a hormone that we all naturally secrete from our pituitary, which also resides near the roof of our mouth. The signal for the pituitary to release growth hormone arrives from neurons that exist in the hypothalamus. So growth hormone releasing hormones, believe it or not, that's what they're called, stimulate the release of growth hormone from the anterior pituitary gland into the general circulation, and then growth hormone impacts metabolism and growth of cells and tissues of the body. It is responsible for tissue repair as well. And the growth spurt that everyone experiences during puberty is the consequence of growth hormone. What I'm about to describe is a study that found dramatic, really dramatic I should say, increases in growth hormone, but I also want to emphasize that these increases in growth hormone were not of the sort that are observed in puberty or in infants becoming adolescents or adolescents growing into teenagers. Those levels of growth hormone that are associated with those massive transformations, excuse me, of body morphology, of shape, are far greater than the sorts that I'm talking about here. And yet, as all of us age, when we go from adolescence to our teenage years and then into a young adulthood, but then starting in our early 30s or so, the amount of growth hormone that we secrete is greatly diminished. Normally we would release growth hormone every night, after we go to sleep, in particular in the early part of the night when our sleep is comprised mostly of slow-wave sleep. As we age, less growth hormone is released during that slow wave sleep. There are various things that can promote the release of growth hormone, and we will talk about some of those other things in a moment, things like low blood sugar, turns out, is a stimulus for growth hormone release. And I don't mean hypoglycemia of the sort that makes you dizzy and want to pass out. That's bad. I mean, not having high levels of glucose and insulin in your bloodstream. This is one of the reasons why many people are drawn to intermittent fasting or even prolonged fasting, it's because of the reported increases in growth hormone. I'll touch on those briefly, but if you want to learn more about those and what their real impact is and the extent of growth hormone, check out the episode I did on fasting. You can find that at hubermanlab.com. Certain forms of exercise have also been shown to stimulate growth hormone release. And in a few moments, I'll talk about how exercise and fasting can be combined or how heat can be combined with exercise or certain patterns of food intake to further increase growth hormone. But before I do that, I want to review some of the data, and one study in particular, that discovered certain forms of deliberate heat exposure using sauna can stimulate very large increases in growth hormone output, which for people in their 30s, 40s, and beyond could be very useful, and may also be useful for people who are just trying to stimulate the release of more growth hormone in order to, for instance, recover from exercise or stimulate fat loss or muscle growth or repair of a particular injury. The title of this paper is "Endocrine Effects of Repeated Sauna Bathing." And this is a paper that was published in 1986, which is some years ago, but nonetheless serves as a basis for a lot of other studies that followed. So let me describe what they did in this study. They used an 80 degree Celsius environment, so that's 176 degrees Fahrenheit, and they had subjects do the sauna for 30 minutes, four times per day. So that's two hours total in one day, 30 minutes in the sauna, a period of cool down rest, 30 minutes in the sauna again, cool down rest, a third, and a fourth time. So, two hours total in this 80 degree Celsius environment. So that's a lot, but what they observed was really quite significant. So they had subjects do this protocol, and I should mention they had both male and female subjects in this study, and the entire study lasted a week. They did this two hours of sauna exposure on day one, day three, and day seven of that week. And they measured a lot of different hormones, cortisol, thyroid stimulating hormone, thyroid hormone itself, luteinizing hormone, and follicle stimulating hormone, which are hormones that essentially drive the production of other hormones. We won't get into that too deeply, but if you'd like to learn about FSH, follicle stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone, please see the episode on optimizing testosterone and estrogen at hubermanlab.com. They looked at prolactin and they looked at growth hormone. I'll just cut to the chase and tell you the effects on growth hormone. In subjects that did this two hour a day, 80 degree Celsius protocol experienced 16-fold increases in growth hormone. So they measured growth hormone before the sauna and after the sauna and growth hormone levels went up 16 fold, which is obviously an enormous, and it turns out statistically significant, effect. Now, one important caveat here. Remember earlier when I talked about people who did sauna once a week versus two to three times a week versus four to seven times a week, and the more often people did sauna, the less likely they were to die of cardiovascular events or other things of that sort? Well, in this case, the effects of sauna exposure on growth hormone actually went down the more often that people did this deliberate heat exposure. So as I mentioned, they did this two hour a day divided into 30 minute sessions protocol on day one, day three, and day seven of a week. And what they found was on day one, there was a 16-fold increase in growth hormone. On day three, however, there was still a significant effect on growth hormone as compared to before sauna, but that effect was basically cut by two thirds. So now instead of getting a 16-fold increase, it was more like a three or four-fold increase, which is still a huge increase, but not as great as the increase observed on day one. And then on day seven, there tended to be a two, maybe a threefold increase, but not as great as the one observed on day one. What does this mean? And why does this happen? Well, the reason this happens is because heat, just like cold, is a shock or a stressor to the system. In the context of cold, if you get into a very cold ice bath, for instance, a five-degree ice bath, even for 20 seconds, it's known to increase norepinephrine 200%. It can double the amount of norepinephrine that you suddenly release into your brain and body, which actually can have some positive effects. I'll talk about those in a little bit, but if you were to do that every day, you would become cold adapted. This circuit that compares the shelling core of your body would adjust in ways that it could either predict that cold stimulus, or more likely to create some thermogenetic mechanisms in preparation for that cold exposure. This is why, for instance, people that use deliberate cold exposure to try and increase lipolysis, the burning of fat, oftentimes will get results for a while, but then if they're doing it a lot, a lot, they stop getting those effects. I talk a lot about avoiding cold adaptation, if that's your goal, in the episode on cold, but similar mechanisms are at play here. So we have to imagine that when the subjects got into the sauna on day one, whatever pathways went from measurement of temperature at the shell to changes in temperature at the core led to these big increases in growth hormone, which is basically a way of just describing the result I already told you before. But the fact that that result diminished over time either means that the circuit was not as efficient in communicating that shift in temperature or that that shift in temperature was of less impact because the downstream effectors were not engaged to the same extent because it wasn't as much of a shock. And I think the latter explanation is far more likely. This is very much akin to weight training or cardiovascular exercise, where if you run up a hill very fast, for instance, and your lungs are burning and you're heaving and breathing hard, on the first day, that's a very painful thing. But if you do it every day or every other day, provided you allow yourself to recover, pretty soon you're running up that hill and you're not breathing as hard. There isn't as much burning in your muscles, et cetera, et cetera. Your body adapts. So, one of the key things to understand about the use of deliberate heat exposure is if you're going to use it in order to try and trigger massive increases in growth hormone, you're going to need to be careful about not doing it more than, let's say, once a week. Now, I'm extrapolating from this study. Maybe once every 10 days would be even better, but if you start getting heat adapted, it's very unlikely that you're going to get these massive increases in growth hormone. So I don't mean to be discouraging of using deliberate heat exposure to access growth hormone increases, but if that's your specific goal or your main goal, then I think it's reasonable to say that you don't want to do deliberate heat exposure, at least not of the sort that I described here, more than once a week, or maybe even once every 10 days, and that you would want to time that to other events in your life, maybe hard workouts, or if you are trying to push through a fat loss barrier or simply in order to access growth hormone at peak levels, maybe three times per month or four times per month. If you start doing deliberate heat exposure more often, you'll still get increases in growth hormone, but they are not going to be nearly as large as the increases in growth hormone that you're going to experience if you shock your system with deliberate heat exposure every once in a while. An important way to frame this is actually in the context of cold. And while you might say, wait, this is an episode on heat and heating, not cold, you really can't have a conversation about heat and heating without talking about cold. Because, as I mentioned earlier, if you cool the outside of your body, the shell, you're actually heating up your body. In fact, the circuits that control heating of the body and that control cooling of the body, for instance, the activation of things like shiver or fat loss in response to cold and shiver, those are also controlled by the preoptic area of the hypothalamus. So we can take a step back and start to think about what it would take to design the optimal protocol for deliberate heat exposure by looking at cold, and here's what I mean. There have been beautiful studies showing that if people get into a very cold body of water, four degrees Celsius for 20 seconds. As I mentioned earlier, that will cause the a 200 to 300% increase in norepinephrine. Norepinephrine is also called noradrenaline. And norepinephrine and other so-called catacholamines like dopamine increased dramatically in this very brief cold water exposure. And those increases in norepinephrine and dopamine are known to have long-lasting effects that generally lead to improvements in mood, focus, and alertness. So they're pretty significant. However, they aren't significant enough to increase metabolism to a very high degree. Whereas, other studies have shown that if people go outside in 16 degree Celsius weather with a proper amount, but a fairly minimum amount of clothing, you can experience even greater increases in norepinephrine. But the time that's required in order to experience those increases is six hours at, for instance, 16 degrees Celsius. So if you have six hours a day to be out there in the cold, or if you can turn the air conditioning on in an environment and make it very, very cold, fine. But basically what I'm describing is that you can sort of bookend the parameters that you can use. You can use a very brief exposure to cold or to heat in order to stimulate heat shock proteins, growth hormone, et cetera, or you can use longer exposure in less intense versions of heat and cold. You really have to find what's going to work for you and what you can do safely. And if you're confused about where to start, please use the parameters that I described earlier. First of all, check with your doctor. As always, make sure that you're somebody who can do deliberate cold or heat exposure safely, but that 80 to 100 degrees Celsius, meaning 176 degrees Fahrenheit to 212 degrees Fahrenheit, that I keep repeating over and over, 'cause I know somebody's going to ask, even though I repeat it over and over, which is fine, I'm delighted to keep saying it, and to respond if someone asks again. Well, those parameters are going to kind of bookend what you should do in terms of the intensity of the heat stimulus. How long? Well, we heard earlier, five to 20 minutes. Why not start with five and then ramp it up to 10 or 15? And then if you're feeling really bold and you really want to crank out growth hormone, well, then you could do that 30 minute four times in one day stimulus every once in a while. So you have to really figure out what you're using heat exposure for. This is one of the reasons why when people say, is it better to get in a wet sauna or dry sauna? What's the optimal temperature? Is it better to take a hot shower or a hot bath or a hot tub? To be completely honest, it depends on what you're going to be able to do regularly, whether or not you want to do it regularly, and what your specific goals are. So the purpose of this episode is really to arm you with the underlying mechanisms and to arm you with the general parameters that are going to allow you to access the results that you're seeking. For what it's worth, I personally use a protocol, and I've been using a protocol for a long time, that involves trying, meaning I accomplish this most weeks, not all, trying to get into a sauna for three 20-minute sessions every week. I use a dry sauna, so it's not a steam room. If I don't have access to it, I might take a hot bath or something of that sort. But in general, I just stick to doing the sauna three times a week. And I generally will do that either after a workout, either a cardiovascular workout or a weight workout, or I will do it later in the evening. Why later in the evening? Well, it has to do with the circadian shifts in temperature that we all experience. Talked a lot about this in the circadian episodes and the episodes related to sleep. But in a nutshell, here's how it works. Every early morning, about two hours before your typical wake up time, your body temperature is at its all-time lowest. We call that your temperature minimum. Right about waking your body temperature increases. In fact, an increase in body temperature is part of the reason you wake up at all, unless, of course, you're setting an alarm. Increases in body temperature are going to be one of the major things that wakes up your brain and body. Body temperature will tend to continue to increase through the morning. You'll get that increase in cortisol. That's a healthy increase in cortisol. Body tempera will increase into the afternoon, and then we'll start to drop in the later afternoon. This general contour can be shifted by whether or not you exercise, how often you eat, because of the so-called thermogenetic effects of food. That is, every time you eat there's a slight increase in body temperature and metabolism, but it's not really that significant to throw off this general contour and rhythm, but toward the afternoon around four or five o'clock, most days, depending on time of year, your body temperature will peak, and then it will start to drop. And as your body temperature drops by one to three degrees, and here I'm referring to your core body temperature, not your shell body temperature, you will start to get sleepy and to transition into sleep and to maintain sleep throughout the night. Your body temperature will remain low until you hit that temperature minimum, and then it'll start to come up again. What that means is that when you decide to do sauna, or cold exposure for that matter, it's going to be important. Why? Well, as I mentioned earlier, if you were to make the surface of your body cold, at least in the immediate period after that, your body temperature will increase. So for those of you that are challenged in getting to sleep and are still working on your sleep, remember sleep is the foundation of all mental and physical health and optimal performance, you should try to get really quality sleep of sufficient duration, at least 80% of nights. That should be an ongoing goal throughout your lifespan for a huge number of reasons. Watch the master sleep episode if you'd like to hear are more of those reasons and the mechanisms to make sure that you do that. But in any event, cold exposure late in the evening will start to increase your body temperature again. And that can make it hard for some people to fall asleep. Now, if you're very, very tired, because you've been working hard or training hard or both throughout the day, might not throw off your sleep so much. I've gone through bouts where I'm just so, so busy from morning till night, that the only time I can get into the ice bath or the cold shower is late in the evening and I have no trouble sleeping after that. However, if you have trouble sleeping, I would recommend doing the cold exposure early in the day to match that natural heating, that natural increase in body temperature that occurs across the 24-hour so-called circadian rhythm. Similarly, if you're going to use deliberate heat exposure, you'd be wise to do that later in the day. You'd be wise to do it later in the day because when you get into a warm environment, sure, the surface of your body, the shell, heats up, the core of your body heats up, but then it also activates cooling mechanisms through the preoptic area, and when you get out of that hot environment, sauna or otherwise, your body will continue to cool down. And so many people find that if they do sauna in the later half of the day, or even just before sleep and then take a warmish shower afterwards, then they find it easier to fall asleep. And that makes sense because their body temperature is dropping. And in fact, if your goal is to really promote the maximum amount of growth hormone release, that's also going to be the best time of day to do it, especially if you haven't eaten in the two hours before sleep. So if you're really going for growth hormone release, you're really trying to optimize sleep, and the two things are actually linked because of the release of growth hormone that happens from the pituitary in the early nights sleep, well, then you would be wise to do your sauna maybe once or maybe twice a week in the evening or at nighttime, then taking a warm or cool shower just briefly, just enough to kind of rinse off all the sweat from the sauna, and then get ready for sleep. And to do that, not necessarily fasted, but to try and keep your levels of glucose and insulin somewhat low in your bloodstream. The reason I say that is that having elevated blood glucose and or insulin tends to blunt or reduce growth hormone release, and that's true for any number of different stimuli including exercise and including sauna. So there's a really nice study on this that I can point you to, is this study that was published in the journal Stress. Literally, that's the name of the journal. I love it when journals have these names like Pain or Stress. I find that somewhat amusing for reasons that escape me, but nonetheless, amuse me. The title of this study is "Growth Hormone Response "to Different Consecutive Stress Stimuli in Healthy Men. "Is There Any Difference?" And I don't want to go into all the details of the study, because it's pretty extensive and complicated, but basically what they did is they had people do sauna and then gave them a drug or a condition of having low, not dangerously low, but low blood sugar. Or they had them in a condition where they had low blood sugar and then did sauna. Or they had them do an exercise protocol that led them to increased growth hormone and then had them do low blood sugar. Basically mixing and matching the various stimuli that could increase growth hormone. And what they found was very straightforward. What they found was that doing sauna once and then waiting some period of time and then later that day doing sauna again, they didn't see the same increase in growth hormone both times. First they got a big increase in growth hormone and then less if they did sauna again. If they had people do exercise and then sauna, what they found was exercise could stimulate growth hormone, but then following it with sauna did not allow you to get twice as much growth hormone. In general, anytime you release growth hormone, you reduce the likelihood that you're going to release growth hormone again later that day. And this partially explains that earlier study, where if people did this growth hormone promoting protocol on day one, but then on day three they didn't see quite as big an effect, and on day seven they didn't see quite as big effect. All it basically boils down to is that if you really want to crank out the most amount of growth hormone in response to sauna, do it fasted or at least not having ingested any food in the two or three hours before. You don't have to be deep into a fast, and the whole notion of what breaks a fast is kind of an interesting conversation, because it's contextual. Will a sip of coffee break your fast? Well, maybe probably not. Will one grain of sugar break your fast? No. Will an entire candy bar break your fast? Yes, it has to do with where your blood glucose is when you ingest that particular food item. Not so much what that food item, is per say. But the bottom line here is if you want to crank out the most amount of growth hormone, wait a couple of hours after eating before getting into the sauna, or maybe do it before dinner and then prepare dinner... Do the sauna before dinner, that is, then prepare dinner, then eat dinner, and then make sure that you wait a few hours before going to sleep. You're going to have to arrange your schedule accordingly. I know most people can't arrange their schedule perfectly just to get growth hormone increases, nor do I think people should approach health protocols that way. I think for 90% of people 90% of the time, just getting into the sauna once or twice or three times a week is going to be beneficial for the number of reasons that I described earlier. And you don't want to obsess too much about out the exact conditions you need in order to get the greatest effect out of that sauna treatment. These are just some additional tweaks related to food intake and low level hypoglycemia and exercise, that if you wanted to leverage, you could. So if decreases in body temperature tend to aid the transition of sleep and getting out of a hot sauna tends to promote decreases in body, it makes sense why you would want to put your sauna exposure or other deliberate heat exposure in the second half of your day, and maybe even right before sleep. Now, regardless of what time of day you do sauna or how frequently you do it, you're going to want to hydrate after going in the sauna. When you go in the sauna, you lose water, and when you lose water, you need to replace it. Why? Well, you need water for all your cells, but you also need electrolytes. So make sure that you're replacing the water that you lose in the sauna. Now there's no exact formula of how much water to drink and whether or not you need electrolytes in that water or not. It's going to depend on how much you sweat, meaning how heat adapted you are. It's going to depend on how much salt you tend to excrete in your sweat. Huge amount of variation, but in general, one way to approach this would be to make sure that you drink at least 16 ounces of water for every 10 minutes that you happen to be in the sauna. You could do that before and during and after, you could do it during and after, or you could do it after. Now, there are other reasons to do deliberate heat exposure that have nothing to do with cardiovascular effects, nothing to do with growth hormone or anything of that sort, but rather have to do with improvements in mood and mental health. In fact, the data related to sauna and other forms of deliberate heat exposure improving mood are very impressive, both at the mechanistic level and in terms of the longterm consequences that people experience. First of all, we need to ask, how is it that deliberate heat exposure can improve our mood and wellbeing? Well, it turns out that it improves mood and wellbeing, but it also improves our capacity to feel good in response to things that would ordinarily make us feel somewhat good. Now, this is not a situation where you're going to be walking around grinning ear to ear in response to nothing at all, simply because you went in a sauna. What I'm talking about is the up regulation of pathways, meaning chemical pathways in your brain and body that allow you to experience pleasure in all its fullness. So here's how this whole deliberate heat exposure, sauna, mood thing works. Many of you have probably heard of endorphins. Endorphins are a category of molecules that are made naturally in your brain and body and that are released in response to different forms of stressors. That's right, in response to stressors. So, if ever you've gone out on a long run, and at some point in that run, you feel like you're aching and your joints hurt, or maybe you have shin splints, and you push through that, part of the reason that you experience a lack of pain at some point, usually, or you experience a euphoria during or after that exercise is the exercise-induced effects on endorphin release. Or rather, to be more specific, I should say the exercise-induced consequences on the stress system, which in turn trigger the release of endorphin. In other words, when we experience short term or acute stress, the endorphin system is activated. Now the endorphin system is not just about feeling good, believe it or not. It also about feeling bad. And there are two general categories of endorphins. The first are the ones that you normally hear about, endorphins, things that bind for instance to receptors like the mu opioid receptor. Opioids are not just prescribed compounds or unfortunately drugs of abuse, which they are. We have this opioid crisis in the United States and elsewhere, which is a very serious and tragic thing, but we make endogenous opioids. We make endorphins that naturally act as pain relievers and that make us feel mildly euphoric. We also make endorphins such as dynorphine, that's D-Y-N-O-R-P-H-I-N-E, dynorphine, that actually make us feel worse in response to stressors. When we get into a hot sauna, or a hot environment of any kind, dynorphins are liberated in the brain and body. And I should mention that dynorphins are made by many neurons in many different areas of the brain. So you might think, well, why would I want that? Why would I want to release dynorphine into my brain and body? Well, first of all, when you get into an uncomfortably hot situation, uncomfortably hot scenario, oh gosh, this is sounding terrible. And a deliberately hot environment that you are using to try and trigger some sort of biological or psychological benefit, I should say, the discomfort that you feel, the desire to get out of that environment, is in part the consequence of the release of dynorphine. It's also the consequence of the activation of that sympathetic nervous system. Remember, the preoptic area can communicate with the amygdala and trigger that kind of fight or flight mode, I want to get out of the sauna. This is really, really hot. But dynorphine is also liberated from a certain number of neurons. Dynorphine binds to what's called the CAPA receptor. The CAPA receptor binds dynorphine and triggers pathways in the brain and body that lead to agitation, to stress, and believe it or not to a general sense of pain. This is why you want to get out of the hot sauna, and remember if it's unsafe levels of hot, then you should get out of that sauna or other hot environment. But if you're working in a range or you're exposing yourself to a range of heat that's uncomfortable, but safe to be in, dynorphine will be liberated from these neurons, bind to the CAPA receptor. And as a downstream consequence of that, there will be an increase in the receptors that bind the other endorphins, the endorphins that make you feel soothed, that make you feel happy, and that make you feel mild euphoria. So there've been a number of studies showing that initially deliberate heat exposure, by sauna or otherwise, causes the release of dynorphine. In fact, I think it's fair to say that every time we get into a hot environment that's uncomfortable or a cold environment that's uncomfortable, dynorphine is likely released and binding to the CAPA receptor. But over time that binding of dynorphine into the CAPA receptor leads to downstream changes in the way that the feel good endorphins, things like endorphin binding to the mu opioid receptor, and there are still other feel good endorphins, so to speak. That system becomes much more efficient, such that people feel an elevation in their baseline level of mood, and when a good or happy event comes along, they feel a heightened level of happiness or joy or awe or improved mood in response to that. This is not unlike the effects of caffeine on the dopamine receptor that I've described previously. And for those of you that aren't familiar with it, many of you drink caffeine and love it. Part of the reason you love it is because of the release of certain neurochemicals, like norepinephrine, et cetera, the energy that it gives you. Maybe the taste, I would hope, as well, but caffeine ingestion also causes increases in dopamine receptor concentration and efficacy. In other words, it allows the receptors for dopamine to work better so that for a given amount of dopamine release, you experience more pleasure and motivation. This is a similar mechanism, but within the endorphin pathway. So what does it mean? It means that a little bit of discomfort as a consequence of deliberate heat exposure, while in the short term, doesn't feel good, by definition, it is activating pathways that are allowing the feel molecules and neural circuitries that exist in your brain and body to increase their efficiency, placing you in a better position to be joyful in response to the events of life. I confess I'm very excited about the data on deliberate heat exposure and improvements in the chemical systems that underlie good mood. And just to underscore this further, the dynorphine system is not unique to heat-induced stress. In fact, there are beautiful studies and reviews out there about the role of dynorphine in stress and depression, in stress and alcoholism, just as a brief aside, and in the future we will do a whole episode on alcohol and alcoholism, but turns out that chronic alcohol use and alcoholism causes changes in dopamine receptors that make it very difficult for people to achieve pleasure through things other than alcohol, and even alcohol. That's kind of the really diabolical nature of addiction, which is the thing that initially brings pleasure, eventually is just required to maintain baseline levels of dopamine. And I've talked before, and Dr. Anna Lembke, when she was a guest on this podcast, talked about the pleasure pain balance that exists within the dopamine system. It is beautifully described in her book "Dopamine Nation," by the way. Excellent book I recommend to all people, addicts or not. Well, in that context of pleasure and pain it's very clear what the pleasure molecule is. It's actually a molecule more related to motivation, and that's dopamine. The pain molecule, however, appears to be dynorphine. And the fact that dynorphine is dysregulated in stress and depression and alcoholism and the relationship between dynorphine and dopamine is something that we should all take very seriously. And for that reason, I'm very excited about the fact that deliberate heat exposure can leverage the dynorphine system in a short term and an acute way that allows mood to improve after the sauna exposure. So, for those of you that don't like heat exposure, keep in mind that a lot of the observed positive effects on our biology relate to metabolism, cardiovascular function, but also mental health. And along those lines, there is a wonderful study, again, published in 2018. I don't know why. I guess 2018 was a big year for deliberate heat exposure studies. The title of this study is "Sauna Bathing "and Risk of Psychotic Disorders." And this was a prospective cohort study. Again, we'll provide a link to this study. It's a really interesting study that explored the relationship between mental health, so people suffering from various forms of psychoses, schizophrenia and other forms of psychoses, and use of sauna. So essentially what this study did is they looked at a very large number of subjects, more than 2,000 subjects, who had no history of psychotic disorders. They were classified into three groups based on their frequency of sauna use, either once a week, two to three to times per week, or four to seven times per week. This should call to mind that earlier study on all-risk mortality and cardiovascular event risk. And then they explored the hazard ratio for psychosis specifically, meaning how likely it was that people would develop psychotic symptoms or full blown psychotic illness, according to their frequency of sauna session. So, again, this isn't causal, this is correlative. And according to the data in this study, what they concluded is that there was a strong and inverse independent association between frequent sauna bathing and the future risk of psychotic disorders in this population. Now, this does not mean that going into a sauna seven times per week is going to prevent people from becoming schizophrenic, necessarily, or from having a psychotic episode, necessarily. And of course, frequent sauna use will be related to other health-promoting activities. But in this study, as in the previous study, they went to great lengths in order to try and limit those so-called confounding variables. Now, of course, this is just one study, and again, it's correlative, not causal, but based on the large number of subjects they included, plus the rigor of the statistical analysis, we're starting to see a general picture that using the sorts of sauna protocols that I've described throughout this episode, five to 20 minutes or so, done one to seven times per week is associated with a general improvement in cardiovascular health, a general improvement in mental health, and it really points to the fact that, yes, sauna done acutely for three or four times a day, 30 minutes each session separated by cooling, maybe getting into cold bath, sure that can potently increase growth hormone, but done on a more regular basis can reduce cortisol, improve heart health, improve mental health. And for that reason, and the fact that for most people, it is conceivable to come up with a way that you could get into deliberate heat exposure for a minimum of cost. If it's a hot bath, or if you had to resort to bundling up and going for a jog, this sort of thing, or if you have access to it, a sauna of some sort, that we're really talking about a stimulus to initiate a large number of different biological cascades that wick out to improve multiple aspects of brain and body health. So up until now, I've been talking about whole body heating. So for instance, putting your whole body into the sauna, which of course is what most people do, or getting into a hot tub or hot bath up to your neck, or in the cases where we were talking about deliberate cold exposure as a means to increase core body temperature and metabolism, getting into an ice bath or cold water of some sort up to your neck or into a cold shower, et cetera. Now I'd like to talk about deliberately heating or cooling specific parts of the body, meaning certain surface areas of your body as a means to get effects on those particular areas, as well as at the whole body level. Numerous times throughout this episode, I've talked about the dangers of overheating. So what should you do if you think you or someone else is hyperthermic, is too hot? Well, if you understand just a little bit about the cooling and heating systems of your shell and core, there are some terrific tools that you can use in order to cool off your core quickly. And remember the core consists of the nervous system, the spinal cord, and the viscera, which are really the organs you're trying to protect. So, being able to cool off the core of your body quickly can be very beneficial, and in some cases, it could even save your life. There is a way to more quickly heat or cool the body, and that's through specific elements of your shell, meaning particular skin surfaces. I've talked extensively about this in the episode on cold. It was also covered in the episode with my guest, Dr. Craig Heller, from the Biology Department at Stanford. It relates to the so-called glabrous skin surfaces on the upper half of our face, palms of our hands, and the bottoms of our feet. And for those of you that have heard this before I encourage you to continue to listen nonetheless, because today I'm going to talk about specifically how to heat the body or cool the body through these glabrous skin surfaces. Very briefly, the mechanism is as follows. The palms of our hands, the bottoms of our feet, and the upper half of our face overly specific types of vasculature, meaning specific types of veins and arteries that don't have capillaries between them, and as a consequence, heat and cold can move very quickly from the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the feet, and the upper half of our face, and change our core body temperature. There's a name for these particular vascular structures. They're called AVAs or arteriovenous astemoses. Basically veins and arteries interacting directly without capillaries in between, which allows cooling of blood or heating of blood much more quickly than is possible by applying colder heat elsewhere on the body, where capillaries intervene between veins and arteries. These AVAs, arteriovenous anastomoses, can be leveraged to cool off your core body temperature very quickly. The key thing is to get the palms of your hands, the bottoms of your feet, and the upper half of your face in contact with a cold surface or fluid that is cold enough to cool the blood and the core of your body, but not so cold that it constricts the veins just below the palms of your hands, the bottoms of your feet, or the upper half of your face. So, not placing ice packs necessarily, but maybe placing cool towels on the bottoms of feet, the palms of the hands, and the upper half of the face, and as they warm up, replacing those with other cool towels. The exact temperature will depend on how hot you happen to be. I can't know that without knowing your particular circumstances. If you'd like to learn more about how to cool off your core very quickly, and some of the details and some of the technologies that are being developed to do that, please see the episode I did with Craig Heller or the episode on cold. If you don't want to go to those episodes, here is a good procedure that you could use. You could grab, for instance, a package of frozen broccoli or frozen blueberries. If someone is really, really warm, make sure they take off their shoes and socks, get their feet on top of those. Ideally get some into their hands as well. Get some cool compresses and get them onto people's face. You could, of course, also put a cool compress on the back of the neck, on the top of the head. That would be an especially good idea if someone were hyperthermic because of the way that cooling of the brain occurs under conditions of hyperthermia. But the key point here is that just putting cold compresses or cold materials onto somebody's torso is not going to be as efficient as cooling those glabrous skin surfaces, the bottoms of the feet, the palms of the hands, and the upper half of their face. Similarly, or I suppose to be more accurate, I should say, conversely, there are times when it is desirable to heat the core of the body. And once again, just simply throwing a hot towel over somebody is not going to be the most efficient way. If someone is hypothermic, they're too cold, it is not a problem to cover them with a blanket. But ideally what you do is you use some warm object or warm fluid to warm the bottoms of their feet, their hands, and the upper half of their face. Of course not so warm that you burn those skin surfaces. This has actually been examined in studies from the Heller Lab. Turns out that, for instance, to get people out of anesthesia, it is beneficial to warm their core body temperature. And of course there is fever, which you should know is an adaptive response. While fever is uncomfortable, and in fact often involves a mismatch between our perception of our shell and a perception of our core temperature. In other words, there are times when our body temperature is really high, we have a fever, and yet we're shivering and we're cold. And that's because under conditions of fever, the immune system liberates certain molecules that impact, and in some ways, intentionally disrupt the preoptic area, the POA, and the way it normally functions so that it can override peripheral signals and simply try and heat the body and kill whatever pathogen has infected the body. So for those of you that think about fever as always a bad thing, it's not. Now, of course we don't want our core body temperature to go so high that tissues of the brain and body are damage. This is one reason why, if a fever ever goes above 103, you need to start getting a little bit worried, 104. There are times when you need to call an ambulance or go to a hospital, you really need to employ cooling methods of the sort that I talked about before to prevent hyperthermia. Of course, safe ranges for body temperature vary between infants and adults. So you can look those up online, depending on the person's age, what is a safe range, what is not. But keep in mind that if you are taking compounds, pills to reduce your fever, you are actually short circuiting the protective mechanism for burning up the pathogen. And that's because most pathogens, bacteria and virus, don't survive well at high temperatures. In fact, in laboratories, if we want to preserve a virus for use, we put it into a freezer. If we want to kill a virus, we heat inoculate it. So in many ways, fever is your natural form of heat inoculation designed to kill pathogens of various kinds. Now last, but certainly not least, I want to refer to the study that I described at the very beginning of this episode, involving what's called local hyperthermia in order to trigger a number of biological processes in fat tissue in order to convert white fat to beige fat, which is the metabolically active form of fat. Many of you, or at least some of you, should be familiar with the fact that deliberate cold exposure can increase brown fat stores, these mitochondrial dense fat stores that can, in turn, allow a person to feel more comfortable in cold temperatures, water, or otherwise, and increase core metabolism. I talked about this in the episode on cold, but very briefly, the general protocol, again, is to get 11 minutes total per week of uncomfortable, yet safe deliberate cold exposure, either through ice bath, cold shower, cold immersion up to the neck, or some other form of cold exposure. That triggers increases in brown fat. That's been beautifully shown by Dr. Susanna Søberg. And that increase in brown fat in turn increases core metabolism and one's ability to feel comfortable in cool temperatures. This was a study done in humans, and there's now ample evidence from animal models to support that this is a general phenomenon that I think most people could use and benefit from. Local hyperthermia is a distinctly different phenomenon. It involves heating a particular surface of the body as a way to convert the white fat at that location to beige fat, which in turn leads to more systemic increases in thermogenesis and increases in metabolism, and believe it or not, in fat loss. Now, the study that I'm referring to is a very recent study that was published, again, in this terrific apex journal, Cell, Cell Press Journal. And again, one of the three top journals, Nature, Science, and Cell are the three top journals. Top because they're the most competitive, but also generally, not always, but generally the most stringent in terms of the review process. Papers that make it into these three journals generally are of very, very high quality. And certainly enough people see them that if they're not of high quality, they get shot down pretty quickly in a short amount of time. Whereas papers in other journals can sometimes last a long time before they're ever replicated, et cetera. The title of this paper is "Local Hyperthermia Therapy Induces Browning of White Fat "and Treats Obesity." This was a study that was performed on mice and humans in the same study. What this study involved was heating of a local patch of skin to 41 degrees Celsius, which is a 105.8 degrees Fahrenheit, but not damaging the skin. So the methods of heating did not involve placing something on the skin that would damage it. In fact, in the study on the mice, they used this kind of clever molecular chicanery in order to do it. And in humans, they used a thermocouple that would allow them to heat the skin up just locally in particular locations on the body that I'll talk about in a moment. They refer to this process as LHT, or local heat therapy. The reason they did this is worth considering. It's long been known from clinical data. And in fact, from a bit of research data that people that experience burn on a small, or unfortunately in some circumstances, significant portion of their body experience overall decreases in body fat and increases in metabolism that can last many years, Now, of course, is not reasonable nor would one ever want to induce burn in order to induce fat loss. But the observed increases in metabolism and fat loss in response to skin surface burn couldn't be explained by reductions in activity related to the burn, for instance. And in fact, there are molecular pathways related to something called UCP1, which is uncoupling protein one. I talked about this also in the cold episode, but don't worry if you didn't see that episode, or if you choose not to. UCP1 has the ability to increase mitochondrial function in ways that increase core body temperature overall, in particular, in beige and brown fat, which are these fat cells that exist generally along our spine, and in particular, in the upper part of our back and around our neck and clavicles. And they're responsible for acting as this sort of a candle, or I should say the fuel or the fat of a candle that can be burned up to manufacture heat in the body. So, if you normally think about fat and you think about blubbery fat, you're thinking about white fat, which again is just a storage site. Beige fat and brown fat exist at just a few locations, mainly internally, around our spinal cord and our clavicles, and those fat stores are responsible for generating heat in our body. So they're a very metabolically active form of fat. Small children have a lot of brown fat and beige fat, in particular because very young children can't shiver. A number of you probably didn't know that, but very young children can't shiver, so they need some way to generate heat in order to make sure that they stay alive if they were ever to get cold. This is also probably the reason why little kids can run around on a cold day outside without their shirt on and they don't even seem to notice, whereas adults are freezing cold. As we get older, the amount of beige and brown fat tends to either reduce or shrink or disappear entirely. It's still debated which happens. But we know that white fat can be converted to this more metabolically active form of beige fat by deliberate cold exposure, according to the protocol I talked about earlier, and now it seems, based on this new study, that local heating of skin tissue can also induce UCP1 and the effects of UCP1 on increasing mitochondria. And in fact, that local hyperthermia, 41 degrees Celsius, that is 105.8 degrees Fahrenheit, can actually induce the conversion of white fat to beige fat. Now that's pretty interesting, and I can already predict the way this is probably going to go in the kind of wellness and biohacking and longevity communities. I'm sure that pretty soon there are going to be people putting heating pads on different fat pads of theirs on their body, trying to reduce, or at least convert the white fat into beige fat. And who knows, maybe that'll work. There have not been many controlled studies of this yet. This is the first, at least to my knowledge, of such studies looking at this in non-burn conditions. Nonetheless, the data are mechanistically even more interesting than this whole business about UCP1, and here's why. Local hyperthermia, using the protocol that I described before, resulted in the increase of a promoter, which is essentially a mechanism by which certain genes regulate their activity. This is a DNA binding of something called HSF1. We don't have to go too deep into the mechanism here or the nomenclature, but HSF stands for heat shock factor one. And HSF1 binding to a particular location in the genome allowed for a different molecule with a very long name. I'll just tell it to you for fun, but you can just let the numbers and letters stream by. It's not important. HNRNPA2B1, shortened to A2B1, which frankly is not that short to begin with, A2B1, is still a name that should be meaningless to most everybody, but here's what's really cool. A2B1 is directly involved in glucose and lipid metabolism and regulates the genes that control glucose and lipid metabolism. So here we have a situation where local heating of skin converted a metabolically sluggish or inactive cell type, the white fat cell, into the metabolically charging, so to speak, beige fat cell, which in turn led to systemic, meaning body-wide increases in metabolism, through two mechanism. One mechanism is this increase in UCP1, which for those of you that want to know, UCP1 causes shifts in the way that potential energy is pushed from the protons through the mitochondria, basically more mitochondrial function, which means more ATP, which means cells are more active, AKA, increased metabolism, and increases in things like heat shock factor one and A2B1, which are involved in lipid and glucose metabolism and regulation. So I want to be very clear, this study does not say that spot reduction is possible with local heating of tissue. I just can see it now that once this paper gets out into the press, people are going to say, oh, heating up a certain patch of skin is going to burn fat or convert fat to some other cell type at that location. Sorry, that's not the way it works. They did observe increases in beige fat cells at certain locations in the body. But those increases in beige fat occurred where beige fat cells always reside, around the spine, the upper neck, the clavicles, and so on. This is exciting because it provides yet another potential mechanism in addition to deliberate cold exposure to increase beige fat, meaning the metabolically active form of fat cell. It also nicely provides a mechanism, or at least a potential mechanism, for the observation that burn, either small patch of skin being burned, or again, sadly large patches of skin being burned, leading to these very extreme and very long lasting increases in body fat loss and metabolism. What, if anything, should you do with this information? Well, first of all, I want to very much caution people about putting anything so hot that it can damage the surface of your skin onto your skin. That would be a terrible idea. However, I do predict a time not too far from now where people will start to explore the use of local skin heating as a means to increase the conversion of white to beige fat, and in turn for beige fat stores to increase metabolism overall, and maybe even improve glucose metabolism and thermogenesis. If you'd like more detail else about this study, we will provide a link to it in the show notes caption. I should mention that the study, at least the portion of the study that was focused on humans, involved roughly equal numbers of males and females. The subjects followed their normal daily schedule, including time and composition of meals, they say, rest and active hours, et cetera, et cetera. The local hyperthermia therapy was done in the following way. Here I'm paraphrasing from their methods section. Subjects were seated in an upright posture. They were wearing a standard test robe with the head and neck and shoulders unclothed and one meter away from a thermal imaging camera, which could basically measure the temperature at their skin surface to make sure that it remained constant across subjects and yet safe. The supraclavicular fat deposits, meaning the upper shoulders and upper back area, were exposed to this thermal source, again, 41 degrees for 20 minutes. So it was 41 degrees for 20 minutes. And their core temperatures and skin temperatures were monitored before and after this local hyperthermic therapy. The subjects were exposed to this local hyperthermia therapy three days per week, separated by day, Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, so they had weekends off, for five weeks total, after which their data were collected. And the study has a number of other really interesting features that are sure to lead to increased understanding of both mechanism and new protocols, such as analysis of the genes and proteins that are activated downstream of this local hyperthermia therapy. I find these data incredibly interesting, in part because of the ways that local hyperthermia therapy mimics deliberate cold exposure therapy. Same downstream mechanisms, UCP1, and some of the other pathways are involved, and all of that points to a somewhat new, but certainly an important concept. Many of you have probably heard of hormesis, which is the subjecting of one's self, or others, I suppose, to enough stress to induce an adaptation of some kind. So hormesis is the reason why if you get into cold water repeatedly, at first, it's very painful psychologically, and over time you get used to it. You never get completely used to it, but you get more used to it. Hormesis is also used to describe the adaptation to cardiovascular exercise or to the hard rep sets of resistance training and the growth of muscles or the strengthening of muscles or the improvement in cardiovascular function to endurance exercise and so forth. Hormesis is a somewhat common term nowadays. If you haven't heard it, now you've heard it. In this paper they describe what is called mitohormesis, which is, in essence, the fact that any number of different stressful stimuli, provided they activate UCP1 and some of these other pathways that I just described, like HSF1, can induce changes in the mitochondria that lead to increases in metabolism. So it shouldn't surprise us that cold and heat can both lead to increases in metabolism and conversion of white fat to beige fat. It shouldn't surprise us because both pathways are stress. Local hyperthermia is stress. Burn certainly is stress. Sauna is a form of stress. Deliberate cold exposure is a form of stress. Exercise is a form of stress. And the adaptation to those stressors is not infinite. All of those protocols, any protocol for that matter, is going to be effective because it's going to converge on an existing internal biological mechanism. So there's no unique mechanism for each protocol. Each protocol that I've talked about today, whether or not it's five minutes or 20 minutes or four times in a day or three times per week or seven times per week is tickling or pushing or stomping, if you will, on a given pathway and really activating it to a mild or to a severe degree. What I've tried to do is to illustrate the general mechanisms by which heat in particular can activate certain biological pathways so that you can devise protocols that are going to be optimal for you and your needs. So just to briefly recap, if you want to get the greatest growth hormone increases, do sauna or other deliberate heat exposure fairly seldom, probably no more than once per week, maybe even less, and do it a lot that day. Just make sure that you break it up into multiple sessions. In the study I described earlier they did four sessions, 30 minutes each. But that was just once a week. If you're interested in the cardiovascular benefits and the potential longevity benefits of sauna, well then it's clear that doing it three to four, maybe even seven times per week is going to be more beneficial than doing it just one or three times per week. It stands to reason that for those of you interested in the general health effects of sauna, about an hour per week broken up into three sessions makes the most sense based on my read of the data. And again, that range of 80 to 100 degrees Celsius is going to be your guide. And in terms of the mental health benefits, it seems that getting a little bit uncomfortable in that heat environment, sauna or otherwise, provided it's safe, is going to be the best way to access those mental health effects by way of increasing dynorphine, which, as you recall, will then increase the ability of endorphin to have its positive effects on mood after you get out of the sauna or other deliberate heat exposure. And in terms of timing, after a workout of any kind, morning or afternoon, or if you're not doing it after a workout, certainly in the later part of the day is going to be most beneficial as it relates to sleep. But of course, there's a caveat there, which I will mention again, which is that for those of you that have no trouble sleeping 'cause you're exhausted or you're just one of these phenomenal sleepers, well then do it any time of day or night. But for most people doing it later in the day is going to be more beneficial because of the post sauna cooling effect and the relationship between cooling by a degree or more as a way to enter sleep. Thank you for joining me today for my discussion about the science of heat and heating for health. If you are learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and or Apple, and on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If you have comments or feedback or suggestions about topics or guests that you'd like us to cover on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That is the best way to support this podcast. As also mentioned at the beginning of the episode, we are now partnered with Momentous Supplements. So if you go to livemomentus.com/huberman, you'll find what we firmly believe to be the highest quality supplements available in the specific dosages that match the peer reviewed science and recommendations made on various episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. You will also find specific protocols of how much to take and when, what time of day, what time of night, et cetera. And you will also find behavioral tools that can synergize with those supplements. Many of you will also be pleased to learn that Momentous Supplements, of course, ships within the United States, but also internationally. If you're not already following us on Instagram or Twitter, please do so. It's Huberman Lab on both Instagram and Twitter. Both places I talk about science and science related tools in short little snippets that often overlap with the contents of the podcast, but often is distinct from the contents of the podcast. In addition, please consider signing up for our newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter. You can do that by going to hubermanlab.com. I should point out that we do not share your email with anybody, and we have a very clear privacy policy that is at that location at hubermanlab.com. The Neural Network Newsletter includes protocols and podcast summaries and other things that we believe people will find useful. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 279 ---
Video ID: UF0nqolsNZc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF0nqolsNZc
Title: Using Light (Sunlight, Blue Light & Red Light) to Optimize Health | Huberman Lab Podcast #68
Published: 2022-04-18 12:00:24 UTC
Description:
I describe the mechanisms by which different wavelengths of light impact the cells, tissues and organs of the human body, and how specifically timed light exposure of specific wavelengths can be used to improve sleep, enhance alertness, modulate hormone levels, and improve mood. I also explain the use of ultraviolet and infrared phototherapies to relieve pain increase testosterone and estrogen levels; improve skin health, appearance and wound healing; and how red light can be used to offset age-related vision loss and provide neuroprotection. Throughout the episode, I describe the mechanisms of light-based therapies and actionable tools that people can use positively impact mental and physical health.  

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
Website - https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast:
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
Skin exposure to UVB light induces a skin-brain-gonad axis and sexual behavior: https://bit.ly/3MbtbeT
Skin Exposure to Ultraviolet B Rapidly Activates Systemic Neuroendocrine and Immunosuppressive Response: https://bit.ly/36nmojd
A visual circuit related to the periaqueductal gray area for the antinociceptive effects of bright light treatment: https://bit.ly/3xutcXo
Light exposure during sleep impairs cardiometabolic function: https://bit.ly/3xykAPq
Light-emitting diodes in dermatology: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials: https://bit.ly/3viUlJW
Low-level laser (light) therapy (LLLT) in skin: stimulating, healing, restoring: https://bit.ly/3vwHJPQ
Weeklong improved colour contrasts sensitivity after single 670 nm exposures associated with enhanced mitochondrial function: https://go.nature.com/3rA6IjT
Red light: A novel, non-pharmacological intervention to promote alertness in shift workers: https://bit.ly/3MfBbvI
Gamma Entrainment Binds Higher-Order Brain Regions and Offers Neuroprotection: https://bit.ly/3vqkgzB

Other Links
Light pads: https://amzn.to/3xAFVIb
Light boxes: https://amzn.to/36lHcaC

Timestamps
00:00:00 Using Light to Improve Health 
00:04:31 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:05:17 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, LMNT
00:09:56 Physics of Light, Electromagnetic Energy
00:12:23 Wavelengths of Light
00:15:38 How Light Penetrates Tissues 
00:20:13 Light & the Body: Direct & Indirect Signals 
00:28:35 Light, Seasonality & Melatonin 
00:33:40 Melatonin: Regulatory & Protective Effects
00:38:49 Tools: Optimizing Melatonin Levels
00:44:49 Sun (UVB light) Exposure, Mating Behavior, Testosterone & Estrogen 
00:58:09 Seasonality, Romantic Passion & Testosterone 
01:02:13 Tool: Skin Sun Exposure & Testosterone 
01:06:13 Light & Improved Pain Tolerance 
01:11:55 Protocol: Sun Exposure & Chronic Pain
01:12:48 Tools: Sunlight (UVB), Blue-Light Blockers, Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD)
01:19:44 Light & Enhanced Immune Function 
01:23:30 Tool: Light During Winter Months
01:26:18 Light Therapies: Local vs. Systemic Exposure 
01:28:54 Tool: Improving Mood, Timing of Natural & Artificial Light
01:32:44 Light Conditions & Sleep Optimization
01:39:00 Infrared Light, Skin & Wound Healing 
01:46:00 Infrared Light Therapy & Skin, Low-Level Laser (Light) Therapy (LLLT)
01:49:20 Infrared Light & Age-Related Vision Loss  
01:59:36 Tools: Infrared Panels, Morning Exposure  
02:05:22 Infrared Light at Night, Shift Work 
02:08:35 Light Flicker Phototherapy & Neuroprotection
02:19:07 Phototherapies for Health 
02:20:50 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify Reviews, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter, Brain-Body Contract

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss light and the many powerful uses of light to optimize our health. We're going to discuss the use of light for optimizing skin health, appearance, and longevity, for wound healing, for optimizing hormone balance, and for regulating sleep, alertness, mood, and even for offsetting dementia. One of the reasons why light has such powerful effects on so many different aspects of our biology is that it can be translated into electrical signals in our brain and body, into hormone signals in our brain and body, and indeed into what we call cascades of biological pathways, meaning light can actually change the genes that the cells of your bodies express. And that is true throughout the lifespan. Today, I will discuss the mechanisms by which all of that occurs. I promise to make it clear for those of you that don't have a biology background. And if you do have a biology background, I'll try and provide sufficient depth so that it's still of interest to you. And I promise to give you tools, very specific protocols that are extracted from the peer-reviewed literature that will allow you to use different so-called wave lengths, which most of us think of as colors, of light in order to modulate your health in the ways that are most important to you. For those of you that are thinking that the use of light to modulate health falls under the category of woo science, pseudoscience, or biohacking, well, nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, in 1903, the Nobel Prize was given to Niels Finsen, he was Icelandic, he lived in Denmark, for the use of phototherapy for the treatment of lupus. So there's more than a hundred years of quality science emphasizing the use of light, and as you'll soon see, the use of particular wavelengths or colors of light in order to modulate the activity of cells in the brain and body. So while it is the case that many places and companies are selling therapies and products related to the use of flashing lights and colored lights, promising specific outcomes from everything from stem cell renewal to improvement of brain function, and some of those don't have any basis in science, there are photo therapies that do have a strong foundation in quality science, and those are the studies and the protocols that we are going to discuss today. But I thought that people might appreciate knowing that over a hundred years ago, people were thinking about the use of light for the treatment of various diseases and for improving health. And indeed many of those therapies are used today in high quality hospitals and research institutions and, of course, clinics and homes around the world. One of the more exciting examples of phototherapy in the last few years is the beautiful work of Dr. Glen Jeffery at University College London. The Jeffery Lab is known for doing pioneering and very rigorous research in the realm of visual neuroscience. And in the last decade or so, they turned their attention to exploring the role of red light therapy for offsetting age-related vision loss. What they discovered is that just brief exposures to red light early in the day can offset much of the vision loss that occurs in people 40 years or older. And what's remarkable about these studies is that the entire duration of the therapy is just one to three minutes, done just a few times per week. What's even more exciting is that they understand the mechanism by which this occurred. The cells in the back of the eye that convert light information into electrical signals that the rest of the brain can understand and create visual images from, well, those cells are extremely metabolically active. They need a lot of ATP or energy. And as we age, those cells get less efficient at creating that ATP and energy. Exposure to red light early in the day, and it does have to be early in the day, allowed those cells to replenish the mechanisms by which they create ATP. I'll talk about these experiments in more detail later in the episode and the protocols so that you could apply those protocols should you choose. But I use this as an example of our growing understanding of not just that phototherapies work but how they work. And it is through the linking of protocols and mechanism that we, meaning all of us, can start to apply phototherapies in a rational, safe, and powerful way. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled The Brain Body Contract, during which I will discuss science and science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. And I should point out that while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast and on various social media posts, most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere. So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th. You can access tickets by going to hubermanlab.com/tour. And I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, also called AG1. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG1 and the reason I still take AG1 once or twice a day is that it covers my foundational vitamin, mineral, and probiotic needs. It also has adaptogens and things like zinc for immune system function, but the probiotics are one of the key features in there. I've done several podcasts on the gut microbiome, which are these trillions of microbiota that live in our digestive tract, and that are crucial for our immune system, brain function, and so on. One way to enhance our gut microbiome to ensure that it's healthy is to make sure that we get the correct probiotics. And Athletic Greens has the correct prebiotics and probiotics that ensure a healthy gut microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, so in the car and on the plane. I should mention the Athletic Greens is delicious. I love the way it tastes. I mix mine with some water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. This special offer is the five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3+K2. Vitamin D3 has been shown to be important for a tremendous number of biological functions. Many of us who get sunlight get enough vitamin D3. Many of us, even if we do get sunlight, do not get enough Vitamin D3. So the year's supply of vitamin D3 also has K2, which is important for cardiovascular function for calcium regulation. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3+K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. Nootropic is a smart drug. And personally, I'm not a big fan of the concept of a smart drug, at least not the way that most people talk about smart drugs or nootropics, for the following reason. Being smart involves various things. There is creativity, there's focus, there's task switching, and so on. And each one of those involves different operations in the brain. Different neural circuits, different neurochemicals have to be deployed in order for us to, for instance, be very focused or for us to be very creative or for us to be able to switch tasks easily. Thesis understands this. And for that reason, they've developed custom nootropics that are aimed at getting your brain and body into particular states for particular types of work or physical activity. In order to accomplish that, they've created unique blends of high quality ingredients. And each of those blends is designed to get your brain and body into a particular mode, such as focus, clarity, or motivation. I've been using Thesis nootropics for over six months now. And I have to say it's been a total game changer and very unique from the experience of using sort of what I call catchall nootropics. So with Thesis, it's really directed toward particular brain-body states. I should also mention that they tailor those custom blends to you. So by taking a quiz on their site, they will tailor the blend to you and your specific needs and the things you don't want. So if you want to try your own personalized nootropic starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman. You'll take a three-minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. And then based on the outcomes with those, they can update your formulations for you. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is a properly balanced electrolyte drink that has no sugar. When we get our electrolytes in the proper ratios, the cells of our brain and body can function optimally. Many people are surprised to find that when they increase their sodium intake, provided that it is a proper balance with potassium and magnesium, they can think more clearly, they recover from exercise better, and they have more energy. There is no surprise as to how that all works, however. Every cell of your body requires the electrolytes to function. And in particular, the neurons of your brain and body require sodium in order to function. So while people with pre-hypertension and hypertension definitely need to be careful about increasing their sodium intake, many people do well to increase their sodium intake, again, provided it's in the proper balance with potassium and magnesium. LMNT provides that proper balance. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's L-M-N-T, .com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack. You only cover the cost of shipping. Again, that's drinklmnt, L-M-N-T, .com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Okay, let's talk about light. First, I want to talk about the physics of light, and I promise to make that very clear, even if you don't have a background in physics. And then I want to talk about the biology of light, meaning how light is converted into signals that your brain and body can use to impact things like organ health or disease, or how it can use light in order to repair particular organs, like your skin, your eyes, your brain, et cetera. The physics of light can be made very simple by just illustrating a few key bullet points. The first bullet point is that light is electromagnetic energy. If the word electromagnetic feels daunting to you, well, then just discard that and just think of light as energy and think of energy as something that can impact other things in its environment. Now, the way to imagine light or to conceptualize light as energy is that all around you light is traveling in these little wavelengths. And the reason, for those of you that are watching, I'm making a little wavey motion with my hand is that's actually the way that light energy moves in little waves. Just like sound waves are coming at you and impinging on your ears, if you can hear me talking right now, that is happening, those are sound waves, meaning the movement of air particles out there impacting your ear drum. Well, light energy is just little bits of electromagnetic energy traveling through your environment all the time in these little waves and impinging on your brain and body and eyes, et cetera. And as I mentioned before, energy can change the way that other things behave. It can cause reactions in cells of your body. It can cause reactions in fruit, for instance, right? You see a piece of fruit and it's not ripe, but it gets a lot of sunlight and it ripens. That's because the electromagnetic energy of sunlight had an impact on that plant or that tree, or even on the fruit directly. As a parallel example of energy and its ability to impact other things, we are all familiar with food and the fact that food has calories. Calorie is a measure of energy. It has everything to do with how much heat is generated when you burn a particular article of food, believe it or not. And it turns out that how hot a given article of food burns gives you a sense of how much energy it can provide your body in terms of your body's ability to store or use that energy. So again, think of light as electromagnetic energy, but really put that word energy into capital letters, embed that in your mind, going forward, and you'll understand most of the first bullet point of what light is in terms of the physics of light. Now, the second thing that you need to understand about the physics of light is that light has many different wavelengths, and the simplest way to conceptualize this is to imagine that cover of that Pink Floyd album, where there's a prism. You have a white beam of light going into that prism. And then the prism splits that beam of light into what looks like a rainbow. So you got your reds, your orange, your greens, your blues, your purples, et cetera. Anytime we have light in our environment, that is so-called white light. It includes all those wavelengths, but sunlight and other forms of light also have other wavelengths of light that we can't see. So when we think about the rainbow, that's just the visible spectrum of light. There are also wavelengths of light that are not visible to us, but that are visible to some other animals, and that can still impact your brain and body because there is still energy at those wavelengths. I'll give a few examples of this. Humans are not a species that can see into the infrared realm of the spectrum. A pit viper, meaning a snake that has infrared sensors, however, can sense in the infrared. So if you were to walk through a jungle and there's a pit viper there, it sees you as a cloud of heat emission because your body is emitting infrared energy all the time. You're casting off infrared energy. The snake can see it, you can't. If you were to put on a particular set of goggles that were infrared goggles, well, then you would be able to see the heat emissions of any organism, human or otherwise, that could emit infrared energy. Let's take the opposite end of the spectrum. We are familiar with seeing things that are blue or green or very pale blue. But as we say below that, meaning even shorter wavelength light is out there. Ultraviolet light is a really good example of light energy that's coming from the sun and is in our environment and is being reflected off surfaces all the time. We don't see it. And yet, if it's very bright outside, that ultraviolet light can burn our skin. As you'll learn in today's episode, ultraviolet light can also positively impact us. In fact, I will describe a particular set of new results that show that ultraviolet light viewed for just a few minutes each day, or landing on the skin for just a few minutes each day, can actually offset a lot of pain. It actually has the ability to reduce the amount of pain sensed by your body. And we now understand the specific circuits in the brain and body that allow that to happen. I'll talk about that and the related protocols a little bit later. So the important thing to understand about the physics of light is that there's energy at all these different wavelengths. We only see some of those wavelengths, which basically is to say that light impacts us at many different levels. And the so-called levels that I'm referring to are the different wavelengths of light. And you're welcome to think of the different wavelengths of light as different colors, but do understand that there are truly colors of light that you and I can't see, and yet that have powerful impact on your brain and body. Now, the third bullet point to understand about the physics of light is that different wavelengths of light, because of the way that their wave travels, can penetrate tissues to different depths. This is very, very important. Today, we're going to talk a lot about red light therapies and near-infrared light therapies. Those are so called longer wavelengths. Longer wavelengths, just think of a bigger, longer wave, right? A bigger curve, as opposed to short wavelength light, which is going to be shorter, right? A short wavelength light would be something like blue or green light or ultraviolet light. Blue, green, and ultraviolet light, because its shortwave length light, doesn't tend to penetrate tissues very easily. It has to do with the way that the physics of light interacts with the physical properties of your skin and other tissues of your body. But basically, if you were to shine UV light onto your arm, for instance, it could impact the skin on the surface of the arm, maybe some of the cells just beneath the top layer of skin, but it wouldn't penetrate much deeper. Long wavelength light like red light and near-infrared light has this amazing ability to penetrate through tissues, including your skin. And so if we were to shine red light or near-infrared light onto your arm, it would pass through that top layer of skin. It might impact it a little bit, but it could penetrate deeper into your skin, not just to the skin layers, but maybe even down to the bone, maybe even down to the bone marrow. And for many people, this will be hard to conceptualize. You think, "Well, wait, I've got the skin there. Doesn't the light just bounce off?" And the answer is no, because of the way that long wavelength light interacts with the absorbance properties of your skin. Absorbance properties are just the way that the skin takes light energy and converts it into a different form of energy. And your skin is not able to take long wavelength light, like red light and near-infrared light, and absorb it. But the tissues deeper in your body can. So if you shine a red light or near-infrared light onto the surface of your skin, you'll see a red glow there as a reflectance on the surface of your skin. But a lot of the photon energy, the light energy in those longer wavelengths is indeed passing through those top layers of skin, into the deeper layers of skin, and can even make it into the deep layers of your arm. And as we start to transition from the physics of light to the biological impacts of light, just understanding that the different wavelengths of light impact our tissues at different levels, literally at different depths, will help you better understand how light of different colors, of different intensities and how long you are exposed to those colors and intensities of light can change the way that the cells and the organs of your body work. And if it didn't sound weird enough that you can pass light through particular tissues and have them land and be absorbed at tissues deeper in your body, well, it turns out that different wavelengths of light are also best absorbed by particular so-called organelles within your cells. What are organelles? Organelles are the different compartments and different functions within a given cell. So for instance, your mitochondria, which are responsible for generating ATP and energy in your cells, those exist at a particular depth, at a particular location within a cell. They're not all at the cell surface. They sit somewhat deeper in the cell. The nucleus of your individual cells contains DNA, and that sits at a particular depth or location within your cell. Different wavelengths of light not only can penetrate down into different tissues and into different cells of your body, but they can also penetrate and access particular organelles, meaning mitochondria or the nucleus or the different aspects of your cells that are responsible for different functions. This is exquisitely important, and it's exquisitely powerful because as you'll learn today, particular wavelengths of light can be used to stimulate the function of particular organelles within particular cells, within particular organs of your body. I can think of no other form of energy, not sound, not chemical energy, so not drugs, not food, not touch, no form of energy that can target the particular locations in our cells, in our organelles, in our organs and in our body, to the extent that light can. In other words, if you had to imagine a real world surgical tool by which to modulate our biology, light would be the sharpest and the most precise of those tools. Now, let's talk about how light is converted into biological signals. There's several ways in which that is accomplished, but the fundamental thing to understand is this notion of absorption of light energy. Certain pigments or colors in the thing that is receiving the light energy, meaning the thing that the light energy lands on, are going to absorb particular wavelengths of light. Now, I promise you that you already intuitively know how this works. For instance, if you were to sit outside on a very bright sunny day, and you had a table in front of you that was metal, you might find it hard to look down at that metal table because it's reflecting a lot of light of particular wavelengths. If that table were pitch black, however, it wouldn't reflect quite as much, and you would be able to comfortably look at at it. If that table were red, it might be somewhere in between. If that table were green, it would be also somewhere in between, but let's say it were very light blue. Well, then it might reflect almost as much as a table that were just metal or a white table surface. So the absorbance properties of a given surface will determine whether or not light energy goes and stays at that location and has an impact on that location or whether or not it bounces off. Every biological function of light has to do with the absorbance or the reflectance of light or light passing through that particular thing, meaning that particular cell or compartment within a cell. I'd like to make it clear how this works by using the three primary examples of how you take light in your environment and convert it into biological events. We have photoreceptors in the back of our eyes. These photoreceptors come in two major types, the so-called rods and the cones. The rods are very elongated, they look like rods. And the cones look like little triangles. Rods and cones have within them photopigment. They have dark stuff that's stacked up in little layers. Rods absorb light of essentially any wavelength. There's some variation to that, but let's just say rods don't care about the different colors of light. They will absorb light energy, photon energy, if it's red, if it's green, if it's blue, if it's yellow, doesn't matter, as long as that light is bright enough. And it turns out that rods are very, very sensitive. They can detect very, very small numbers of photons. And rods are essentially what you use to see in very low light conditions. We'll return more to vision later. The cones come in three major varieties. At least for most people who aren't colorblind, you have so-called red cones, green cones, and blue cones. But they're not really red, green, and blue in the back of your eye. They are cones that either absorb long wavelength light, red, that absorb medium wavelength light, green, or short wavelength light, blue. The reason that they can absorb different wavelengths of light is they have different photopigments. So much as the example I gave before, where you have different tables outside in the sunny environment, and some are reflecting light more than others, others are absorbing light more than others, well, so too, the photoreceptors, meaning the cones, are absorbing light of different wavelengths to different extents. And in an absolutely incredible way, your brain is actually able to take that information and create this perception that we have of color. But that's another story altogether that we'll just touch on a little bit more later, but that if you want to learn all about, you can go to our episode on vision. So that's photoreceptors in the back of your eye, absorbing light of different wavelengths, rods, and cones. The other place, of course, where light can impact our body is on our surface, on our skin. And skin has pigment too. We call that pigment melanin. We have within our skin multiple cell types, but in the top layer of skin, which is called the epidermis, we have keratinocytes, and we have melanocytes. And the melanocytes are the cells that create pigmentation of the skin. And of course there is wide variation in the degree to which there is pigmentation of the skin, which has to do with genetics, also has to do with where you were born and raised, how much light exposure you have throughout the year, right? So people toward the equator tend to have more melanocyte activity than people who are located at the North Pole. And of course, people live at different locations throughout the Earth, regardless of their genetic background or where they were born. And so, as you all know, with light exposure, those melanocytes will turn on genetic programs and other biological programs that lead to enhanced pigmentation of the skin, which we call tanning. The way they do that is by absorbing UV light specifically. So with melanocytes, we have a very specific example of how a pigment absorbs light of a particular length, in this case, ultraviolet shortwave length light, which in turn creates a set of biological signals within those cells that in turn creates changes in our skin pigmentation. So we have photoreceptors, we have melanocytes. And the third example I'd like to provide is that of every cell of your body. And what I mean by that is that every cell of your body, meaning a cell that is part of your bone tissue or your bone marrow or heart tissue or liver or spleen, if light can access those cells, it will change the way that those cells function for better or for worse. For many organs within our body that reside deep to our skin, light never arrives at those cells. A really good example of this that we'll touch on later is the spleen. Unless you have massive damage to your body surface, unless you literally have a hole in your body, light will never land directly on your spleen, but the spleen still responds to light information through indirect pathways. And those indirect pathways arise through light arriving on the skin and light arriving on the eyes. So a key principle that I'm going to return to again and again today is that the ways in which light can impact the biology of your organelles, your cells, your organs, and the tissues, and indeed your whole body, can either be direct, so for instance, light onto your skin impacting skin or light onto your photoreceptors impacting the photoreceptors of your eye, or it can be indirect. It can be light arriving on your photoreceptors, the photoreceptors then informing another cell type, which informs another cell type, which then relays a signal in kind of a bucket brigade manner off to the spleen and says to the spleen, "Hey, there's a lot of UV light out here. We're actually under stress. In fact, there's so much UV light that you need to activate an immune program to protect the skin." And in response to that, the spleen can deploy certain signals in certain cell types to go out and start repairing skin that's being damaged by UV light. So we have direct signals and we have indirect signals, but in every case, it starts with light of particular wavelengths being absorbed by particular pigments or properties of the surfaces that those light waves land on. And as you recall from our discussion about the physics of light, remember, it's not just about light impinging on the surface of your body. Light can actually penetrate deep to the skin and access at least certain tissues and cells of your body. Even though you can't see those wavelengths of light, they are getting into you all the time. So perhaps the best way to wrap this discussion about the physics and the biology of light with a bit of a bow is to think about light as a transducer, meaning a communicator of what's going on in the environment around you and that some of those signals are arriving at the surface and impacting the surface of your body. But many of those signals are being taken by cells at the surface of your body, meaning your melanocytes in your skin and the photoreceptors of your eyes, and then being passed off as a set of instructions to the other organs and tissues of your body. Light can impact our biology in very fast, moderately fast, and slow ways. But even the slow ways in which light can impact our biology can be very powerful and very long-lasting. Just as a quick example of the rapid effects of light on our biology, if you were to go from a room that is dimly lit or dark into a very brightly lit room, you would immediately feel very alert. You might say, "No, that's the not true. Sometimes I wake up and it's dark, and I kind of stumble out and it's lighter out in the next room. And it takes me a while to wake up." Ah, but if we were to move you from a room that was very dark to very bright, a signal conveyed from your eyes to an area of your brain stem called the locus coeruleus would cause the release of adrenaline similar to the release of adrenaline if you were to be dropped into very, very cold water all of a sudden. Just an immediate wake-up signal to your brain and body. So that's an example of a rapid effect of light on your biology, not a very typical one, but nonetheless, one that has a hardwired biological mechanism. At the other end of the spectrum are what we call slow integrating effects of light on our biology. So what I mean by that are ways in which your body is taking information about light in the environment, not in the sort of snapshot, acute sense, but averaging the amount of light in your environment. And that average light information is changing the way that your biology works. But even though this is a slow process, as I mentioned before, it's a very powerful one. The primary example of this are so-called circannual rhythms. Circannual rhythms are literally a calendar that exists within your body that uses not numbers, but amounts of hormone that are released into your brain and body each day and each night as a way of knowing where you are in the 365-day calendar year. Now that might seem kind of crazy, but it's not crazy. The Earth travels around the sun once every 365 days. And depending on where you are on the Earth, where you live, you are going to get more or less light each day on average, depending on the time of year. So if you're in the Northern Hemisphere, in the winter months, days are shorter, nights are longer. In the summer months, days are longer, nights are shorter. And of course, things change whether or not you're in the Northern Hemisphere or the Southern Hemisphere, but nonetheless in short days you have more darkness, that's obvious. And if you understand that light arriving on the eyes is absorbed by a particular cell type called the intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cell. It's just a name. You don't need to know the name, but if you want, it's the so-called intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cell, also called the melanopsin cell because it contains an opsin, a photopigment that absorbs shortwave length light that arrives through sunlight. Those cells communicate to particular stations in the brain that in turn connect to your so-called pineal gland, which is this little pea-sized gland in the middle of your brain that releases a hormone called melatonin. And the only thing you need to know is that light activates these particular cells, the intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin cells, which in turn shuts down the production of melatonin from the pineal gland. If you think about this in terms of the travel of the Earth around the sun across the year, what it means is that in short days, because there's very little light on average landing on these cells, the duration of melatonin release will be much longer because as I mentioned before, light inhibits, it shuts down melatonin. Whereas in the summer months, much more light on average will land on your eyes, right? Because days are longer. Even if you're spending more time indoors, on average, you're going to get more light to activate these cells. And because light shuts down melatonin production, what you'll find is that the duration of melatonin release for the pineal is much shorter. So melatonin is a transducer. It's a communicator of how much light on average is in your physical environment. What this means is for people living in the Northern Hemisphere, you're getting more melatonin release in the winter months than you are in the summer months. So you have a calendar system that is based in a hormone, and that hormone is using light in order to determine where you are in that journey around the sun. Now, this is beautiful. At least to me, it's beautiful because what it means is that the environment around us is converted into a signal that changes the environment within us. That signal is melatonin, and melatonin is well known for its role in making us sleepy each night and allowing us to fall asleep. Many of you have probably heard before, I am not a big fan of melatonin supplementation for a number of reasons, but just as a quick aside, the levels of melatonin that are in most supplements are far too high to really be considered physiological. They are indeed super physiological in most cases, and melatonin can have a number of different effects, not just related to sleep, but that's supplemented melatonin. Here, I'm talking about our natural production and release of melatonin according to where we are in the 365-day calendar year. Endogenous melatonin, meaning the melatonin that we make within our bodies naturally, not melatonin that's supplemented, has two general categories of effects. The first set of effects are so called regulatory effects and the others are protective effects. The regulatory effects are for instance, that melatonin can positively impact bone mass. So melatonin can, for instance, turn on the production of osteoblasts, which are essentially stem cells that make more bone for us that make our bones stronger and that can replace damaged aspects of our bone. Melatonin is also involved in maturation of the gonads during puberty, the ovaries and the testes. Although there, the effects of melatonin tend to be suppressive on maturation of the ovaries and testes, meaning high levels of melatonin tend to reduce testicle volume and reduce certain functions within the testes, including sperm production and testosterone production. And within the ovaries, melatonin can suppress the maturation of eggs, et cetera. Now, I don't want anyone to get scared if you've been taking melatonin. Most of the effects of melatonin on those functions are reversible, but I should point out that one of the reasons why children don't go into puberty until a particular age is that young children tend to have chronically high endogenous melatonin. And that is healthy to keep them out of puberty until it's the right time for puberty to happen. So melatonin can increase bone mass, but reduces gonad mass, so to speak. It's going to have varying effects depending on the ratios and levels of other hormones and other biological events in the body. But as you can see, melatonin has these powerful regulatory on other tissues. I should also mention that melatonin is a powerful modulator of placental development. So for anyone that's pregnant, if you're considering melatonin supplementation, please, please, please talk to your OB/GYN, talk to your other doctor as well. You want to be very, very cautious because of the powerful effects that melatonin can have on the developing fetus and placenta. For people that are not pregnant, in fact, all people, melatonin has a powerful effect on the central nervous system as a whole. Your brain and spinal cord are the major components of your central nervous system , and melatonin, because it's associated with darkness, which is just another way of saying that light suppresses melatonin, melatonin is thereby associated with the dark phase of each 24-hour cycle, it can have a number of different effects in terms of waking up or making our body feel more sleepy. And it does that by way of impacting cells within our nervous system, literally turning on certain brain areas, turning off other brain areas. And it does that through a whole cascade of biological mechanisms, a bit too detailed to get into today. So melatonin is regulating how awake or asleep we are. It tends to make us more asleep, incidentally. It's regulating our timing of puberty, and it's regulating how our gonads, the testes and ovaries, function, even in adulthood, to some extent. And it's regulating bone mass. As I mentioned before, melatonin also has protective effects. It can activate our immune system. It is among the most potent antioxidants. So it is known to have certain anti-cancer properties and things of that sort, which is not to say that you simply want more melatonin. I think a lot of people get misled when they hear something like, melatonin has anti-cancer properties. That doesn't mean that cranking up the levels of melatonin by supplementing it, or by spending time in darkness and not getting any light, which would, of course, inhibit melatonin, is going to be beneficial for combating cancer. That's not the way it works. It is actually the rise and fall of melatonin every 24-hour cycle and the changes in the duration of that melatonin signal throughout the seasons that has these anti-cancer and antioxidant effects. So when we think about light impacting our biology, the reason I bring up melatonin as the primary example of that is A, because melatonin impacts so many important functions within our brain and body, but also because hormones in general, not always, but in general, are responsible for these slow modulatory effects on our biology. And so I'm using this as an example of how light throughout the year is changing the way that the different cells and tissues and organs of your body are working, and that melatonin is the transducer of that signal. So at this point, we can say light powerfully modulates melatonin, meaning it shuts down melatonin. Melatonin is both beneficial for certain tissues and suppressive for other tissues and functions. What should we do with this information? Well, it's very well established now that one of the best things that we can all do is to get the proper amount of sunlight each day. And by proper, I mean appropriate for that time of year. So in the summer months where the days are longer and nights are shorter, we would all do well to get more sunlight in our eyes. And again, it's going to be to our eyes because as you recall, the pineal sits deep in the brain, and light can't access the pineal directly, at least not in humans. So in order to get light information to the pineal and thereby get the proper levels of melatonin according to the time of year, we should all try and get outside as much as possible during the long days of summer and spring. And in the winter months, it makes sense to spend more time indoors. For those of you that suffer from seasonal effective disorder, which is a seasonal depression, or feel low during the fall and winter months, there are ways to offset this. We did an entire episode on mood and circadian rhythms where we described this. So it does make sense for some people to get more bright light in their eyes early in the morning and throughout the day during the winter months as well. But nonetheless, changes in melatonin, meaning changes in the duration of melatonin release across the year are normal and healthy. So provided that you're not suffering from depression, it's going to be healthy to somewhat modulate your amount of indoor and outdoor time across the year. The other thing to understand is this very firmly established fact, which is light powerfully inhibits melatonin. If you wake up in the middle of the night, and you go into the bathroom and you flip on the lights, and those are very bright, overhead, fluorescent lights, your melatonin levels, which would ordinarily be quite high in the middle of the night because you've been eyes closed in the dark, presumably, will immediately plummet to near zero or zero. We would all do well regardless of time of year to not destroy our melatonin in the middle of the night in this way. So if you need to get up in the middle of the night and use the restroom, which is a perfectly normal behavior for many people, use the minimum amount of light required in order to safely move through the environment that you need to move through. Melatonin needs to come on early in the night. It actually starts rising in the evening and towards sleep. But then as you close your eyes and you go to sleep, melatonin levels are going to continue to rise at least for several hours into the night. Again, if you get up in the middle of the night, really try hard not to flip on a lot of bright lights. If you do that every once in a while, it's not going to be a problem. But if you're doing that night after night, you are really disrupting this fundamental signal that occurs every night, regardless of winter, spring, summer, et cetera. And that is communicating information about where your brain and body should be in time. And I know that's a little bit of a tricky concept, but really our body is not meant to function in the same way during the winter months, as the summer months. There are functions that are specifically optimal for the shorter days of winter. And there are functions that are specifically optimal for the longer or days of summer. So again, try to avoid bright light exposure to your eyes in the middle of the night. And for those of you that are doing shift work, what I can say is try and avoid getting bright light in your eyes in the middle of your sleep cycle. So even if you're sleeping in the middle of the day, because you have to work at night, if you wake up during that about of sleep, really try hard to limit the amount of light, which is going to be harder for shift workers, right? Because there are generally a lot more lights on and bright lights outside, so you would want to close the blinds and limit artificial light inside. One way to bypass some of the inhibitory effects of light on melatonin is to change your physical environment by, for instance, dimming the lights. That's one simple way, very low-cost way. In fact, you'll save money by dimming the lights or turning them off. The other is if you are going to use light, using long wavelength light, because, as you recall, these intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin cells within your retina that convey the signal about bright light in your environment to impact melatonin, to shut down melatonin, respond to short wavelengths of light. So red light is long wavelength light. You now understand that from our discussion about the physics of light. And if you were to use amber-colored light or red light and even better, dim amber or dim red light in the middle of the night, well, then you would probably not reduce melatonin at all unless those red lights and amber lights are very, very bright. Any light, provided it's bright enough, will shut down melatonin production. One final point about melatonin, and this relates to melatonin supplementation as well, is that now that you understand how potently melatonin can impact things like cardiovascular function, immune function, anti-cancer properties, bone mass, gonad function, et cetera, you can understand why it would make sense to be cautious about melatonin supplementation, because supplementation tends to be pretty static. It's X number of milligrams per night, whereas normally endogenously the amount of melatonin that you're releasing each night is changing according to time of year, or if you happen to live in an area where there isn't much change in day length across the year, so for instance, if you live near the equator, well, then your body is accustomed to having regular amounts of melatonin each night. When you start supplementing melatonin, you start changing the total amount of melatonin, obviously, but you're also changing the normal rhythms in how much melatonin is being released into your brain and body across the 365-day calendar year. So while I'm somebody who readily embraces supplementation in various forms, for things like sleep and focus, et cetera, when it comes to melatonin, I'm extremely cautious. And I think it's also one of the few examples where a hormone is available without prescription, over the counter. You just go into a pharmacy or drugstore or order online, this hormone, which is known to have all these powerful effects. So I get very, very concerned when I hear about people taking melatonin, especially at the levels that are present in most supplements. It's been recognized for a very long time, and in fact, there are now data to support the fact that animals of all kinds, including humans, will seek out mates and engage in mating behavior more frequently during the long days of spring and summer. That's right, in seasonally-breeding animals, of course, this is the case, but in humans as well, there is more seeking out of mates and mating behavior in longer day times of year. Now, you could imagine at least two mechanisms by which this occurs. The first mechanism we could easily map to melatonin and the fact that melatonin is suppressive to various aspects of the so-called gonadal axis, which is basically a fancy way of saying that melatonin inhibits testosterone and estrogen output from the testes and from the ovaries. I just want to remind people that both males and females make testosterone and estrogen, although in different ratios, typically, in males versus females, and that both testosterone and estrogen are critical for the desire to mate and for mating behavior. There's a broad misconception that testosterone is involved in mating behavior and estrogen's involved in other behaviors, but having enough estrogen is critical for both males and females in order to maintain the desire to mate, and indeed the ability to mate. I discuss this on the episode on optimizing testosterone and estrogen. So if you'd like more details on that, please see that episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Okay, so if melatonin is suppressive to the so-called gonadal axis and reduces overall levels of testosterone and estrogen in males and females and a light inhibits melatonin, then when there's more light, then there's less melatonin and more hormone output from the gonads. And indeed that's how the system works, but that's not the entire story. It turns out that there is a second so-called parallel pathway, meaning a different biological pathway that operates in parallel to the light suppression of melatonin pathway that provides a basis for longer days, inspiring more desire to mate and more mating behavior. So if we think of the first pathway involving melatonin as sort of a break on these reproductive hormones, the second mechanism is more like an accelerator on those hormones. And yet it still involve light. As I'm about to tell you, in animals such as mice, but also in humans, exposure to light, in particular UV blue light, so short wavelengths of light, can trigger increases in testosterone and estrogen and the desire to mate. Now what's especially important about this accelerator on the desire to mate and mating behavior and hormones is that it is driven by exposure to light, but it is not the exposure of light to the eyes. It turns out that it is the exposure of your skin to particular wavelengths of light that is triggering increases in the hormones, testosterone, and estrogen, leading to increased desire to mate. As it turns out, your skin, which most of us just think of as a way to protect the organs of our body or something to hang clothes on or ornaments on, if you're somebody who has earrings and so forth, your skin is actually an endocrine organ, meaning it is a hormone-producing and hormone-influencing organ. I promise what I'm about to tell you next will forever change the way that you think about your skin and light and the desire to mate, and indeed even mating behavior. I think the results are best understood by simply going through the primary data, meaning the actual research on this topic. And to do so, I'm going to review a recent paper that was published in the Journal Cell Reports, Cell Press Journal, excellent journal. This is a paper that came out in 2021, entitled "Skin Exposure to UVB light induces a skin, brain, gonad axis, and sexual behavior. And I want to emphasize that this was a paper that focused on mice in order to address specific mechanisms, because in mice, you can so-called knock out particular genes. You can remove particular genes to understand mechanism. You just can't do that in humans in any kind of controlled way, at least not at this point in time. And this study also explores humans and looked at human subjects, both men and women. The basic finding of this study was that when mice or humans were exposed to UVB, meaning ultraviolet blue light, so shortwave length light of the sort that comes through in sunshine, but is also available through various artificial sources. If they received enough exposure of that light to their skin, there were increases in testosterone that were observed within a very brief period of time, also increases in the hormone estrogen. And I should point out that the proper ratios of estrogen and testosterone were maintained in both males and females, at least as far as these data indicate, and mice tended to seek out mating more and mate more. There were also increases in gonadal weight, literally increases in testy size and in ovarian size when mice were exposed to this UVB light past a certain threshold. Now, as I mentioned before, the study also looked at humans. They did not look at testy size or ovarian size in the human subjects. However, because they're humans, they did address the psychology of these human beings and addressed whether or not they had increases in, for instance, aggressiveness or in passionate feelings and how their perception of other people changed when they were getting a lot of UVB light exposure to the skin. So before I get into some of the more important details of the study and how it was done and how you can leverage this information for yourself, if you desire, I just want to highlight some of the basic findings overall. UVB exposure increased these so-called sex steroid levels in mice and humans. The sex steroid hormones, when we say steroids, we don't mean anabolic steroids taken exogenously. I think when people hear the word steroids, they always think steroid abuse or use, rather. Steroid hormones, such as testosterone and estrogen, went up when mice or humans had a lot of UVB exposure to their skin. Second of all, UVB light exposure to the skin enhanced female attractiveness, so the perceived attractiveness of females by males, and increased the receptiveness or the desire to mate in both sexes. UVB light exposure also changed various aspects of female biology related to fertility, in particular follicle growth. Follicle and egg maturation are well-known indices of fertility, and of course, correlate with the menstrual cycle in adult humans and is related overall to the propensity to become pregnant. UVB light exposure enhanced maturation of the follicle, which just meant that more healthy eggs were being produced. These are impressive effects. First of all, they looked at a large number of variables in the study. And the fact that they looked at mice and humans is terrific. I think that oftentimes we find it hard to translate data from mice to humans. So the fact that they looked at both in parallel is wonderful. In the mice and in the humans, they established a protocol that essentially involved exposing the skin to UV light that was equivalent to about 20 to 30 minutes of midday sun exposure. Now, of course, where you live in the world will dictate whether or not that midday sun is very, very bright and intense or is less bright. Maybe there's cloud cover, et cetera. But since I'm imagining that most people are interested in the ways to increase testosterone and/or estrogen in humans and are not so much interested in increasing testosterone in mice, I'm going to just review what they did in the human population or the human subjects. What they did is they had people, first of all, establish a baseline. And the way they established a baseline was a little bit unusual, but will make perfect sense to you. They had people wear long sleeves and essentially cover up and avoid sunlight for a few days so they could measure their baseline hormones in the absence of getting a lot of UVB light exposure from the sun or from other sources. Now, of course, these people had access to artificial lights, but as I've pointed out on this podcast before, it's pretty unusual that you'll get enough UVB exposure from artificial lights throughout the day. And in the morning you need a lot of UVB exposure, or we should be getting a lot of UVB exposure to our eyes and to our face and to our skin throughout the day, provided we're not getting sunburnt. This is actually a healthy thing for mood and for energy throughout the day. It's only at night, basically between the hours of about 10:00 pm and 4:00 am, that even a tiny bit of UVB exposure from artificial sources can mess us up in terms of our sleep and our energy levels, and so on. And that's because of the potent effect of UVB on suppressing melatonin. So the point here is that they establish a baseline whereby people were getting some artificial light exposure throughout the day, but they weren't getting outside a lot. They weren't getting a lot of sunlight. And then they had people receive a dose of UVB light exposure that was about 20 to 30 minutes outdoors. They had people wear short sleeves, no hat, no sunglasses. Some people wore sleeveless shirts. They encouraged people to wear shorts. So they were indeed wearing clothing. They were not naked. And they were wearing clothing that was culturally and situationally appropriate, at least for the part of the world where this study was done. And they had people do that two or three times a week. So in terms of a protocol that you might export from this study, basically getting outside for about 30 minutes, two or three times a week in a minimum of clothing, and yet still wearing enough clothing that is culturally appropriate. They were outside, they weren't sun bathing, flipping over on their back and front. They were just moving about doing things. They could read, they could talk, they could go about other activities, but they weren't wearing a broad brim hat or a hat of any kind, just getting a lot of sun exposure to their skin. They did this for a total of 10 to 12 UVB treatments. So this took several weeks, right? It took about a month, if you think about it, two or three times per week for a total of 10 to 12 UVB treatments. These treatments, of course, are just being outside in the sun. And then they measured hormones, and they measured the psychology of these male and female adult subjects. Let's first look at the psychological changes that these human subjects experienced after getting 10 to 12 of these UVB light exposure outdoor and sunlight type treatments. They did this by collecting blood samples throughout the study, and they saw significant increases in the hormones, beta-estradiol, which is one of the major forms of estrogen, progesterone, another important steroid hormone, and testosterone in both men and women. Now, an important point is that the testosterone increases were significantly higher in men that happened to originate from countries that had low UV exposure compared to individuals from countries with high UV exposure. Now, this ought to make sense if we understand a little bit about how the skin functions as an endocrine organ. Many of you have probably heard of vitamin D3, which is a vitamin that we all make. Many people supplement it as well if they need additional vitamin D3. We all require sunlight in order to allow vitamin D3 to be synthesized and perform its roles in the body. And it turns out that people who have darker skin actually need more vitamin D3 and/or more sunlight exposure in order to activate that D3 pathway, than do people with paler skin. And this should make sense to all of you given what you now understand about melanocytes, that cell type that we discussed earlier, because melanocytes have pigment within them. And if you have darker skin, it means that you have more melanocytes or that you have melanocytes that are more efficient at creating pigment. And as a consequence, the light that lands on your skin will be absorbed by those melanocytes, and less of it is able to impact the D3 pathway. Whereas if you have pale skin, more of the light that lands on your skin can trigger the synthesis and assist the actions of vitamin D3. Similarly, in this study, they found that people who had paler skin and/or who originated from countries where they had less UVB light exposure across the year had greater, meaning more significant, increases in testosterone overall than did people who already were getting a lot of UVB exposure. This led them to explore so-called seasonal changes in testosterone that occurred normally in the absence of any light exposure treatment. So up until now, I've been talking about the aspects of this study involving people getting outside for about 20 to 30 minutes per day in sunlight, in a minimum of clothing. There was an increase in testosterone observed in both men and women. The increases in testosterone were greater for people that had paler skin than darker skin. So the data I'm about to describe also come from this same paper, but do not involve 20 to 30 minute daily sun exposure protocols. It's simply addressing whether or not testosterone levels change as a function of time of year. They measure testosterone across the 12-month calendar. This study was done on subjects living in the Northern Hemisphere for the entire year. And so in the months of January, February, and March, of course, the length of days is shortest and the length of nights is longest. And, of course, in the spring and summer months, June, July, August, September, and so on, the days are much longer and the nights are shorter. And what they observed was very obvious. They observed that testosterone levels were lowest in the winter months and were highest in the months of June, July, August, and September. Now, these are very important data. At least to my knowledge, these are the first data systematically exploring the levels of sex steroid hormones in humans as a function of time of year and thereby as a function of how much sunlight exposure they're getting. And what's remarkable about these data is that they map very well to the data in mice and the other data in this paper on humans, which illustrate that if you're getting more UVB exposure, your testosterone levels are higher. This study went a step further and explored whether or not the amount of sunlight exposure that one is getting to their skin influences their psychology in terms of whether or not they have increased desire to mate and so on. It's well known that sunlight exposure to the eyes can increase mood. And I talked about this in the podcast episode with my guest, Dr. Samer Hattar, who's the director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health. And Samer's recommendation is that people get as much bright light exposure as they safely can in the morning and throughout the day for sake of both sleep and energy, but also for enhancing mood and regulating appetite. In this study, it was found that both males and females had higher levels of romantic passion after getting the UV treatment. In fact, some of them reported increases in romantic passion from just one or two of these UV treatments. So they didn't have to go through all 10 or 12 in order to get a statistically significant increase in passion. Now, when we talk about passion, as the authors of this paper acknowledge, there's really two forms. There is emotional and sexual, and they parse this pretty finely. I don't want to go into all the details, and we can provide a reference and link to this study if you'd like to look at those details. But what they found was that women receiving this UVB light exposure focused more on increases in physical arousal and sexual passion, whereas the men actually scored higher on the cognitive dimensions of passion, such as obsessive thoughts about their partner and so on. Regardless, both males and females experienced and reported a increase in sexual passion and desire to mate. And we now know there were increases in testosterone and estrogen, which of course could be driving the psychological changes, although I'm sure that those interact in both directions, meaning the hormones no doubt affect psychology and no doubt the psychology, these changes in passionate feelings, no doubt also increased or changed the hormone levels as well. And I want to reemphasize that there was a component of the study that had no deliberate daylight, sunlight exposure for 20 or 30 minutes, but rather just looked at hormone levels throughout the year and found that the increase in day length correlated with increases in testosterone and sexual passion. Now, in my opinion, this is a very noteworthy study because it really illustrates that sunlight and day length can impact the melatonin pathway and thereby take the foot off the brake, so to speak, on testosterone, estrogen, and the desire to mate. It also emphasizes that sunlight, UVB light, can directly trigger hormone pathways and desire to mate and mating behavior. Now, this study went a step further in defining the precise mechanism by which light can impact all these hormones and this desire to mate. And here, understanding the mechanism is key if you want to export a particular protocol or tool that you might apply. We talked earlier about how UVB light exposure to the eyes triggers activation of these particular neurons within the eye, and then with centers deeper in the brain, and eventually the pineal gland to suppress the output of melatonin and thereby to allow testosterone and estrogen to exist at higher levels because melatonin can inhibit testosterone and estrogen. In this study, they were able to very clearly establish that it is sunlight exposure to our skin that is causing these hormone increases that they observed in mice and humans. And the way they did that was to use the so-called knockout technology, the ability to remove specific genes within specific tissues of the body. And what they found is that UVB light, meaning sunlight-exposed skin, upregulated, meaning increased the activity of something called p53, which is involved in the maturation of cells and various aspects of cellular function. And the cells they were focused on were the keratinocytes, which you are now familiar with from our earlier discussion about the fact that the epidermis of your skin contains mainly keratinocytes and melanocytes. Sunlight exposure increased p53 activity in the skin. And p53 activity was required for the downstream increases in ovarian size, in testicular size, in testosterone increases, in the estrogen increases, and the various other changes that they observed at the physiological level when animals or humans were exposed to sunlight. So these data are important because what they mean is that not only is it important that we get sunlight exposure early in the day and throughout the day to our eyes, at least as much as is safely possible, but that we also need to get UVB sunlight exposure onto our skin if we want to activate this p53 pathway in keratinocytes and the testosterone and estrogen increases that are downstream of that p53 pathway. So even though the gene knockout studies were done on mice, they clearly show that if you remove p53 from the skin, that these effects simply do not occur. So in terms of thinking about a protocol to increase testosterone and estrogen, mood and feelings of passion, the idea is that you would want to get these two to three exposures per week, minimum of 20 to 30 minutes of sunlight exposure onto as much of your body as you can reasonably expose it to. And when I say reasonably, I mean, of course you have to obey cultural constraints, decency constraints. And of course you have to also obey the fact that sunlight can burn your skin. So many people are probably going to ask, "What happens if you wear sunscreen?" Well, in theory, because sunscreen has UV protection, it would block some of these effects. Now I'm not suggesting that people do away with sunscreen entirely. I do hope to do an episode all about sunscreen in the future because sunscreen is a bit of a controversial topic. Skin cancers are a real thing, and many people are especially prone to skin cancer, so you need to take that seriously. Some people are not very prone to skin cancers and can tolerate much more sun exposure. You're probably familiar with the simple fact that if you've gone outside on the beach with friends, some people get burned very easily, others don't. So you really should prioritize the health and the avoidance of sunburn on your skin. However, these data and other data point to the fact that we should all probably be striving to get more sunlight exposure onto our skin during the winter months and still getting sunlight exposure onto our skin in the summer months, provided we can do that without damaging our skin. Another set of very impressive effects of UVB light, whether or not it comes from sunlight or from an artificial source, is the effect of UVB light on our tolerance for pain. It turns out that our tolerance for pain varies across the year and that our pain tolerance is increased in longer day conditions. And as we saw with the effects of UVB on hormones and mating, again, this is occurring via UVB exposure to the skin and UVB exposure to the eyes. I want to just describe two studies that really capture the essence of these results. I'm going to discuss these in kind of a top contour fashion. I won't go into it as quite as much depth as I did the last study, but I will provide links to these studies as well. The first study is entitled Skin Exposure to Ultraviolet B Rapidly Activates Systemic, Neuroendocrine, and Immunosuppressive Responses. And you might hear that and think, "Oh, immunosuppressive that's bad." But basically what they observed is that even one exposure to UVB light changed the output of particular hormones and neurochemicals in the body, such as corticotropin hormone and beta-endorphins, which are these endogenous opioids. We've all heard of the opioid crisis, which is people getting addicted to opioids that they are taking in drug form, pharmaceuticals. But here I'm referring to endorphins that our body naturally manufactures and releases in order to counter pain and act as somewhat of a psychological soother also, because, of course, physical pain and emotional pain are intimately linked in the brain and body. What they found was that exposure to UVB light increased the release of these beta-endorphins. It caused essentially the release of an endogenous pain killer. Now, a second study that came out very recently, just this last week, in fact, published in the journal Neuron, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, is entitled A Visual Circuit Related to the Periaqueductal Gray Area for the Antinociceptive Effects of Bright Light Treatment. I'll translate a little bit of that for you. The periaqueductal gray is a region of the mid-brain that contains a lot of neurons that can release endogenous opioids, things like beta-enkephalin, things like enkephalin, things like mu opioid. These are all names of chemicals that your body can manufacture that act as endogenous pain killers and increase your tolerance for pain. They actually make you feel less pain overall by shutting down some of the neurons that perceive pain or by reducing their activity. Not to a dangerous level, right? They're not going to block the pain response so that you burn yourself unnecessarily or harm yourself unnecessarily, but they act a bit of a pain killer from the inside. If you heard the word antinociceptive, nociception is basically the perception or the way in which neurons respond to painful stimuli. So you can think of nociceptive events in your nervous system as painful events. And there I'm using a broad brush. I realized that the experts in pain will say, "Oh, it's not really a pain circuit," et cetera, et cetera. But for sake of today's discussion, it's fair to say that nociception is the perception of pain. So if this title is A Visual Circuit Related to the Periaqueductal Gray, which is this area that releases these endogenous opioids for the antinociceptive, the anti-pain effects of bright light treatment, the key finding of this study is that it is light landing on the eyes and captured by the specific cells I was talking about earlier, those intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin ganglion cells is the long name for them, but these particular neurons in your eye, and in my eye incidentally, that communicate with particular brain areas. These brain areas have names. If you want to know them, for you aficionados or for you ultra curious folks, they have names like the ventral lateral geniculate nucleus and the intergeniculate leaflet. The names don't matter. The point is that light landing on the eyes is captured by these melanopsin cells. They absorb that light, translate that light into electrical signals that are handed off to areas of the brain, such as the ventral geniculate. And then the ventral geniculate communicates with this periaqueductal gray area to evoke the release of these endogenous opioids that soothe you and lead to less perception of pain. This is a really important study because it's long been known that in longer days or in bright light environments, we tolerate emotional and physical pain better. Previous studies had shown that it is light landing on our skin that mediates that effect, but only in part. It couldn't explain the entire effect. This very recent study indicates that it's also light arriving at the eyes, and in this case, again, UVB light, ultraviolet blue light of the sort that comes from sunlight, that is triggering these anti-pain or pain-relieving pathways. So once again, we have two parallel pathways. This is a theme you're going to hear over and over and over again, not just in this episode, but in all episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, because this is the way that your brain and body are built. Nature rarely relies on one mechanism in order to create an important phenomenon, and pain relief is an important phenomenon. So we now have at least two examples of the potent effects of UVB light exposure to the skin and to the eyes. One involving activation of testosterone and estrogen pathways, as it relates to mating, and another that relates to reducing the total amount of pain that we experience in response to any painful stimuli. So for those of you that are thinking tools and protocols, if you're somebody who's experiencing chronic pain, provided you can do it safely, try to get some UVB exposure, ideally from sunlight. I think the 20 to 30-minute protocol, two or three times per week is an excellent one, seems like a fairly low dose of UVB light exposure. It's hard to imagine getting much damage to the skin. Of course, if you have very sensitive skin, or if you live in an area of the world that is very, very bright and has intense sunlight at particular times of year, you'll want to be cautious. Heed the warnings and considerations about sunscreen that I talked about earlier, or about wearing a hat. But the point is very clear. Most of us should be getting more UVB exposure from sunlight. I can already hear the screams within the comments or rather the questions within the comments, saying, "Well, what if I live in a part of the world where I don't get much UVB exposure?" And I want to emphasize something that I've also emphasized in the many discussions on this podcast related to sleep and circadian rhythms and alertness, which is even on a cloud-covered day, you are going to get far more light energy, photons through cloud cover than you are going to get from an indoor light source, an artificial light source. I can't emphasize this enough. If you look outside in the morning and you see some sunlight, if you see some sunlight throughout the day, you would do yourself a great favor to try and chase some of that sunlight and get into that sunlight to expose your eyes and your skin to that sunlight as much as you safely can. And when I say as much as you safely can, never ever look at any light, artificial, sunlight, or otherwise, that's so bright that it's painful to look at. It's fine to get that light arriving on your eyes indirectly. It's fine to wear eyeglasses or contact lenses. In fact, if you think about the biology of the eye and the way that those lenses work, that you will just serve to focus that light onto the very cells that you want those light beams to be delivered to, whereas sunglasses that are highly reflective or trying to get your sunlight exposure through a windshield of a car or through a window simply won't work. I'm sorry to tell you, but most windows are designed to filter out the UVB light. And if you're somebody who's really keen on blue blockers and you're wearing your blue blockers all day, well, don't wear them outside. And in fact, you're probably doing yourself a disservice by wearing them in the morning and in the daytime. There certainly is a place for blue blockers in the evening and nighttime, if you're having issues with falling and staying asleep. But if you think about it, blue blockers, what they're really doing is blocking those short wavelength, UVB wavelengths of light that you so desperately need to arrive at your retina and of course, also onto your skin in order to get these powerful biological effects on hormones and on pain reduction. And in terms of skin exposure, these data also might make you think a little bit about whether or not you should wear short sleeves or long sleeves, whether or not you want to wear shorts or a skirt or pants. It's all going to depend on the context of your life and the social and other variables that are important, of course. I don't know each and every one of your circumstances, so I can't tell you to do X or Y or Z, nor would I, but you might take into consideration that it is the total amount of skin exposure that is going to allow you to capture more or fewer photons, depending on, for instance, if you're completely cloaked in clothing and you're just exposed in the hands, neck, and face such as I am now, or whether or not you're outside in shorts and a T-shirt, you're going to get very, very different patterns of biological signaling activation in those two circumstances. Many of you I'm guessing are wondering whether or not you should seek out UVB exposure throughout the entire year or only in the summer months. And that's sort of going to depend on whether or not you experience depression in the winter months, so called seasonal effective disorder. Some people have mild, some people have severe forms of seasonal effective disorder. Some people love the fall and winter and the shorter days. They love bundling up. They love the leaves. They love the snow, they love the cold, and they don't experience those psychological lows. So it varies tremendously. And there are genetic differences and birthplace origin differences that relate to all this, but really it has to be considered on a case-by-case basis. I personally believe, and this was reinforced by the director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, Samer Hattar, that we would all do well to get more UVB exposure from sunlight throughout the entire year, provided we aren't burning our skin or damaging our eyes in some way. In addition to that, during the winter months, if you do experience some drop in energy or increase in depression or psychological lows, it can be very beneficial to access a SAD lamp. Or if you don't want to buy a SAD lamp, 'cause oftentimes they can be very expensive, you might do well to simply get a LED lighting panel. I've described one before. And I want to emphasize that I have no affiliation whatsoever to these commercial sources, but I've described one before and I'll describe it again. And we can provide a link to a couple examples of these in the show, in the show note captions, excuse me. This is a 930 to 1,000 lux, L-U-X, light source that's designed for drawing. It's literally a drawing box. It's a thin panel. It's about the size of a laptop. Very inexpensive compared to the typical SAD lamp. I actually have one, and I position it on my desk all day long. I also happen to have skylights above my desk. I'm fairly sensitive to the effects of light. So in longer days I feel much better than I do in shorter days. I've never suffered from full-blown seasonal effective disorder, but I keep that light source on throughout the day throughout the year. But I also make it a point to get outside and get sunlight early in the morning and several times throughout the day. And if it's particularly overcast outside or there just doesn't seem to be a lot of sunlight coming through those clouds, I will try to look at that light source a little bit more each day in order to trigger these mechanisms. Now, some people may desire to get UVB exposure to their skin and they want to do that through sources other than sunlight. And there it's a little bit more complicated. There are, of course, tanning salons, which basically are beds of UVB light. That's really all they are. I've never been to one. I know people do frequent them in certain parts of the world. There, of course, people are covering their eyes. They are only getting UVB exposure to their skin, typically because the UVB exposure, or intensities rather, tend to be very, very high. And so you can actually damage your eyes. If you're looking at a very, very bright artificial UVB source up close. So you really have to explore these options for yourself. Sunlight of course, being the original and still the best way to get UVB exposure. So without knowing your particular circumstances, finances, genetics, or place of origin, et cetera, I can't know whether or not you need to use artificial sources. You're going to have to gauge that. Meanwhile, getting outside, looking at and getting some exposure of UVB onto your skin is going to be beneficial for the vast majority of people out there. And in fact, it's even going to be beneficial for people that are blind. People that are blind, provided they still have eyes, often maintain these melanopsin cells. So even if you're low vision or no vision, getting UVB exposure to your eyes can be very beneficial for sake of mood, hormone pathways, pain reduction, and so forth. A cautionary note, people who have retinitis pigmentosa, macular degeneration, or glaucoma, as well as people who are especially prone to skin cancers should definitely consult with your ophthalmologist and dermatologist before you start increasing the total amount of UVB exposure that you're getting from any source, sunlight or otherwise. There are additional, very interesting and powerful effects of UVB light, in particular on immune function. All the organs of our body are inside our skin. And so information about external conditions, meaning the environment that we're in, need to be communicated to the various organs of our body. Some of them have more direct access to what's going on outside. So for instance, the cells in your brain that reside right over the roof of your mouth, your hypothalamus, they control hormone output, and they control the biological functions that we call circadian functions, the ones that change every 24 hours. Well, those are just one or two connections, meaning synapses away from those cells in your eye that perceive UB, UVB light, excuse me. Other organs of your body, such as your spleen, which is involved in the creation of molecules and cells that combat infection, well, those are a long ways away from those cell in your eye. And in fact, they're a long ways away from your skin. There are beautiful studies showing that if we get more UVB exposure from sunlight or from appropriate artificial sources, that spleen and immune function are enhanced, and there's a very logical, well-established circuit as to how that happens. Your brain actually connects to your spleen. Now, it's not the case that you can simply think, "Okay, spleen, turn on, release killer cells, go out and combat infection." However, UVB light arriving on the eyes is known to trigger activation of the neurons within the so-called sympathetic nervous system. These neurons are part of the larger thing that we call the autonomic nervous system, meaning it's below or not accessible by conscious control. It's the thing that controls your heartbeat, controls your breathing and that also activates or flips on the switch of your immune system. When we get a lot of UVB light in our eyes, or I should say sufficient UVB light in our eyes, a particular channel, a particular set of connections within the sympathetic nervous system is activated, and our spleen deploys immune cells and molecules that scavenge for and combat infection. So if you've noticed that you get fewer colds and flus and other forms of illness in the summer months, part of that could be because of the increase in temperature in your environment, because typically longer days are associated with more warmth in your environment as opposed to winter days, which are short when it tends to be colder out. Well, that's true, but it's also the case that people around you have fewer colds and flus and that you will get infected with fewer colds and flus and other infections, because if those infections, whether or not they're bacterial or viral, arrive in your body, right, if you inhale them or they get into your mouth or on your skin, your spleen meets those infections with a greater output. In other words, the soldiers of your immune system, the chemicals and cell types of your immune system that combat infection are in a more ready, deployed stance, if you will. If you want to know more about the immune system and immune function, I did an entire episode about the immune system and the brain, you can find that at hubermanlab.com. We talk about cytokines, we talk about killer cells, B cells, T cells, et cetera, a lot of detail there. So we often think about the summer months and the spring months as fewer infections floating around. But in fact, there aren't fewer infections floating around. We are simply better at combating those infections, and therefore there's less infection floating around. So we are still confronted with a lot of infections. We're just able to combat them better. What does this mean in terms of a tool? What it means is that during the winter months, we should be especially conscious of accessing UVB light to enhance our spleen function, to make sure that our sympathetic nervous system is activated to a sufficient level to keep our immune system deploying all those killer T cells and B cells and cytokines so that when we encounter the infections, as we inevitably will, right, we're constantly being bombarded with potential infections, that we can combat those infections well. And as just a brief aside, but I should mention, a brief aside that's related to tens of thousands of quality studies, it is well known that wound healing is faster when we are getting sufficient UVB exposure. Typically, that's associated with the longer days of spring and summer. It is known that turnover of hair cells, the very cells that give rise to hair cells are called stem cells. They live in little so-called niches in our skin with these hair stem cells, and your hair grows faster in longer days. That too is triggered by UVB exposure, not just to the skin, but to the eyes. That's right. There was a study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences a couple of years ago that showed that the exposure of those melanopsin ganglion cells in your eyes is absolutely critical for triggering the turnover of stem cells in both the skin and hair, and also turns out in nails. So if you've noticed that your skin, your hair and your nails look better and turn over more, meaning grow faster in longer days, that is not on a coincidence. That is not just your perception. In fact, hair grows more, skin turns over more, meaning it's going to look more youthful. You're going to essentially remove older skin cells and replace them with new cells, and all the renewing cells and tissues of our body are going to proliferate, are going to recreate themselves more when we're getting sufficient UVB light to our eyes and also to our skin. And so while some of you may think of light therapies such as red light therapies or UVB therapies as kind of new agey, or just biohacking, again, a phrase I don't particularly like, this notion of biohacking, 'cause it implies using one thing for a purpose that it was never tended to have, well, it turns out that UVB exposure and red light, as we'll soon see, is a very potent form of increasing things like wound healing and skin health for very logical mechanistically backed reasons. So while I can't account for everything that's being promoted out there in terms of this light source will help your skin look more youthful or will help heal your scars, the mechanistic basis for light having those effects makes total sense. But what you should consider, however, is that if the particular light therapy that you're considering involves very local application rather than illuminating broad swaths of skin, and if it has no involvement with the eyes, meaning there's no delivery of UVB or red light or the other light therapy to the eyes, it's probably not going to be as potent a treatment as would a more systemic activation of larger areas of skin and the eyes. Now, again, a cautionary note, I don't want people taking technologies that were designed for local application and beaming those into the eyes. That could be very, very bad and damaging to your retinal and other tissues. Certainly, wouldn't want you taking bright light of very high intensity of any kind and getting cavalier about that. Typically, the local illumination of say a wound or a particular patch of acne or some other form of skin treatment involves very high intensity light. And if the intensity is too high, you can actually damage that skin. And so as we'll talk about in a few moments, most of those therapies for modifying skin involve actually burning off a small, very thin layer at the top of the epidermis in efforts to trigger the renewal or the activation of stem cells that will replenish that with new cells. So there's a fine line to be had between light therapies that are very localized and intense, which are designed to damage skin and cause reactivation of new stem cells, whether that's hair cells or skin cells, et cetera, versus systemic activation across broad swaths of skin and the eyes. You really have to consider this on a case-by-case basis, but at least for now just consider that increases in hormones, reduction in pain by way of increases in enkephalin and other endogenous opioids, improving immune status by activating the spleen, and so on, and so on really are all the downstream consequence of illuminating large swaths of skin and making sure that those neurons within the eye get their adequate UVB exposure or other light wavelength exposure, not simply beaming a particular wavelength of light at a particular location on the body and hoping that that particular illumination at a particular location on the body is going to somehow change the biology at that location. Our biology just really doesn't work that way. It's possible, but in general, systemic effects through broad scale illumination and illumination to the eye, combined with local treatments are very likely to be the ones that have the most success. Now, I'd like to shift our attention to the effects of light on mood more specifically. We talked about this in terms of seasonal effective disorder, but many of us don't suffer from seasonal effective disorder. So I'd like to drill a little deeper into how light impacts mood. And here, I want to, again, paraphrase the statements of Dr. Samer Hattar at the National Institutes of Mental Health, I should mention the director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health and perhaps one of the top one to two to three world experts in how light can impact mood, appetite, circadian rhythms, and so forth. Samer stated on the podcast, and he said in various other venues as well, that getting as much UVB light in our eyes and on our skin in the early day and throughout the day as is safely possible is going to be beneficial for mood. There's also another time of day, or rather I should say a time of night in which UVB can be leveraged in order to improve mood, but it's actually the inverse of everything we've been talking about up until now. We have a particular neural circuit that originates with those melanopsin cells in our eye that bypass all the areas of the brain associated with circadian clocks, so everything related to sleep and wakefulness, that's specifically dedicated to the pathways involving the release of molecules like dopamine, the neuromodulator that's associated with motivation, with feeling good, with feeling like there's possibility in the world, and so on and so forth, and other molecules as well, including serotonin and some of those endogenous opioids that we talked about before. That particular pathway involves a brain structure called the perihabenular nucleus. The perihabenular nucleus gets input from the cells in the eye that respond to UVB light, and frankly, to bright light of other wavelengths as well, 'cause as you recall, if a light is bright enough, even if it's not UV or blue light, it can activate those cells in the eye. Those cells in the eye communicate to the perihabenular nucleus. And as it turns out, if this pathway is activated at the wrong time of each 24-hour cycle, mood gets worse, dopamine output gets worse, molecules that are there specifically to make us feel good, actually are reduced in their output. So while UVB exposure in the morning and throughout the day is going to be very important for elevating and maintaining elevated mood, avoiding UVB light at night is actually a way in which we can prevent activation of this eye to perihabenular pathway that can actually turn on depression. To be very direct and succinct about this, avoid exposure to UVB light from artificial sources between the hours of 10:00 pm and 4:00 am. And if you're somebody who suffers from low mood and overall has a kind of mild depression or even severe depression, of course, please see a psychiatrist, see a trained psychologist, get that treated, but you would do especially well to avoid UVB exposure from artificial sources, not just from 10:00 pm to 4:00 am, but really be careful about getting too much exposure to UVB even in the late evening, so 8:00 pm perhaps to 4:00 am. I can't emphasize this enough, that if you view UVB light, you activate those neurons in your eye very potently. And if those cells communicate to the perihabenular nucleus, which they do, you will truncate or reduce the amount of dopamine that you release. So if you want to keep your mood elevated, get a lot of light, UVB light, throughout the day, and at night, really be cautious about getting UVB exposure from artificial sources. Now let's say you're somebody who has no issues with mood. You're just the happiest person all year long, or maybe you just have subtle variations in your mood. You feel great about that. Turns out that you still want to be very careful about light exposure between the hours of 10:00 pm or so, and 4:00 am, in fact, even during sleep. There's a recent study that just came out in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, and it's entitled Light Exposure During Sleep Impairs Cardiometabolic Function. This is a very interesting study where they took human subjects, young adults, and having them sleep in rooms that had different lighting conditions, either dim light or slightly bright light. Now, many people can't fall asleep in brightly lit rooms, so they acknowledge this. These were not very brightly lit rooms. These were rooms that had just a little bit of overhead room lighting, a hundred lux, which is not very bright at all. Or they had them sleep in a room that had very dim light, which is less than three lux. If you want to get a sense of how bright three lux is versus a hundred lux, I would encourage you to download the free app Light Meter. I have no relationship to the app. It's a pretty cool app, however. I've used it for a long time, where you can basically point your phone at a particular light source, sun or otherwise, and you just press the button and it'll give you an approximate readout of lux, which is the light intensity that the phone happens to be staring out at at that location. It's not exact, but it's a pretty good back-of-the-envelope measure of light intensity. So these subjects were either sleeping in a very dim room, three lux is very, very dim, or a somewhat dim room, a hundred lux. In this study, they measured things like melatonin levels. They looked at heart rate, they looked at measures of insulin and glucose management. Now, in previous episodes, I've talked about how glucose, blood sugar, is regulated by insulin because you don't want your glucose levels to be too high, hyperglycemia, or too low, hypoglycemia. And the hormone insulin is involved in sequestering and shuttling glucose in the bloodstream. Basically, how well you manage glucose in the bloodstream can be indirectly measured by your insulin levels. And it's well known that sleep deprivation can disrupt glucose regulation by insulin. However, in this study, subjects were sleeping the whole night through. It just so happens that some of the subjects were sleeping in this very dimly lit room, three lux, and other subjects were sleeping in a somewhat dimly lit room, a hundred lux. What's incredible about this study is that both rooms were sufficiently dimmed that melatonin levels were not altered in either case. This is really key. It's not as if one group experienced a lot of bright light through their eyelids and others did not. Melatonin levels were not disrupted. And given how potently light can inhibit melatonin, this speaks to the fact that this very dim condition of three lux and the somewhat dim condition of a hundred lux was not actually perceived by the subjects nor was it disrupting these hormone pathways. They also looked at glucose responses. They had people essentially take a fasting glucose test in different conditions. I won't go into all the details, but here's what they found. In healthy adults, even just one night of sleeping in a moderately lit environment, this hundred lux environment, caused changes, increases in nighttime heart rate, which means that the sympathetic nervous system was overly active as compared to people that slept in a completely dark or in a very, very dimly lit room. Decreases in heart rate variability, and here I should point out that heart rate variability or HRV is a good thing, we want heart rate variability. So they saw increases in heart rate, decreases in heart rate variability, and increases in next morning insulin resistance, which is an indication that glucose management is suffering. So this is powerful. The results of this study essentially indicate that even just one night of sleeping the whole night through in a dimly lit environment is disrupting the way that our autonomic nervous system is functioning, altering so called autonomic tone, making us less relaxed is probably the best way to describe it, even though we are asleep, disrupting the way that our cardiometabolic function operates, such that we have lower heart rate variability and increased insulin resistance. This is not a good thing for any of us to experience. So while we've mainly been talking about the positive effects of UVB light and other forms of light, now we have two examples. One from the work of Hattar and colleagues showing that UVB exposure via the perihabenula can diminish the output of dopamine and other molecules that make us feel good if that UVB exposure is in the middle of the night or late evening. And now we have yet another study performed, in this case, in humans, indicating that even if we fall asleep and sleep the whole night through, if the room that we're sleeping in has too many lux, too much light energy, that light energy is no doubt going through the eyelids, which it can, activating the particular cells in the eye that trigger an increase in sympathetic nervous system activation and disrupting our metabolism. And this study rests on a number of other recent studies published in Cell, which is a superb journal, and other journals, showing that during the course of a healthy, deep night's sleep, our body actually transitions through various forms of metabolic function. We actually experience ketosis-like states. We experience glucogenesis. We experience different forms of metabolism associated with different stages of sleep, not something that we're going into in depth in this podcast, we will in a future podcast. What this study shows is that light exposure even in sleep is disrupting our autonomic, in this case, the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system in ways that are disrupting metabolism, probably in sleep, but certainly outside of sleep so that we wake up and have our first meal of the day. Or even if you're intermittent fasting, you eat that first meal of the day, if your sleep is taking place in an environment that's overly illuminated, well, that's disrupting your cardiac function and your metabolism. I've been talking a lot about UVB light, which is short wavelength light. So UV light, blue light, maybe even some blue green light, that's going to be short wavelength light. Now, I'd like to shift our attention to the other end of the spectrum, meaning the light spectrum, to talk about red light and infrared light, which is long wavelength light. Many so-called low level light therapies, the acronym is LLLT, low level light therapies, involve the use of red light and infrared light. Sometimes, low level light therapies involve the use of UVB, but more often than not these days, when we hear LLLT, low level light therapy, it's referring to red light and near-infrared light therapies. Low level light therapies have been shown to be effective for a huge number of biological phenomenon and medical treatments. I can't summarize all of those now. It would take me many, many hours. It would be an effective episode for curing insomnia, but it wouldn't inform you properly about the use of light for your health. Rather, I'd like to just emphasize some of the top contour of those studies and point out that for instance, low level light therapy with infrared light has been shown to be effective for the treatment of acne and other sorts of skin lesions. There have been some really nice studies actually where they use subjects as their own internal control. So people, believe it or not, agreed to have half of their face illuminated with red light or near-infrared light, and the other half of their face serve as a control, and to do that for several weeks at a time. And you can see pretty impressive reductions in skin lesions, reductions in scars from acne, and reduction in acne lesions themselves, meaning the accumulation of new acne cysts with low level light therapy, using red light and infrared light. Sometimes however, there is a resistance of that acne to the low level light therapy, such that people will get an initial improvement, and then it'll go away despite continuing the treatment. So you're probably asking, or at least you should be asking, how is it that shining red light on our skin can impact things like acne and wound healing, et cetera? Well, to understand that, we have to think back to the beginning of the episode where I described how long wavelength light, such as red light and near-infrared light, which is even longer than red light, can pass through certain surfaces, including our skin. So our skin has an epidermis, which is on the outside, and the dermis, which is in the deeper layers. Red light and infrared light can pass down into the deeper layers of our skin, where it can change the metabolic function of particular cells. So let's just take acne as an example. Within the dermis, the deep layers of our skin, we have what are called sebaceous glands that actually make the oil that is present in our skin. Those sebaceous glands are often nearby hair follicles. So if you've ever had a infected hair follicle, that's not a coincidence that hair follicles tend to get infected. Part of it is because there's actually a portal down and around the hair follicle, but the sebaceous gland is where the oil is created. That is going to give rise to, for instance, acne lesions. Also, in the dermis, in the deep layers of the skin, are the melanocytes. They're not just in the epidermis, they're also in the deeper layers of the skin. And you have the stem cells that give rise to additional skin cells. If the top layers of the epidermis are damaged, those stem cells can become activated. And you also have the stem cells that give rise to hair follicles. So by shining red light or near-infrared light on a localized patch of skin, provided that red light is not of such high intensity that it burns the skin, but is of sufficient intensity that it provides just a little bit of damage to the upper layers of the skin, the epidermis, and that it triggers certain biological pathways within the cells of the sebaceous gland and the stem cells within the hair cell niche and the stem cells in skin, what happens is the top layers of the skin are basically burned off by a very low level of burn and/or the cells in the deeper layer start to churn out new cells, which go and rescue the lesion, essentially clear out the lesion and replace that lesion with healthy skin cells. This does work in the context of wound healing, getting scars to disappear. It also works to remove certain patches of pigmentation. There are sometimes cases where people will get a red blotchiness due to certain skin conditions or some darker pigmentation that they want remove, or that they need removed, because it's a potential skin cancer threat. Now, how is red light actually doing it within the cells of the sebaceous gland, the stem cells, et cetera? Well, long wavelength light can actually get deep into the skin, I mentioned that before, but can also get into individual cells and can access the so-called organelles, which I described at the beginning of the episode. In particular, they can access the mitochondria, which are responsible for producing ATP. Now, the simple way to think about this for sake of this discussion is that as cells age, and in particular, in very metabolically active cells, they accumulate what are called ROSs, reactive oxygen species. And as reactive oxygen species go up, ATP energy production in those cells tends to go down. It's a general statement, but it's a general statement that in most cases is true. There are some minor exceptions that don't concern us that have to do with cell types different than the ones that I'm talking about now. So the way to think about this is that red light passes into the deeper layers of the skin, activates mitochondria, which increases ATP, and directly or indirectly reduces these reactive oxygen species. These reactive oxygen species are not good. We don't want them. They cause cellular damage, cellular death. And for the most part just inhibit the way that our cells work. So if you've heard of red light or near-infrared light therapies designed to heal skin or improve skin quality or remove lesions, or get rid of scars or unwanted pigmentation, that is not pseudoscience, that is not woo science. That is grounded in the very biology of how light interacts with mitochondria and reactive oxygen species. Some of you may also find it interesting to note that some of the cream-based treatments for acne, for instance, like retinoic acid, Retin-A, is actually a derivative of vitamin A. And the pathway involving retinoic acid and vitamin A, believe it or not, is very similar to the natural biological pathway by which photopigments in the eye convert light information into biological changes within those cells. So the key point here is that light is activating particular pathways in cells that can either drive death of cells or can make those cells essentially younger by increasing ATP by way of improving mitochondrial function. And in recent years, there have been some just beautiful examples that exist, not only in the realm of skin biology, but in the realm of neurobiology whereby red light and near-infrared light can actually be used to enhance the function of the cells that, for instance, allow us to see better and indeed cells that allow us to think better. So now I'd like to review those data because not only are they interesting in their own right, but they also point to some very interesting and powerful application of low-cost or zero-cost tools that we can use to improve our vision. If you are somebody who's interested in the use of red light or near-infrared light, so-called LLLT, low level light therapies, for treatment of dermatologic issues, so anything related to skin, I will include a link to a excellent set of reviews. The first one is Light-emitting Diodes in Dermatology: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials. That one includes review of a very large number of studies, came out just a few years ago in 2018, and I think is very clearly and cleanly laid out for anyone to access. And you can see the degree of effects of red light, for instance, on treatment of acne or scarring, et cetera. And I'll also provide a link to another review, which is Low-level Light Therapy in Skin: Stimulating, Healing, and Restoring. So for those of you that are interested, again, in dermatologic issues and the kind of restoring youthfulness and the kind of general themes of anti-aging and longevity and how red light therapies can be used for that, I would encourage you to take a look at those reviews. What you're going to find is that rarely, if ever, is there a study looking at whole body red light illumination for sake of treating and improving skin. And I mention this because I get a lot of questions about infrared sauna and global illumination with red lights. We'll talk more about cases where global illumination of your whole body or your whole face with red lights might be useful, but in terms of infrared sauna, I've mentioned on this podcast before, and I will certainly go deeper on this in an upcoming episode, all about the use of heat and temperature for augmenting our biology, but in general, infrared saunas don't get hot enough, temperature-wise, in order to trigger some of the important effects on growth hormone and heat shock proteins and some of the other things that sauna has been shown to be excellent for. That's a general statement. I realize there are some infrared saunas that do get hot enough. There are very few data on the use of whole body illumination with infrared saunas that really point to any specific mechanistically supported effects. Almost all the positive effects that you're going to see of red light and low-level light therapies, certainly the ones discussed in the reviews that I just mentioned, are going to be the consequence of very directed illumination of particular patches of skin that are seeking repair, that people are seeking the repair of. So again, I don't want to disparage infrared saunas, but in general, they don't get hot enough to trigger most of the positive effects that sauna have been demonstrated to have. And it's unclear at all as to whether or not they can enhance skin quality, youthfulness, restore top layers of skin that are damaged, repair acne, et cetera. So more on heat saunas and infrared saunas and their comparison in an upcoming episode. So let's talk about a clear set of examples where red light and near-infrared light have been shown to have positive effects on our health. And these are the data that I referred to at the beginning of the episode from Dr. Glen Jeffery at University College London, who, again, is a longstanding member of the neuroscience community, working on visual neuroscience, and who over the last decade or so has really emphasized the exploration of red light and near-infrared light for restoration of neuronal function as we age. This is absolutely critical. We know that we don't accumulate many new brain cells as we get older. And in some areas of our nervous system, such as our neural retina, which is the part of our eye, that's responsible for translating light information to electrical signals so that we can see, we don't get any new cells after the time in which we were born. So the ability to keep our neurons healthy is extremely important for our visual system, extremely important for our hippocampus, an area of the brain involved in memory. And I should just mention that even if people don't get Alzheimer's, there's always going to be some degree of age-related dementia. Sadly, nobody is as cognitively sharp in the years before they die, as they are 20 years before that. It's just never the case. We're all getting worse at thinking, feeling, perceiving, et cetera. The question is how quickly we are getting worse. So any mechanism by which we can preserve or reverse neuronal function turns out to be immensely beneficial. The Jeffery Lab has published two studies in recent years on humans that looked directly, no pun intended, at how red light and near-infrared light can improve visual function. I'm going to describe the parameters of those studies. And then I'm going to describe what they found, exactly. The mechanistic motivation for these studies, again, traces back to this effect of light on mitochondria. So to go a little bit deeper into that mechanism just briefly so that you can frame any potential protocol that you would develop, when light arrives on cells, including neurons, that light can penetrate into the cells if it's of the appropriate wavelength. Red light can do that, it can get into cells, it can access the mitochondria, it can increase ATP. In general, anytime ATP is doing its thing to increase energy in cells, it's involving this thing called cytochrome c, which is an oxidase. Anytime you hear ase, A-S-E, in biology, it's going to be an enzyme. It's involved in some process of degrading a molecule and creating another molecule, typically. So ATP and cytochrome c is going to give you ATP. Now, that's a great thing, but it creates a byproduct. It breaks things down, such that you get these ROSs, these reactive oxygen species. And those reactive oxygen species, for those of you that want to know, are involved in things like redox signaling. And reactive oxygen species actually change which genes are made in a cell. So the goal of any treatment is to keep neurons or other cells youthful and functioning well, and to prevent or reverse aging, is going to be to increase ATP and to reduce reactive oxygen species, and in doing so, to disrupt some of the normal pathways associated with aging. The Jeffery Lab approached these studies with that understanding of how mitochondria and reactive oxygen species and ATP work. And what they did was exquisitely simple to the point of being elegant. And what they found was really, really exciting. What they did is they had people, subjects that were either younger, so in their 20s, or 40 years old or older, view red light of about 670 nanometers. 670 nanometers would appear red to you and me. They, they had them do that, excuse me, at a distance that was safe for their eyes, so at about a foot away. Now, a foot away from a very intense red light could actually be damaging to the eyes, so they had them do this at about a foot away from a red light that was of low enough intensity that it did not damage the eyes. And they had them do that anywhere from two to three minutes per day. And in one study, they had them do that for a long period of time of about 12 weeks. And in the other study, they had them do that just for a couple of weeks. What's remarkable is that when you collapse the results across these two studies, what they found is that when looking at these subjects ranging from 28 years old to about 72 years old, the major findings were that in individuals 40 years old or older, so in the 40 to 72-year-old bracket, but not in the subjects younger than 40 years old, they saw an improvement in visual function. That improvement in visual function was an improvement in visual acuity, meaning the ability to resolve fine detail, and using a particular measure of visual function, which is called the Tritan exam. T-R-I-T-A-N, Tritan exam, which specifically addresses the function of the so-called short wavelength cones, the ones that respond to green and blue light, they saw a 22% improvement in visual acuity, which in the landscape of visual testing is an extremely exciting result. Okay, so I think in most studies of improvements of vision, you'd be very excited to see an improvement of 5% or 10%. So a 22% improvement in visual acuity, even though it's in this very specific form of visual testing, this Tritan exam or this Tritan score, well, that turns out to be very significant and translates to the real world in an important way. In particular, as we age, we tend to lose certain neurons within our retina, but we don't tend to lose cones. We tend to lose rods. We tend to lose other cells within the retina, including the cells that connect the eye to the brain, the so-called ganglion cells. Cones, for whatever reason, are pretty resilient to age-related loss. However, because rods and cones both are not just among the most metabolically active cells in your entire body, but the most metabolically active cells in your entire body that's right, your rods and cones are the cells that demand, and that use the most energy of all the cells in your body, not your skin cells, not your spleen, not your stomach cells. Even if you talk a lot, not the cells that are responsible for moving your mouth. It is the rods and cones of your neural retina that are responsible for using the most amount of ATP and energy in your entire body. And because of that, those cells tend to accumulate a lot of reactive oxygen species as we age. Red light of the sort used in these studies was able to reduce the amount of reactive oxygen species in the rods and cones and to rescue the function of this particular cone type, the short wavelength and medium wavelength cones, which if you think about the study, is a little bit surprising, because it was red light and near-infrared light, not short wavelength light, that was used in order to create this improvement in cellular function. But if you step back a little bit further, it makes perfect sense because there's nothing specific about the red light in the sense that it gets delivered only to red cones. That red light and near-infrared light is being absorbed by all the photoreceptors within the eye, the rods and the blue cones and the green cones and the red cones. It's just that the red cones absorb that light best. So the important takeaway here is that viewing red light and near-infrared light at a distance at which it is safe for just a couple of minutes each day allowed a reversal of the aging process of these neurons, which some people have heard me say before, and I'll just say it again, the retina, including your photoreceptors, are not just connected to your brain. They're not just near your brain. They are actual central nervous system tissue. They are the only two pieces of your brain, meaning your neuroretinas are the only two pieces of your brain that reside outside your skull, or at least outside the cranial vault. So here we're seeing a reversal of the aging process in neurons by shining red light on those neurons. Now, of course, the Jeffery Lab is primarily interested in vision, and humans are most dependent on vision as a sense to navigate the world and survive. So this is really wonderful. Here, we're looking at a therapy that can reverse age-related vision loss, at least in some individuals. But as you can imagine, the study was also done on these cells because they reside outside the skull and you can shine light directly on them, right? I'm sure that there are many people out there who are interested in how they can improve the function, say, of the neurons in their brain responsible for memory. And in a few minutes, I'll describe the non-invasive applications of light to try and restore the function of those cells as well. So a little bit more about the studies from the Jeffery Lab. One of the things that they observed was a reduction in so-called drusen, D-R-U-S-E-N. Drusen are little fatty deposits, little cholesterol deposits, that accumulate in the eye as we age. We've all heard about cholesterol within our veins and arteries and how that can clog our veins and arteries and how, of course, clogging of veins and arteries is not a good thing. Well, our neural retina being so metabolically active requires a lot of blood flow. It's heavily vascularized, and drusen are a special form of cholesterol that accumulate in the eye. As it turns out, these red light and near-infrared light therapies explored by the Jeffery Lab were able to actually reduce or reverse some of the accumulation of drusen. And so in addition to reducing reactive oxygen species, the idea in mind now is that red light may actually reduce cholesterol deposits and reactive oxygen species in order to improve neuronal function. So what should you and I do with these results? Or should we do anything with these results? Well, first of all, I want to emphasize that even though these studies are very exciting, they are fairly recent. And so more data, as always, are needed. There's some additional features of these studies that I think are also important to consider. First of all, the exposure to red light needed to happen early in the day, at least within the first three hours of waking. How would one do that? Well, nowadays there are a number of different red light panels and different red light sources that certainly fall within the range of red light and near-infrared light that one could use. I don't have any affiliation to any companies or products that promote or make those red light therapies. I do own a red light panel, so I confess I have started using this protocol. I am older than 40 years old. I also have been experimenting with these red light panels as a way of addressing other changes in biological tissues, for which I'm doing blood work, et cetera. And I'm going to talk about that in a future episode, but that, of course, is what I call anecdata. It only relates to my experience. So today, and certainly on all episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we emphasize peer-reviewed studies almost exclusively, talking about anecdata only when highlighting it as anecdata. So if you're somebody who wants to explore red light therapy, here's what you need to do. You need to make sure that that red light source, whatever source you happen to use, whether or not you purchase it or make one... And in fact, these red light sources are very, very easy to make. You could essentially take a bright flashlight and cover it with a film or a filter that would only allow particular long wavelengths to pass through. This would be very easy to look up online and figure out how to do this. You could probably do this for, you know, just a few dollars or you could purchase a red light unit if that was within your budget and something that you're interested in. You want to make sure that it's not so bright that you're damaging your eye. A good rule of thumb is that something isn't painful to look at. And in fact, I should just emphasize that any time you look at any light source, sunlight or otherwise, that's painful and makes you want to squint or close your eyes, that means it's too bright to look at without closing your eyes. Okay, that's sort of a duh, but I would loathe to think that anyone would harm themselves with bright light in any way. I don't just say that to protect us. I say that to protect you, of course, because you are responsible for your health. And again, retinal neurons do not regenerate. Once they are gone and dead, they do not come back. There's no technology to replace them at this current state in time. So please don't damage your retinas. So is a red light source safe to look at if it is not painful to look at? Chances are it is. And yet I would still encourage you to talk to your optometrist or ophthalmologist before getting into any extensive protocols. But if you are still determined to pursue the sorts of protocols that are in the Jeffery studies, certainly we'll provide a link to those studies. Again, it involved looking at these red light panels, blinking aloud for two minutes to three minutes every morning for a period of two weeks or more. And if you're older than 40, that could very well have an effect. If you're longer, younger than 40, excuse me, that's unlikely to have an effect. At least that was what was observed in these particular studies. The lights were not flashing. It was continuous illumination. Again, you're allowed to blink. It does not have to even be direct illumination. It can be somewhat indirect illumination, much as we described for the use of UVB light before. The wavelength of light is important. It is red light and near-infrared light that is going to be effective in this scenario. The authors of this study emphasized that it was red light of 670 nanometers in wavelength and near-infrared light of 790 nanometers in wavelength that were effective and that those wavelengths could be complimentary. That's probably why, or maybe it's just coincidental, but it's a fortunate coincidence that a lot of the commercially available red light panels that you'll find out there combine both red light and near-infrared light. However, I want to emphasize that most of the panels that are commercially available are going to be too bright to safely look at very close up. And in fact, that's why most of those red light panels are designed for illumination of the skin and oftentimes arrive in their packaging with eye protectors that are actually designed to shield out all the red light. So take the potential dangers of excessive illumination of the eyes with any wavelength of light seriously. But if you're going to explore 670 and 790 nanometer light for sake of enhancing neuronal function, set it at a distance that's comfortable to look at, and that doesn't force you to squint or doesn't make you feel uncomfortable physically, as if you need to turn away during the period of that two to three-minute illumination each day. In terms of turning away from light, I'll just briefly mention that that is not an accident or a coincidence that you have that response to very bright light. There is a so-called photic avoidance pathway that involves cells within your retina, these ganglion cells that communicate with yet another brain station, a certain area of your thalamus that communicate to areas of your brain that are associated with pain. So literally that can trigger headache, and that can trigger the squint reflex. Biology is just beautiful in this way. Too much light is bad for us in that it can damage our eyes and other aspects of our body. So if we look at a light that's too bright, our eyes send a signal to the brain that gives us a sort of a headache and a desire to squint and turn away. So that can be a useful guide in terms of gauging how bright a light should be or at least how far away you should be from a bright source in order to safely engage with that light source. So the studies I just described, once again, involve the use of red light early in the day within three hours of waking and are for the sake of improving neuronal function. Red light has also been shown to be beneficial late in the day and even in the middle of the night. And when I say middle of the night, I'm referring to studies that explore the use of red light for shift workers. I know that most people are not working in the middle of the night, at least I hope they're not, but some of you may do that from time to time. All-nighters for studying, I confess I still pull all-nighters every once in a while to prepare things like podcasts and other deadlines. I really try not to, happens less and less as I get older, because I think I get more disciplined and/or less good at pulling all-nighters. But I realize that many people are doing shift work, or they have to work certainly past 10:00 pm. Or maybe they're taking care of young children in the middle of the night, and they have to be up. In that case, red light can actually be very beneficial. And nowadays there are a lot of sources of red light available just as red light bulbs. You don't need a panel. So what I'm basically saying is that it can be beneficial to use red lights at night. The study I'd like to emphasize in this context is entitled, Red Light: A Novel Non-pharmacological Intervention to Promote Alertness in Shift Workers. It's a beautiful study. They explored the use of different wavelengths of light, so blue light of 460 nanometers or red light or dim white light, of different brightnesses, et cetera, and looked at things like melatonin. How much does light of a given color and intensity suppress melatonin? They looked at cortisol, a stress hormone. They looked at wakefulness, how much or to what degree could a given color of light increase wakefulness at different hours of the day? The takeaway from this study is very clear. If you need to be awake late at night for sake of shift work or studying or taking care of children, et cetera, red light is going to be your best choice because if the red light is sufficiently dim, it's not going to inhibit melatonin production, and it's not going to increase cortisol at night. Cortisol should be high early in the day, or at least should be elevated relative to other times of day if you are healthy. A late shifted increase in cortisol, however, 9:00 pm cortisol, 10:00 pm cortisol, is well known to be associated with depression and other aspects of mental health, or I should say mental illness. So if you do need to be awake at night or even all night, red light is going to be the preferred light source. And in terms of how bright to make it, well, as dim as you can, while still being able to perform the activities that you need to perform. That's going to be your best guide. I'll provide a link to this study as well. Again, it's a really important study because it emphasized that there are forms of light, red light, provided it's dim, that can allow you to stimulate the alertness that light landing on the eyes can provide. So it allows you to stay awake and to do whatever work that you need to do. It does not seem to alter melatonin production, so that's good. It does not seem to alter levels or timing of cortisol production. So yet another case where red light used correctly can be beneficial. Up until now, we've been talking about the effects of shining different wavelengths of light on the skin or on our eyes and the downstream health consequences of that illumination. However, one of the most important goals of science and medicine is to figure out how to change the health of our brain. And of course, our brain is contained within our skull, and therefore we can't just shine light onto the outside of our head and expect it to change the activity of neurons deep within the brain, unless those neurons are linked up with our eyes or with our skin. And as it turns out, even though there are a lot of brain areas that are connected through neural circuits and hormone circuits through our eye, and believe it or not, also to our skin, many brain areas are not. Brain areas such as the hippocampus, which is involved in learning and memory, brain areas such as our neocortex, well, some areas of our neocortex such as our visual cortex are indirectly linked to our eyes, so if we shine light in our eyes, we can change the activity of neurons in our neocortex, but there are other brain areas that are not directly or even indirectly connected to our visual system, not at least in any immediate way. So that raises the question of how do you change the activity of neurons in the brain? Well, there's pharmacology. You can take pills, you can inject drugs that will change the pharmacology of neurons and the way they operate and fire. Of course, antidepressants are one such instance, opioid drugs are another. There's a huge array of psychoactive compounds, meaning compounds that will change the levels of chemicals in your brain. Some of those work, many of them also carry side effects. It's all rather indirect, meaning you have lots of different cells in different areas of your brain that utilize the same chemicals. So a drug, for instance, to increase serotonin for sake of improving depression will also often have the effect of reducing certain neurons output of serotonin in the hippocampus and cause changes in appetite or changes in libido and so on and so forth. You could imagine using electrical stimulation, putting wires into the brain and stimulating specific brain areas in order to activate the neurons in those brain areas. And certainly that works and has been done experimentally and is done during neurosurgery exams, et cetera, but involves removing a piece of skull. So that's not very practical. In principle, light would be a wonderful way to modulate the activity of neurons deep within the brain. But again, the skull is in the way. Recent studies, however, have figured out ways that light can be delivered to the eyes to change global patterns of firing in the brain in ways that can be beneficial to the brain. And the work that I'm referring to now is mainly the work of Li-Huei Tsai at MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and her colleagues. And what they've discovered that there's a particular pattern of brain activity called gamma activity. Gamma activity is one so-called wavelength of electrical activity in the brain, so not wavelengths of light, but wavelengths of electrical activity in the brain that can be restorative for certain aspects of learning and memory and can actually help create molecular changes in neurons that lead to clearance of debris and even reductions in age-related cognitive decline. So the way to think about brain waves and brain oscillations is that neurons are electrically active, that involves chemicals, et cetera. And they can be active in very slow, big waveforms. So you can think of, you know, Delta waves, meaning, so you can imagine a wave of electrical activity that comes along very infrequently. So a given neuron fires, and then some period of time later fires, and then some period of time even later fires. Or you can imagine that that same cell is very active, fires, fires, fires, fires, fires. You can imagine if it's firing very often, it's going to be short wavelength, right? Shorter gaps between firing. Or if it's firing very seldom, you're going to think about that as longer wavelength firing. Turns out that gamma waves are one pattern of firing that lead to downstream metabolic functions and biological functions that end up clearing away debris that's associated with aging in cells and that also lead to molecular changes that enhance the kind of youthfulness of neurons, so to speak. How do we induce gamma oscillations within the brain? Well, what Li-Huei Tsai and colleagues have beautifully shown is that by delivering certain patterns of light flicker, so lights going on and off at a particular frequency, the brain as a whole starts to entrain, meaning it matches to those particular patterns of light flicker, even though many of the brain areas that do this are not directly within the visual system or visual pathway. So the studies that I'm referring to are several, but the one that I'd like to highlight is entitled, Gamma Entrainment Binds Higher-Order Brain Regions and Offers Neuroprotection. What they essentially did was to expose subjects to 40 hertz, which is a particular frequency of illumination, to the eyes. So it's light goes on, light goes off, light goes on, light goes off at a frequency of 40 hertz. And when they did that and they recorded the activity of neurons within the brain, not just within the visual areas of the brain, but within other areas as well, they observed increased gamma oscillations, meaning that the electrical activity of the brain at large started to match to the patterns of light that were delivered to the eyes. This is really exciting and very unique from the different types of phototherapies that we've been talking about up until now. All the patterns of phototherapy that we've been talking about up until now involved constant illumination with a given wavelength. Here, it is wavelength generating patterns of illumination, light on, light off, light on, light off, at a particular frequency. So what they found, for instance, using this pattern of stimulation, and by the way, the stimulation was called genus, gamma entrainment using sensory stimulation, so G-E-N-U-S, gamma entrainment using sensory stimulation, had a number of really interesting effects. First of all, it reduced so-called amyloid plaques and phosphorylated tau. Amyloid plaques and phosphorylated tau are associated with Alzheimer's and normal age related cognitive decline. So this is incredible, right? A pattern of flashing light delivered to the eyes creates a pattern of neuronal firing, not just in the visual areas of the brain, but in other areas of the brain as well, that in turn trigger molecular pathways that reduce some of the markers and the cause age-related cognitive decline in Alzheimer's. And in parallel to that, they observed an upregulation of some of the biological pathways that lead to enhancement of neuronal function, maintenance of synapses, which are the connections between neurons, and so on, and so on. They have discovered and list out a huge number of these biological effects, both the reduction in bad things, so to speak, and the improvement in good biological pathways. And I find these studies so exciting because, first of all, they're non-invasive, right? There's no drilling through the skull. They are very tractable in the experimental sense, meaning that you can imagine that if 40 hertz stimulation turns out to be the very best stimulation protocol to induce these gamma oscillations, well, great, but because it's non-invasive, it's fairly easy to explore 50 hertz stimulation, 100 hertz stimulation, 20 hertz stimulation, and to do that with different wavelengths of light. And so that's what's happening now. The Tsai lab and other labs are really starting to explore the full range of variables that can impact oscillations within the brain and their downstream consequences. So again, this is phototherapy, but phototherapy of a very different sort that we've been talking about up until now. It's phototherapy designed to trigger activation of biological pathways far away from the very tissue that's being illuminated. And it calls to mind the same sorts of mechanisms that we were talking about earlier, where illumination of the skin with UVB light is setting off an enormous number of different cascades in different organs and tissues, including the spleen, the testes, the ovaries, and so on. So again, light has these powerful effects, both locally on the cells that the light is delivered to, but also systemically in terms of the cells that are changing their electrical and chemical outputs, are modifying lots and lots of biological programs. Is there an actionable tool related to these studies yet? Well, that sort of depends on how adventurous you are. Right now, these studies are being explored in the context of clinical trials, in people with Alzheimer's, dementia, and other forms of neurodegeneration. Is it dangerous to look at a 40-hertz flickering light? Well, in general, the answer is going to be no. However, if you're prone to epilepsy, for instance, staring at a flickering light of a given continuous frequency can induce seizure, right? That might surprise some of you, but it shouldn't, because as this study illustrates and as anyone who's ever been out at night to a club or something illustrates, when you look at a strobe light, for instance, your whole world of visual perception changes, but actually, the rhythm at which you perceive music, at which you perceive conversation, at which you perceive the movement of your body actually changes according to the patterns of visual flicker, in most cases, strobe, if we're using the sort of club dancing example. Your brain is in training to its outside environment. So given the power of flickering lights to entrain brain rhythms, I think at this stage, it's probably too preliminary to really suggest a specific protocol, but I would definitely keep an eye out for these sorts of studies. They are coming out all the time. And I think in a very short period, we are going to see specific protocols that one could use even at home, and of course, these are non-invasive protocols, in order to place the brain into a particular state, not just for sake of offsetting neurodegeneration, but also for enhancing focus, for enhancing the transition into sleep, and other brain states as well. Today, I covered what I would say is a lot of information. My goal was to give you an understanding of how light can be used to change the activities of cells, organelles within those cells, entire organs, and how that can happen locally and systemically. We talked about the power of light to impact our biology at the endocrine level, neuronal level, immune level, mood, et cetera, through both illumination of the eyes and the skin and other tissues as well. I realize that even though this was a lot of information, there are many aspects of phototherapy that I did not cover. I know there's a lot of interest nowadays, for instance, in the use of red light and other wavelength light therapies for ovarian health and testicular health. In fact, I get a lot of questions such as, can red light be used to improve testosterone output? And if so, is that best accomplished by shining red light on the skin or directly on the gonads, on the testicles? I'm going to cover those data at a future time. Right now, the studies that have been done in rodents, I don't think are easily enough translated to humans. And the studies that are happening in humans now are exciting in the sense that they hold a lot of potential, but the data aren't clear yet. However, the data using UVB on the skin of men and women in order to increase hormone, in particular testosterone and estrogen output, those data, I think, are very exciting and very actionable when we talked about those earlier. So if you want more information on how phototherapy can be used, certainly we will do another episode on phototherapy in these other contexts. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. If you have questions or feedback or comments or suggestions about topics that you'd like us to cover in a future podcast episode, or guests that you would like me to interview for the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put all those suggestions, comments, and questions in the comments section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's podcast, we didn't really talk about supplements, but we do talk about supplements and their various uses in many other episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are the very highest quality and stringency. If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. And there you can get 20% off any of the supplements that I take. And if you happen to navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. It's hubermanlab on Instagram. It's also hubermanlab on Twitter. And at both places, I provide science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of this podcast, much of which is unique from the content of this podcast. If you're not already subscribing to our newsletter, you might consider doing so. It's the so-called Neural Network Newsletter. You can find it at hubermanlab.com. Just go into the menu, look up Neural Network Newsletter. You provide email. It is zero cost. We provide summaries of podcasts, summaries of actionable protocols and so forth. We do not share your email with anybody else, and we have a very clear privacy policy there at that website if you choose to explore it. I'm also pleased to announce that we have some live events coming up. So I will be giving a lecture called the Brain Body Contract, where I'll talk about science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab Podcast, much of which is unique and has never been presented publicly before. The first one is going to be May 17th, 2022 in Seattle, Washington. The second one is going to be May 18th in Portland, Oregon. To access tickets, you can go to the link at hubermanlab.com/tour. So thank you once again for joining me today for this deep dive discussion into phototherapies, meaning the power of light to modulate our biology and health. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 280 ---
Video ID: ncSoor2Iw8k
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ncSoor2Iw8k
Title: Dr. Kyle Gillett: How to Optimize Your Hormones for Health & Vitality
Published: 2022-04-11 12:00:23 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Kyle Gillett, MD, a dual board-certified physician in family medicine and obesity medicine and an expert in optimizing hormone levels to improve overall health and well-being in both men and women. We discuss how to improve hormones using behavioral, nutritional, and exercise-based tools and safely and rationally approach supplementation and hormone therapies. We discuss testosterone and estrogen and how those hormones relate to fertility, mood, aging, relationships, disease pathologies, thyroid hormone, growth hormone, prolactin, dopamine and peptides that impact physical and mental health and vitality across the lifespan. The episode is rich with scientific mechanisms and tools for people to consider.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www. hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Sign up to get notified about future Huberman Lab events: https://www.hubermanlab.com/events

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs

Dr. Kyle Gillett
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/kylegillettmd
YouTube: https://bit.ly/3v65nSQ
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@gilletthealth
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/kylegillettmd
Clinic: https://gilletthealth.com

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Kyle Gillett, MD, Hormone Optimization   
00:03:10 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:04:10 Thesis, InsideTracker, ROKA
00:08:24 Preventative Medicine & Hormone Health 
00:14:17 The Six Pillars of Hormone Health Optimization
00:17:14 Diet for Hormone Health, Blood Testing
00:20:21 Exercise for Hormone Health 
00:21:06 Caloric Restriction, Obesity & Testosterone 
00:23:55 Intermittent Fasting, Growth Hormone (GH), IGF-1
00:29:08 Sleep Quality & Hormones
00:35:03 Testosterone in Women
00:38:55 Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), Hair Loss 
00:43:46 DHT in Men and Women, Turmeric/Curcumin, Creatine
00:50:10 5-Alpha Reductase, Finasteride, Saw Palmetto 
00:52:30 Hair loss, DHT, Creatine Monohydrate
00:55:07 Hair Regrowth, Male Pattern Baldness
00:58:12 Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS), Inositol, DIM
01:04:00 Oral Contraception, Perceived Attractiveness, Fertility 
01:10:31 Testosterone & Marijuana or Alcohol
01:14:27 Sleep Supplement Frequency 
01:15:34 Testosterone Supplementation & Prostate Cancer 
01:20:24 Prostate Health, Dietary Fiber, Saw Palmetto, C-Reactive Protein  
01:24:05 Prostate Health & Pelvic Floor, Viagra, Tadalafil 
01:30:54 Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT)
01:35:17 Estrogen & Aromatase Inhibitors, Calcium D-Glucarate, DIM 
01:39:28 Lifestyle Factors to Increase Testosterone/Estrogen Levels, Dietary Fats 
01:45:34 Aromatase Supplements: Ecdysterone, Turkesterone
01:47:04 Tongkat Ali (Long Jack), Estrogen/Testosterone levels 
01:52:25 Fadogia Agrestis, Luteinizing Hormone (LH), Frequency
01:56:44 Boron, Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG)
01:58:13 Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG), Fertility
02:04:18 Prolactin & Dopamine, Pituitary Damage 
02:08:34 Augmenting Dopamine Levels: Casein, Gluten, Vitamin E, Vitamin B6 (P5P)
02:12:30 L-Carnitine & Fertility, TMAO & Allicin (Garlic) 
02:18:19 Blood Test Frequency 
02:19:41 Long-Term Relationships & Effects on Hormones
02:25:33 Nesting Instincts: Prolactin, Childbirth & Relationships
02:29:05 Cold & Hot Exposure, Hormones & Fertility
02:32:34 Peptide Hormones: Insulin, Tesamorelin, Ghrelin 
02:37:24 Growth Hormone-Releasing Peptides (GHRPs)
02:39:38 BPC-157 & Injury, Dosing Frequency
02:45:23 Uses for Melanotan 
02:48:21 Spiritual Health Impact on Mental & Physical Health 
02:54:18 Caffeine & Hormones 
02:56:19 Neural Network Newsletter, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify Review, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Brain-Body Contract

#HubermanLab #Health #Hormones

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [lively music] I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Kyle Gillett. Dr. Gillett is dual board-certified in family medicine and obesity medicine and practices out of a clinic in Kansas and via telemedicine. He provides full-spectrum medicine, including hormone health, preventative medicine, obstetrics, which is the branch of medicine and surgery concerned with childbirth and the care of women giving birth and pediatrics. I first learned about Dr. Gillett from a podcast of all things and was immediately struck by the breadth and depth of his knowledge on all things hormones and hormone optimization. As you'll see very soon today, Dr. Gillett can teach you how to optimize your hormones using behavioral tools, nutrition, exercise-based tools, supplementation, and hormone therapies if those are appropriate for you. There are many professionals out there including many medical doctors of course, talking about hormone health. What really sets Dr. Gillett apart from the pack is his ability to understand how the different factors that I described before, nutrition, supplementation, exercise, and hormone therapies, how those interact with one another and the safest and most rational ways to approach hormone optimization. During today's episode, you will learn how to optimize your hormones, not just testosterone and estrogen, but also prolactin and other hormone pathways that impact your mood, mental health and physical health. Dr. Gillett is also an avid educator about hormones in other aspects of health. He does this on zero cost to consumer platforms, such as Instagram and other social media. On Instagram, he is kylegillettmd, that's K-Y-L-E-G-I-L-L-E-T-T, no E at the end, MD. So kylegilletmd on Instagram. And he is Gillett Health on all other platforms, including LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube, TikTok, and Facebook. If you go to his Instagram or his other social media, you will learn a lot about hormone health, about the latest science impacting obesity and metabolic health. He is a wealth of knowledge. And again, he's providing all that information at zero cost to you, the consumer. What you are soon to hear is a conversation between me and Dr. Gillett about all things hormones and hormone health and hormone optimization. We dive deep into mechanisms, but we are clear to establish what each word or set of concepts mean. So if you have no background in biology or even if you do, I'm sure that you'll come away with a wealth of valuable knowledge. We also talk about specific protocols related again to lifestyle factors, nutrition, supplementation, and where appropriate, hormone replacement therapy. I know there's a lot of interest about these topics. Dr. Gillett is very thorough about addressing both male and female issues and addressing hormone health for people at all stages of life. I'm sure that you'll come away from this episode with the same impression that I did, which is that Dr. Gillett is an extraordinarily clear communicator and that he has tremendous compassion for his patients, and that he has a deep love of understanding biology and medicine in ways that can benefit you. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events in May, 2022. The first live event will take place in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will take place in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled, "The Brain Body Contract" during which I will talk about science and science-based tools. Many of which overlap with the topics covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, but most of which will not and will be completely new topics and tools never discussed publicly before. Both live events will also include a question and answer period during which you the audience can ask me questions directly about any aspect of science or science-based tools and I will attempt to answer them. Tickets for the two events, again, Seattle on May 17th and Portland on May 18th, are both available at hubermanlab.com/tour. Before we begin with today's episode, I want to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes nootropics. In fact they make custom nootropics. Now what is a nootropic? Technically nootropics means smart drug. Frankly, I'm not a big fan of the word nootropics, because what is smart? I mean, there's creativity, there's focus, there's task switching, different aspects of our brain and body engage different aspects of cognition, many of which we can call smart. There's emotional intelligence, there's analytic intelligence, there's logic, there's creativity. Thesis understands this and has designed custom nootropics designed to bring your body and brain into the specific state that you want. So for instance, they have specific nootropics for creativity, other nootropics for focus, other nootropics for motivation, and so on, and so forth. In addition to that, each nootropics is custom designed for you. They use only the highest quality ingredients, things like alpha-GPC and phosphatidylserine, which I've talked about on this podcast before. They also use ingredients like ginkgo biloba, which many people use, like and benefit from. However, there are also people like me who can't take ginkgo biloba, because it gives me terrible headaches. I learned that a long time ago. And so I simply can't take any nootropic or any supplement for that matter that includes ginkgo biloba. I'm sure I'm not alone in the fact that some ingredients work for me and others do not. Thesis has solved this problem of individual variation by creating a brief quiz. So if you go online to takethesis.com/huberman and take a three-minute quiz, and then Thesis will send you to four different formulas that match your specific preferences. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman. And if you use the code HUBERMAN, you'll get 10% off your first box of custom nootropics. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and longterm health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. There are a lot of blood and DNA tests out there, but a major issue with many of them is that you get numbers back about levels of hormones, metabolic factors, lipids, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker has solved that problem by creating a personalized dashboard. So you take your blood and/or your DNA test, you get the results back, and where certain values might be too high or too low for your preference, you can click on that and it will direct you immediately to lifestyle factors, nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, that can help you bring those numbers back into the ranges that are ideal for you. So it not only gives you information about where your health stands, it gives you directives as to how to improve your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime studying the visual system. And I can tell you that your visual system is incredibly sophisticated. It allows you to do things like move from a shady area outside to a sunny area outside and to adjust your visual system, so you don't even notice that transition. A lot of sunglasses and eyeglasses are not designed with those sorts of biological transitions in mind. ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses are different. Every one of their glasses is designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. First of all, they're incredibly lightweight, so you don't even notice that they're on your face. Second of all, they were designed to be worn during activities like running and cycling, et cetera, and they won't slip off your face even if you get sweaty. And they have a terrific aesthetic. So even though they were originally designed as active eyewear, they look great. So you can wear them out to dinner, to school, at work, et cetera. If you'd like to try ROKA sunglasses or eyeglasses, you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code HUBERMAN to save 20% on your first order. Again that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code HUBERMAN at checkout. And now for my discussion about hormone health and optimization with Dr. Kyle Gillett. Dr. Gillett, welcome. - Thank you for having me. - Well, I'm super excited to talk to you, because I found out about you on a podcast and it immediately became clear that you are an encyclopedia of knowledge about hormone health for men and for women across the lifespan. So I have many, many questions, but before we dive into those questions, I'd love to just get a little bit of your background in terms of your medical training and what your particular orientation is toward treating your patients. And how do you think about this whole landscape that we call hormone health? What is a hormone? How do you envision people managing their hormones? If you could just kind of fill in a few of those blanks for us, I think a lot of people would appreciate it. - Absolutely, so I'm dual board-certified in family medicine and obesity medicine. I've kind of tailored my training in order to provide what I call a balanced approach to total health, which includes body, mind, and soul. I recently saw a podcast with Joe Rogan and Mr. Beast. And Joe asks Mr. Beast, "How do you become such an amazing YouTuber and have all these great clickbait videos, and how did you become good at it?" And it turns out he just became obsessed when he was a teenager. And that's essentially how I've tailored my education as well. I've become obsessed with optimal human performance, their body, their mind, and even their spirit. So I attended med school at the University of Kansas, which is one of the few med schools that still emphasizes full-spectrum care. They emphasize exercise is medicine. They emphasize food is medicine, of which I was active in both of those interest groups. In residency, I was active in a lot of mindfulness curriculum. And then also things like Walk with a Doc where you emphasize preventative medicine. That's something that we've kind of got away from. And that niche led me to hormone health. It didn't really start as hormone health, but it's a very important component of health in general that many people don't emphasize. - Great, well, this idea of preventative medicine, I think, is starting to really take hold in the general population, especially given the events of the last few years, people realize that they are showing up to health challenges at a bunch of different levels. And with some people feeling very robust, other people feeling back on their heels. When someone comes to you as a patient, what are some of the first things that you want to know about them? I mean, obviously you want to know their blood pressure. You want to know something about their mental health and family history. But in terms of hormone health, what are the sorts of probe questions that you ask and what are you looking for? And I ask this because I'd like people to be able to ask some of these very same questions for themselves. - Yeah, so when you do a physical exam and a history, you have a lot of different parts. You have your history of present illness if they have a complaint, maybe the patient doesn't have a complaint. In that case, things like their social history and their family history are extremely important, because that gives you an insight into their genetics and an insight into their hormone health. So patients will tell me, oh, I'm doin' okay, but it helps to ask them, well, how are you now? Let's say the patient is 50. How are you now versus when you were 20, and what has changed? So I've gotten the question the lot, how do you get your doctor to order a better lab workup or to even include your basic hormones? And there's no magic answer to that, but what really helps is you tell them, my energy is not as good as it used to be. My focus is not as good as it used to be. My athletic performance is not as good as it used to be. So you don't have to have a pathology in order for a lab to be indicated. You just have that pertinent symptom. - I think that's going to be really helpful, because for many people, the idea of getting a blood test to look at their hormones just seems like such an enormous hurdle to get over, and many doctors won't prescribe them. And would you say that it's, using the approach you just described, that it's equally effective for men and women or do you find that, for one reason or another, that men and women have different challenges and advantages in trying to access their deeper hormone data? - Yeah. It's slightly different. With women, there's a lot more objective data. So if they're having menstrual irregularities or if they're not havin' a period, if they're having too heavy of periods, then those are things that they talk about very frequently with their doctor. Men are more hesitant. So men really want to know what their testosterone is, but at the same time, they really don't want to tell their doctor how their libido is or how their energy is, because it's almost like they feel less masculine or they feel less like a guy when they say that even if they're just talking to their doctor about it. - Yeah, I think that that raises a really important point, which is that the whole discussion around hormone health is a bit of a barbed wire topic, because in many ways when we hear the word hormone, we think testosterone and estrogen, we think notions of masculinity and femininity. And of course testosterone and estrogen are present in all sexes, right? All chromosomal backgrounds. And just varying degrees in ratios. But it also raises all these issues about sexual health that it's kind of interesting, 'cause I'm surrounded by medical doctors in my lab at Stanford. And the more physicians that I surround myself with, the more open is the discussion around sexual health and reproductive health. But in the general population, I think some of these topics are a little bit taboo or against kind of barbed wire. And so I think that people are seeking a lot of this information on YouTube and through communities that may or may not be very educated about the actual biology. So along those lines, we could probably assume that hormones are changing across the lifespan, right? Certainly from childhood and puberty and onward. If you would, I'd love to just kind of take a snapshot of what you think everybody should be thinking about or doing to optimize their hormone health, male or female, in, let's say in their 20s. And then maybe we could migrate that to their 30s and 40s. But before that, could you just tell us what everyone should be doing for their hormone health from puberty onward? - Yeah, the law of diminishing returns applies. So doing a little amount of what I call lifestyle interventions over a long period of time is going to be far more helpful or efficacious than doing a lot and then doing nothing or doing a lot and then doing nothing. So I talk about the big six pillars. The two strongest ones are likely diet and exercise. For hormone health, specifically resistance training is particularly helpful. For diet, caloric restriction can be particularly helpful, especially with the epidemic of metabolic syndrome that is continuing to on go in this country and in developed countries in general. So those are the two most powerful. So number one and number two are diet and exercise. For the last four, I have a little bit of alliteration. So there's stress and stress optimization. That has to do with cortisol, that has to do with your mental health, that has to do with societal health, and collective health of your family as well. When you're a member of a family or even a very close friend trying to achieve optimal health together is very important. It's the same thing with nicotine cessation. It's the same thing with hormone optimization. If you do it as a household unit, it's far more helpful. So after stress, you have sleep optimization. Sleep is extremely important, especially for mitochondrial health as well. And then you have sunlight, which encompasses anything that's outdoors. So you move more, you have cold exposure, you have heat exposure, that's sunlight. And then last one is spirit. So that's kind of the body, mind, and soul. If you have all the other five in, they're dialed in completely, but you don't have your spiritual health, whatever you believe, then that's going to profoundly impact your body and your mind as well. - Yeah, and we're definitely going to touch into this notion of spiritual health, because I think for some people that might draw connotations of certain things that may or may not be accurate, but I know a number of academic laboratories that are focused on this and a number of, not just functional medicine clinics, but research clinics and hospitals throughout the country that are achieving some really interesting data, not just in people that are quite sick, but in healthy people who are trying to further optimize health. So we will definitely touch back to that. If you would be so kind as to maybe give us a little bit more detail about some of these other areas. So when people hear diet, I immediately think, okay, now we get into the combat around vegan, plant-based, carnivore, et cetera. But I think that my general view of this is that most people should probably be eating as few highly processed foods, highly palatable foods as possible, which doesn't mean eating foods that don't taste good, of course. But what other sorts of things do do you recommend in the realm of diet? And then I also want to know about caloric restriction, because my understanding is that a caloric surplus can actually support certain hormones like testosterone. So how does one combine caloric restriction and still optimize hormones? But what would you say is a really terrific way to think about an approached diet? - Yeah. Diet should be an individualized approach. So if you have a car, each car is made different and requires a different sort of fuel, whether it's a race car, whether it's a diesel truck, they have different fuels for different performance outcomes. So if you're trying to tow something or you're trying to go fast. So it's the same way with athletes. It's pretty well studied. The more intra-workout carbs ultra long distance athletes take, in general, they do better. I think they've studied this in cyclists quite often. It also depends on your genetics. So you can have a genetic polymorphism and you metabolize carbs and sugar better, even when they're unopposed by fiber. - How does one determine whether or not they have such a polymorphism? I mean, I'm an omnivore, so I do eat some high quality meats, not in huge quantities, but I also eat vegetables and starches, I feel fine. I've never done an elimination diet. I think I did a very low carb diet once and all it gave me was a lot of psoriasis and poor sleep, so I backed off. I probably didn't do it correctly, but I know a lot of people that do quite well on a very low carb or zero carb diet. - Yeah, particularly those who are at risk of cancer, because you have less glucose that can be easily uptaken into cells. And then also people with autoimmune diseases. - They tend to do well on auto- - On lower carb diets, yeah. But yeah, as far as the how do you know, basically you can use your biofeedback, how you're feeling, to guess what you tolerate well, or you can just get genetic testing, which can be fairly expensive, but most of all, it requires a physician or someone who knows how to interpret the test accurately. - And if someone had the means or would you say that getting regular blood testing is a good idea? And if so, what is regular blood testing? Is it every three months? Is it every six months? Of course the backdrop of life is changing too, stress levels, et cetera. - Yeah, every three to six months for preventative purposes, at times you need blood tests at faster frequencies than that. And then you should also get a blood test when you're fasting and when you're not fasting. So if you're looking for damage to the beach, you don't just look at low tide, you look at high tide and you see what's happening at high tide as well. - I think that's a great way to put it. And in terms of general recommendations around exercise, I mean, I'm of the mind, based on the data that I've seen, that almost everybody should, or everybody should be getting 150 to 180 minutes minimum of Zone 2 cardio per week that kind of could continue while having a conversation, but if one were to exert any more effort, it would have a hard time getting the words out. At least that, right? For cardiovascular health and general brain health and musculoskeletal health plus resistance exercise. Is that more or less the contour of what you recommend? - Yeah, that's more or less the contour. The more you're doing your Zone 2 cardiovascular exercise, the slightly less important a long duration of caloric restriction is. - Interesting, and that brings us to caloric restriction. So it's very clear that caloric restriction can allow one to lose weight, right? This is the classic CICO, C-I-C-O, calories in calories out. We are not disputing calories in calories out. But somehow that always has to be stated 50 times in any forum because of whatever follows, people I think will anchor to, and assume that we don't mean that, but I know you and I both agree on calories in calories out as a fundamental law of thermodynamics. But it's clear to me that based on what I've read that when one is in a slight caloric surplus that hormones like testosterone can be optimized, but is that true for somebody who's showing up with excessive body fat? How does this all work? Because body fat is manufacturing enzymes that convert testosterone to estrogen. So in other words, how does someone know if they should use caloric restriction or avoid caloric restriction? - Yeah, here's how to parse that out. So before I delve into the details a bit more, I should say, as a board-certified obesity medicine physician, obviously the laws of thermodynamics apply. And then in addition to that, there is nothing special about intermittent fasting or caloric restriction or exercise when it pertains to losing body weight in general. When you do lose weight, about 33% of that is lean body mass. And about 10% of fat cells, adipose cells are actually lean body mass as well, because it has proteins and water and things like that in it too so the reason for exercise and the reason for caloric restriction in general, including intermittent fasting, is health reasons. That's how you increase your health span. It's not necessarily going to make the weight on a scale change, but that doesn't matter as much. It's been fairly well studied in both mice and humans. It's much easier to study in mice. So that's a precursor to our six types of people, the ones that care about mice studies and the ones that care about human studies. But if you correctly restrict mice by 40%, than they can have improved testosterone parameters, but only if they're obese to start. And it appears to be that same way in humans as well. So the easy way to think about it is if you're obese or you have metabolic syndrome, caloric restriction will improve your testosterone. There has been a study and they talk about all these studies in a systematic review from the Mayo Clinic Proceedings in March of last year. And they note that there is a study in young, healthy men and they calorically restrict them and their testosterone does decrease. So if you're young and healthy and you don't have metabolic syndrome, then caloric restriction will likely decrease your testosterone. - That clarifies a lot for me. And I believe it will clarify a lot for other people as well. And I'm delighted that you pointed out this distinction about intermittent fasting not being the only way to achieve caloric restriction. There are a number of young, healthy, or older, healthy people I know who like using intermittent fasting, even if they're not trying to lose weight, for a couple of reasons. Some believe that it might extend lifespan. I think that's still a bit of an open question. It's a bit of a hard experiment to do, because the control group is, no one wants in the control group as I say. - It does in mice. - Right. Exactly. - Captive audience. - Exactly, and the other feature of it that's a little bit tricky is that many people like intermittent fasting because of the mental effects, the clarity of mind that they feel during fasting, the increased pleasure in eating when they finally do eat and here I'm referring to intermittent fasting of the sort where eating windows are anywhere from 8 to 12 hours a day. Not extended fasts of 24 hours or more. So the question therefore is, for the healthy lean enough person, right? Non-obese person, is intermittent fasting a bad idea in terms of hormone health? Is oscillating between this period of kind of feast and famine within a 24 hours a problem if one is getting sufficient calories to maintain weight? - Yeah, so if they're in a caloric maintenance, then it's not going to be, it's not going to be deleterious. It's not going to be bad for their hormone health. There's a couple different hormones that we can talk about. We can talk out testosterone. We can talk about DHEA, which usually go hand in hand. And then we can also talk about growth hormone, which is not a steroid hormone, but it's a peptide hormone. So it's a chain of proteins, amino acids that are put together instead of a sterile, think of sterile hormones as coming from cholesterol. So intermittent fasting, you do get a little spike in growth hormone after you eat, but you also get a huge spike in growth hormone, a more significant, less negligible spike overnight. And that is improved if you are intermittent fasting. So it's probably going to help your growth hormone and subsequently IGF-1 levels, which will help more in the older age groups than younger age groups. - And I like to eat dinner. So for me, that means sometime around six or seven o'clock, sometimes eight o'clock. I confess last night, 'cause I was working late, I ate pretty big, it was basically my only meal of the day, at 10 o'clock. That's a rare thing for me. Can I still achieve a high degree of growth hormone output if, let's say I avoid food in the two to three hours before going to sleep? Or does one have to be very deep into a fast in order to achieve the increase in growth hormone? - There's still pretty good growth hormone output even if you eat two or three hours before you sleep. It's just the law of diminishing returns, the longer you go, you get slightly more and slightly more. - Right, and I know a number of people think of growth hormone in the context of the exogenous growth hormone and the fact that that can, in some cases, be associated with cancers. I've been asked many times before, can the increase in growth hormone from things like saunas or intermittent fasting cause levels of growth hormone that are so high that they cause cancers. My impulse is to say, no, it seems like it's not like to happen, but I should probably verify that statement with you. - Yeah, so quite unlikely. I think about growth hormone, and especially IGF-1. And there's actually an IGF-1 and IGF-2. But I think about it in terms of endocrine IGF-1, mostly IGF-1 that's synthesized in the liver and released in the liver versus IGF-1 that's released classically. An example of this would be your IGF-1 levels increase after resistance training or exercise. And that's more of like paracrine or autocrine, and they have more local action. So that IGF-1, it's pretty well studied that if you just give people IGF-1, it's not going to, at physiologic levels, it's not going to improve their body composition. However, that IGF-1 that's autocrine and paracrine just working in those local tissues and muscles is likely part of the reason why you get a improved body composition response after exercise. - I see, and just to clarify for me and for others, what can we say are the major functions of IGF-1 and IGF-2 that are distinct from just growth hormone? Are they just kind of the active hormone growth hormone? The kind of the pickaxe end of the assembly line? - Yeah. So they have a much longer duration of action. I believe the half-life of IGF-1 is several days almost a week, whereas growth hormone has an extremely fast half-life of only hours. So growth hormone acts significantly on the liver to produce IGF-1. So it's around in the serum in the blood long enough to where it's producing an effect pretty much all the time. - Very interesting. - Yep. - Well, and then your other pillars, stress, we've talked a lot about stress on this podcast before and tools for managing stress. Sleep obviously is a big one. I think, if nothing else, I will either put people to sleep with my podcast. Certainly not one, but my solo episodes or hopefully convince people that sleep is the foundation of mental and physical health and performance. Are there any aspects of hormone optimization that can improve sleep? I know sleep can improve hormone optimization, but are there any aspects of hormonal optimization that can improve sleep? And for people that are suffering from this common syndrome of going to sleep and then waking up at 03:00 or 04:00 in the morning, we know that can be associated with depression, but are there any hormonal indications that might lead to that kind of situation? - Yeah, there's three big ones. The first one is not super common, but it's a very direct correlation. If you have a growth hormone deficiency, a true deficiency, whether you're an adult or a child, then your sleep is likely going to be affected. And let's say you're a child with growth hormone deficiency, once that is replaced with therapy, your sleep is going to get significantly better. The second one that's a very common scenario is if you're having what's called vasomotor symptoms of menopause or vasomotor symptoms of andropause which are also applicable. And that's where your progestogenic activity, so your main progestogens are progesterone and then and pregnenolone and then 5-alpha, 3-alpha-progesterone, which is- - Where are those manufactured in the body? - So they're manufactured in a few places. In men, they're manufactured some in the testes in the Leydig cells. In women, they're manufactured in the ovaries until menopause. And then they're also manufactured in the adrenal gland. So if you're pre-adrenopausal where your adrenal glands are still working fairly well, usually still have a decent amount of progesterone around, and this can be measured too. So after menopause, women make progesterone from their ovaries, or sorry, from their adrenal glands. If that progesterone crosses the blood-brain barrier, especially if it's 5-alpha and 3-alpha reduced, so it's modified a little bit, then it is both a GABA agonist, which helps sleep just like GABA does, gamma-amino butyric acid, the main inhibitory neurotransmitter of which lots of things work on, alcohol works on GABA as well. Gabapentin also works on GABA. Migraine medicines, many of them work on GABA. Benzodiazepines, and also non-benzos. So an example of a benzo would be Xanax. An example of a non benzo would be Ambien. So those all work on GABA. So GABA is also helped by the progestogenic activity as well. That's why a lot of women in menopause feel like their sleep is much worse is because they have lower activity of those progestogens. - And for men in so-called andropause, low testosterone, is that also one of the causes of poor sleep. - Low testosterone can lead to poor sleep, nut my third scenario is actually, if a man begins TRT, then they develop poor sleep because of sleep apnea. It drastically raises the risk that somebody is going to have sleep apnea. And then a lot of people, especially when they first started in the first month or two, it puts them into this hypersympathetic state, because they have overactive androgen receptors, especially after a long time of being hypogonadal. Then they have a physiologic dose of TRT and that causes the sleep issue itself. - Interesting, I have a lot of questions about TRT, testosterone replacement therapy. I should just mention that when you say it increases sympathetic activity, you don't mean that taking testosterone increases sympathy for others. It may in fact do the opposite. Although it's very clear from my discussions with my colleagues in the endocrinology side and also with the great Dr. Robert Sapolsky that increasing testosterone merely exacerbates existing features of people. So the jerks become bigger jerks, kind people become even more kind in general, but I want to get into TRT in depth, but it's very interesting to me to hear that testosterone replacement therapy increases the risk of sleep apnea. And I want to make sure that I ask that is that also the case in people that are using TRT who are not hypogonadal? Because in the classic situation, if somebody isn't making enough testosterone, they're below 300 nanograms per deciliter on the chart, they go in and take TRT. But many people nowadays, let's be honest, are taking doses of testosterone even though they are in the sort of standard range, because the range is so large because of other symptomology, is that right? - Yeah, I do love the analogy that Dr. Sapolsky had about monks taking testosterone and making them more and more generous. So that does appear to be what testosterone usually does, is it exacerbates, if you will, what you're previously like. So it's not going to change you as a person. But if you're eugonadal before you start testosterone- - Meaning? - Meaning you have normal testosterone, and then you start TRT or self-administered TRT, steroids, however you want to look at it, then your risk of sleep apnea still goes up in a dose-dependent fashion. So the higher the dose, the more risky. With the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system, the sympathetic is the fight or flight nervous system, the parasympathetic is the rest and digest. So if you have too much fight or flight, and stress can cause that too, then you're not going to rest as well at night. - I want to touch on testosterone in women because there is testosterone in women. I'd like to know where that testosterone comes from, which tissues, I'd like to know whether or not testosterone replacement therapy make sense in women. I'm hearing more and more about women using testosterone. And I'd like to know whether or not knowing a woman's testos, for her to know her testosterone is of equal, less than or more value than knowing, for instance, progesterone and estrogen levels? Because I think there are a lot of misconceptions about the roles of testosterone in women. - For health optimization, testosterone is just as important to know. For pathology prevention, for example, breast cancer, osteoporosis, estrogen, and progesterone are more important to know. So when you're thinking about women, women think that they have such a tiny amount of testosterone, because you test it, most people test a free testosterone, so a testosterone that's unbound, which is by far the smallest proportion of testosterone. Any androgen is bound by lots of different steroid-binding proteins. But the ones that are most pertinent are called SHBG, or sex hormone-binding globulin. And that binds the androgenic steroid, for example, DHT or dihydrotestosterone. It's associated with prostate enlargement, it's associated with male pattern baldness. It binds that the most strongly, and then it binds testosterone next most strongly, and then it binds things like androstenedione or DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone. And then it binds the estrogens, the weakest, like estradiol. So if you look at the total amount of testosterone, women actually have, almost all women, not all women, but almost all of them have significantly more testosterone than estradiol, but it's because it's in different measurements. So estradiol, a lot of time is picograms per mil as opposed to nanograms per deciliter. So women have more testosterone than estrogen and significantly more DHEA than either. - Interesting. Do women make dihydrotestosterone? - Yeah. - And where does this testosterone come from? Because they don't have testes. - Yeah, so most testosterone in women that are premenopausal can come from theca cells, T-H-E-C-A. So theca cells are cells in the ovaries that can produce testosterone. And a lot of people have actually heard about hyperthecosis, not the term itself. But a lot of Olympians that are, their chromosomes are XY, they're females, and they're not taking any- - Wait, they're XY, but they're females? - Or sorry, they're XX. - Oh, okay. - Yeah. Thank you. So they're XX, they're not XY, and they have never transitioned or been on any sort of hormone replacement or testosterone, but they naturally produce a huge amount of testosterone, as much as many men. And some of these women, I believe they were from Botswana, were banned from competing in the Olympics in certain distances. I believe they were banned from the 400 meter and 800 meter, because their natural testosterone was deemed to be too high. - So they mistakenly thought that they were using steroids? - They actually knew they were not using steroids. They knew it was their theca cells were just genetically gifted, I suppose. And they still made them change distances. - [Andrew] Wow. - So one or two of these athletes changed to, I believe it was the 3K or the 5K, and they still did quite well, but it was not their best event. - Interesting, yeah, that's turning out to be a very interesting and controversial area of this notion of hormone therapies and natural variation in hormones on different chromosomal backgrounds. Fascinating, we should probably do a whole episode about that, 'cause it's very much of the times. So men and women both make DHT. I'd like to ask about DHT in men. So often we hear about testosterone in men and free testosterone being the unbound form of course. But dihydrotestosterone, where does it come from in men? What is the cascade of events that takes testosterone to dihydrotestosterone and what are some of the quote/unquote positive and negative effects of, here I'm only referring to endogenous dihydrotestosterone. And in fact, I'll make it very clear whether or not I'm talking about taking something or one's own natural production. Here we're just, I think up until now we've just been talking about natural production. So tell us about DHT in men, such a powerful hormone during development obviously. But what is it doing? - DHT is a very androgenic hormone. So whether you're talking about DHEA, which is a weak androgen, or testosterone, which is a relatively strong androgen, or DHT, which is a very strong androgen, they bind to the androgen receptor in both men and in women. So the effect of all three of those is mediated by the androgen receptor. There's a couple different beta-estradiol receptors and alpha-estradiol receptors, but there's only one androgen receptor. Intriguingly, it is on the X chromosome, so men get their androgen receptor gene from their mother. Women get one androgen receptor gene from their father, one from their mother. Often the one that is more sensitive to androgens and people with PCOS, that's the one that's active. The other one is methylated and inactive. - Can I just pause you one second? Sorry to interrupt, but I have to ask this question before I forget. And I know a number of people are probably wondering, I've heard that whether or not one develops male pattern baldness, whether or not a male develops male pattern baldness, just to be very precise, you could get some information about that by looking at your mother's father, and that would, in keeping with what you just described, that the X chromosome, which of course is handed off through the mother, is carrying the genes that encode for the number and distribution of these androgen receptors that DHT will bind to, 'cause of course, I think as you'll probably tell us, that DHD is a responsible for male pattern bald and beard growth, is that right? Should I look at my grandfather on my mother's side to determine what I'm likely to look like in terms of my DHT-ness, is that a word? - Yeah, it's the best guess that you could make purely from phenotypes. Now you can measure your genotype and get a better idea of that. Assuming that it's true male pattern baldness, it's related to the gene transcription of the androgen receptor. So I like to think of it as how much of this androgen receptor gene is activated by any androgen? So if you have an extremely sensitive gene, which usually means you have very few CAG repeats, which is basically just a certain, CAG encodes for a certain amino acid, and if you have very few of the repeats, then your androgen receptor gene works better. Think of it as a corollary to Huntington's disease where if you have very few of, called trinucleotide repeats, then it's not as severe as a disease, but after you get more and more CAG repeats, which by the way are, in the population you're getting more and more CAG repeats, so it's a natural selection of process that has been ongoing for a variety of number of reasons. But anyway if you have more repeats, then that gene activates in the cytoplasm and moves to the nucleus and causes gene transcription more often and hair loss more often. - So does that mean that we're seeing more hair loss now due to elevated levels of DHT than we were 50 years ago? - Probably not. The hair loss 50 years ago, well, not 50 years ago, but 500 years ago, was probably more significant, because on average, 500 years ago, people were more sensitive to androgens. So there's a syndrome called androgen insensitivity syndrome, AIS and that syndrome was related to when men, who have the copy from their mother who is a carrier, their AR gene, or androgen receptor gene, is completely insensitive. So think of it, it's not related to the CAG repeats, but think of that receptor as just not working at all. So there's a continuum, so everybody's receptor works a little bit better or a little bit worse. And the better your receptor works, the more likely you are to have male pattern baldness. - To zoom out from this, but still keeping an eye on DHT, what do you like to see all women in all men do to optimize DHT? And here I'm talking about regardless of age. So we're still in this from puberty onward phase. We haven't yet micro-dissected out decade by decade, which we will do, but what do you like to see people do to keep DHT in check? But before you tell us that, could you tell us what positive things DHT does when it's in the proper range? - Yeah, so DHT helps a lot for, it's the same reason why testosterone helps, it activates the antigen receptor gene. It helps effort feel good. So it can be motivating. So that's how it's active in the CNS. It also is active in cardiovascular tissue. So if you look at someone that has heart failure or if someone has cardiac hypertrophy, the level of DHT can matter because it's also binding to the androgen receptor in the myocardium or in the heart itself. So you think of the classic bodybuilder heart. It's an easy example to make. They have very thickened muscle. Their muscle is very strong, because they're pumping blood often with high blood pressure and that DHT and the testosterone and any DHT derivatives like Masteron or oxandrolone, preamble and also bind to the heart, and they cause even more hypertrophy or enlargement of that muscle tissue. So then let's say the person stops and they're recovering, and they're trying to have cardiac remodeling, which is where you take a very thick heart, and cardiac remodeling's important in a lot of different cardiac pathologies, but if you give them finasteride or dutasteride, which inhibit the enzyme that can converts testosterone to DHT, so making less activity at the androgen receptor gene, they have cardiac remodeling, and their heart health improves. - I see, so for the non-body builder, the typical woman or man, younger or older, what sorts of things support DHT, and thereby heart health? Presumably DHT she is involved in some of the other things that testosterone is famous for in both men and women. Things like libido, as you mentioned, making effort feel good. So motivation, drive and vitality is, I guess, could be the general phrase. What sorts of things support DHT? What sorts of things create problems for DHT? - There's lots of dietary changes and supplementation that you're probably doing right now that's affecting your DHT. - You mean me personally? - Well, everybody. All of the listeners. Because let's say you have a diet high in plant polyphenols, many of those inhibit the enzyme that converts testosterone to DHT. - Could you give us an example of one of those, either in supplementation form, or in food form? - Curcumins, certain curcuminoids, depending on the structure, will inhibit the enzyme called 5-alpha-reductase that converts testosterone to DHT. - Turmeric? - Yeah. Turmeric. Black pepper extract. So it's used often to increase bioavailability. It's also called BioPerine. It's also a 5-alpha-reductase inhibitor. And on top of that, people have different genetics too. So some people, they're 5-alpha-reductase enzymes, there's three of them. They're on chromosome two, three, and four, I believe, but some of them are active in the prostate, some of them are active in the brain. And so it depends on which tissue, they're tissue-specific enzymes that depend on how much DHT you convert. - Do you recommend that people avoid curcumin and turmeric for that reason? And is there any specific recommendations for men versus women. - If a man or a woman, by the way, in women, a lot of times, if you just ask your doctor for a DHT check, it's the same units as in men, so it's essentially undetectable. So you have to, especially if they're on oral contraceptives, which is a front topic, their DHT is very likely undetectable, especially if it's free DHT. You can measure both a DHT and a free DHT. But if someone's DHT is already low, or if they have somewhat insensitive androgen receptor via genetics or via lifestyle, then I recommend they avoid bioavailable curcuminoids like bioavailable turmeric, black pepper extract, and they might be a good candidate for creatine. Creatine, like creatine monohydrate, can significantly increase the conversion of testosterone to DHT. - Interesting, there's also a lot of really interesting data coming out now about the role of creatine as a brain fuel, and maybe even as a cognitive enhancer over time. The data is still ongoing, but some of the studies in humans are pretty impressive, at least to me. I'm glad you mentioned this thing about curcumin and black pepper. I wish we had had this conversation six years ago, because I had the experience of jumping on the bandwagon of the excitement around turmeric, and I took a turmeric supplement. It was a couple capsules of what I thought to be, and I think was high quality turmeric, and I've never felt as poor as I did in the subsequent few days, flat line of, let's just say everything that one would want to have in life, energy, vitality, just it was a cliff. And a friend somehow knew that curcumin could inhibit 5-alpha reductase. It converts to testosterone to DHT, as you pointed out. I stopped taking it, it was the only new addition to my diet and supplementation, and things bounced back within about three, four days. But it was remarkable. I mean, I felt like garbage. And it was actually kind of frightening to experience the sharpness of that cliff. But I know that some people like turmeric for its antiinflammatory properties, et cetera. Sounds like people either need to experiment, and if they do, obviously to approach that with caution. Anytime you add or remove something, you need to talk to your doctor. You're a doctor, and I'm guessing that if one were to experiment, would you say that most of these effects of things like curcumin are reversible as they were in me? Or is there any potential of permanent damage if people have been taking them for a long time? - The effects are nearly always reversible when you're talking about 5-alpha reductase inhibition, so what turmeric does, but stronger. The most common story that we hear is regarding a supplement known as saw palmetto, which a lot of older men take for their prostate health or finasteride, which you can take for your prostate, or your heart, or your hair, or dutasteride. So if you're having side effects on these, then it's probably because of a couple different reasons. One can be your ratio of androgens to estrogens is off, and that needs addressed. Another one can be it's inhibiting the conversion of your progesterone to that other type of progesterone, the 5-alpha, 3-alpha, that we talked about earlier that's helping with your sleep and your brain, and your calmness. And that's definitely an effect. Another one is depending on the type of supplement or med, they inhibit different isoenzymes of that 5-alpha reductase. So if they're just inhibiting one and two, then that's going to be a different effect than if they're inhibiting two and three. So finasteride does two and three, saw palmetto does one and two, and then dutasteride does all three. The third one is active in the brain and dutasteride inhibits that third one a little bit weaker in vivo, but strongly in vitro. So it's really hard to parse out. You can use biofeedback and experimentation. I do think with supplements it's safe to experiment. The time that it takes to set in is usually about three months. So the risk of, and this is anecdotally, there's been lots of research published about if post-finasteride syndrome is real or fake. And it is real, but it's one of those things that's a combination of organic and inorganic disease. Almost kind of like fibromyalgia where it's definitely real, And there's lots of things that you can do to help with it, but it's very unlikely to occur if you stop taking your supplement or medication after you have side effects. - Interesting, well, I certainly feel better when I'm taking five grams of creatine monohydrate per day. I know most people take it for muscle growth and tissue repair and things of that sort, mainly I think brings water into the muscle tissue, et cetera, but I take it for the brain effects, and also because I like to think that it gives me a little bit of a DHT bump that I can actually see in my blood charts when I've done them. I know many people want to avoid the hair loss that can sometimes be associated with DHT levels going too high. And so I've been asked many times, does creatine monohydrate cause hair loss? It would make sense that if creatine increases DHT and DHT binding to the androgen receptor on the scalp can induce hair loss, that that would be the case. Is that that true or are people just overly concerned about something that's trivial or non-existent? - Each male and fem, so yes, it can potentially add it. I don't like to say it causes it, but it can be a little bit more fuel to the fire. So just like everybody has a different sensitivity of their androgen receptor, they have a different amount of gene transcription that is going to cause death of the follicle. That's an arbitrary threshold. So you don't really know until you start losing hair. - And if somebody takes a little bit of creatine to increase their DHT, maybe for the cognitive enhancing effects, or for whatever reason, and they notice a bit more hair falling out in the sink, and they stop taking it, you said death of the follicle, which sounds very dramatic. Are those little stem cell niches that reside in the follicle, which hairs grow from, are those then abolished, like there's no going back, or can one rescue at the hair? - It takes months, if they're still there, the hair will come back. So the loss of the hair itself is a normal part of the hair cycle. So you have your antigen phase, your catagen phase, your telogen phase, and then your hair loss, and then a new follow. - Of the stem cell niche in the hair follicle. - Yeah. Yeah. Think of it like sharks have teeth. So shark loses a tooth, and they have a new one that comes through. Or losing your baby tooth, and you have a new one, but your hair just always keeps coming through. So it's natural for it to die and lose. That's that's why when you start 5-alpha reductase inhibitors, often you have a big shed. So what happens during that big shed is all of these cells that are unhealthy, they immediately jettison that hair and then they start making a much healthier new follicle. So a lot of the hairs that are at the end of their telogen phase, then they have what's called telogen effluvium, which also happens after pregnancy, also happens in thyroid pathologies. So you shed it, a new one in place, and you think that you're having a horrible hair loss caused by your finasteride or whatever you're doing. And minoxidil does this too, but you're really just having a new, healthier follicle. If you go a really long time, if you go a year, then those hairs might come back, and they might not. - So for simplicity's sake, if somebody is concerned about, or is experiencing hair loss, male or female, what are their options of ways to offset that hair loss that are not going to negatively impact other tissues sensitive to DHT? And what I'm basically saying here is, I could imagine taking a DHT inhibitor, a pill of some sort, or an injection of some sort, and offsetting hair loss, maybe even stimulate more hair growth. It's clear that I'm not doing that, but I know people that do, but then experience some of the other negative effects of blunting DHT, reduced affect, reduced libido, reduced drive, disruptions in prostate function, or even sexual function generally. So what can people do if they want to maintain or grow back hair, but they don't want all those other effects? What should they avoid and what should they perhaps consider talking to their doctor about? - Yeah, there's a whole host of options. I try to separate alopecia or hair loss into two different categories, male pattern baldness, or androgenic alopecia, also known as androgenetic alopecia, versus other types of alopecia, usually telogen effluvium. And if it's androgenetic alopecia or male pattern baldness, even if they're female, perhaps say PCOS, something like that, then you want some sort of strategy to decrease the activity of that androgen receptor. - So women can get male pattern baldness? - [Kyle] Absolutely. - Okay, I'm going to have to wrap my head around that one, but okay. - So there's a lot of different things that you can do that are topical. The most promising is called dutasteride mesotherapy. Essentially what it is is it's very localized injections in areas that are prone to male pattern baldness, whether they're female or male. And it acts locally only. And you repeat these injections from time to time, it decreases the conversion of testosterone to DHT just in the scalp. - So that can avoid prostate effects. And what are some of the negative effects of blocking D HT in females, in the periphery? Meaning not on the scalp or in the brain? Where is DHT doing its stuff? - Yeah, so it's both DHT, and then also that 5-alpha, 3-alpha progesterone, which is called THP or dihydroprogesterone or tetrahydro, trihydroprogesterone. So they're active in the central nervous system, but it's also just active, again, binding to the androgen receptor in a female as well, causing them to have that effort feel good, motivation. A lot of women that are sensitive to DHT, 'cause women can be sensitive to DHT as well, feel very different when they start an oral contraceptive, not because it alters their DHT to a huge amount. It does to some degree. Because the negative feedback inhibition in the pituitary and less produced in the ovaries, but it increases SHBG really high. So because their SHBGs are significantly higher, their free DHT is way lower. - I see, how does a woman know if she has PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome? What are the issues with polycystic ovarian syndrome? What can be done about PCOS? I confess, I was naive to PCOS. That wasn't supposed to rhyme, but since it does, I do confess I was completely naive to it. And I started getting a lot of questions about it in various forums. And I think that's actually the reason why I initially approached you. I know you have treated a lot of PCOS. What age women should be about PCOS, what's PCOS? Teach us about PCOS, please. - Yeah, so PCOS is polycystic ovarian syndrome. And this is one of those conditions which is underdiagnosed. So its prevalence is much higher than we think it is. There's been a lot of studies. And some studies say a prevalence of 10%, some say 20%. It's not completely clinically penetrant. So most people don't know they have PCOS until they have infertility or subfertility. - And is PCOS happening at this frequency in 20-year old women, in 30-year old women, in 40 and onward? - Most women find out they have PCOS in their 30s, especially, it's on a spectrum or a continuum, like a lot of things, where you can have a weaker version, or a very severe version. - What are the symptoms? - There's criteria called the Rotterdam criteria. And in the Rotterdam criteria, there's a couple different ways that you can diagnose it. You're looking for androgen excess, insulin resistance, and you could also look for polycystic ovaries. You don't actually have to have polycystic ovaries or to get an ultrasound of your ovaries to be diagnosed. If you have androgen excess, for example, androgenic acne, or hormonal acne. If you have hair growth, like a hair growth on the chin, it's called hirsutism. Or if you have, like deepening of the voice, any symptom of too much. And male pattern baldness, if you're female, that's a symptom of PCOS as well. Then you can also have insulin resistance. So this is obesity. It's pre-diabetes, a high fasting insulin, a HOMA-IR over two, a fasting insulin of over six. So if you have significant insulin resistance and also androgen dominance, that's a sign of it. Androgen dominance often leads to what's called oligomenorrhea. So if you're having more than 35-day intervals in between a period or if you have less than nine per year, then that can be a sign that you have oligo, which means too little, menorrhea which means menses. So that's a very common sign of PCOS. If you have infertility, so if you're under the age of 35 and you've been trying for more than a year, or if you're over the age of 35, and you've been trying for more than six months, then that can also be, it's a very common presenting complaint when somebody presents with PCOS. - And assuming that a woman is doing all these other things is paying attention to the six pillars that you talked about earlier, diet, exercise, caloric restriction, in some cases, right? Not everyone needs to be caloric restricted. Stress, sleep, and sunlight, spirit. Assuming that they're doing all those things, what other things in the realm of diet or supplementation can help them avoid PCOS if they have subclinical PCOS or they have not developed it, but don't want to develop it? 'Cause it doesn't sound like a good thing. - Yeah, so depending on where they are, if they're very strong on the insulin resistance spectrum, then optimizing their body composition, decreasing their body fat, and treating that metabolic syndrome can help. So a lot of people ask, well, does everybody that's on, like does everybody need to be on metformin that has PCOS? Not necessarily, but metformin is one of the tools that can help with insulin sensitization. Other tools that can help are inositol, so myo-inositol is an insulin sensitizer. Its cousin D-chiro-inositol is a weak antiandrogen. A lot of types of inositol have both of those in it. So depending on if you're a female or a male and you're on inositol, the type of inositol does matter. - Yeah, this is a very important point. Just today I said I'm trying this new supplement inositol for its role in perhaps enhancing sleep even further. My sleep's generally pretty good. Lately it's been a little bit off for a number of reasons. So I took it for the first time last night, and I said, I thought it helped, and just subjectively, and you said, "What kind of inositol is it, because inositol is a very potent androgen inhibitor. It turns out I was taking myo-inositol, which is not an androgen inhibitor. The other type that you mentioned, which is an androgen inhibitor is? - D-chiro-inositol. It's usually in a ratio of 1 to 25 or 1 to 40, in a much lower amount compared to myo-inositol. - In a supplement or in the body? - In a supplement to help induce ovulation. - But for women who have PCOS who might want to try and reduce androgen, then they would perhaps want to take a form of inositol that reduce the androgen receptor activity. Correct? - Yeah. They want both. So if you're a woman and you've ever talked to your doctor about getting on the oral contraceptive or spironolactone, which is also an anti-androgen, but it happens to be a potassium-sparing diuretic blood pressure medicine as well. D-chiro-inositol might be a better option. DIM or diindolylmethane is another kind of weak antiestrogen, antiandrogen that a lot of women should consider as well. - You mentioned oral contraception. I've done a few posts on these. Let's just call them, they really are perceptual effects whereby it's been demonstrated in humans several times now, and what appeared to me to be very solid studies where women that take oral contraceptives, there is both a shift in their perception of men, 'cause these studies only looked at heterosexual, the sort of arrangements here, where women who are on oral contraception, because it blunts some of the peaks and valleys of hormone output, no longer experience the same peak and valleys in their assessment of other men's attractiveness. So it sort of flattens their perception, so to speak. They still find certain men attractive and certain men unattractive, but the degree of difference is kind of mellowed out. And likewise, men, these data say that men perceiving women's attractiveness, they still see women on oral contraceptives as attractive, but a woman taking oral contraception eliminates this kind of peak in her attractiveness that men would otherwise perceive. In other words, oral contraceptives are changing the way that we perceive each other, at least in terms of these male/female experiments. What is going on with that? Is that because oral contraceptives, blunt the increase in testosterone that occurs just before ovulation, or is it because of a complex cascade? What is going on? I find this fascinating. - Yeah, so there's differences in how your, and I wouldn't use the word change necessarily, but alter the severity or alter the peak, as you said. So just like TRT is not going to change you as a person, an oral contraceptive will not change you as a person. It will just change your day to day peaks and troughs in libido and attractiveness. So one of the main effects of oral contraceptives, almost all of them have a synthetic estrogen and a synthetic progestogen in them. One common type of synthetic estrogen is ethanol estradiol. There is another new synthetic estrogen that's out there as well, but that anecdotally, that seems to have even more side effects. So this ethanol estradiol is 100 times more potent than endogenous or bioidentical estradiol in the liver. So it binds to the estrogen receptor in the liver, and it's going to increase sex hormone-binding globulin, which secondarily, as you mentioned, decreases your free testosterone, and especially your free DHT. So that little testosterone hump that you get when you're a female that's ovulating, that's really flatlined and it's a pretty insignificant difference. It's not negligible, but it's a little bit of a hump and you have significantly less of that when you're on a oral contraceptive. - And does that blunt the associated increase in libido that normally would occur from that increase in androgen? - Yes. - Yeah. Interesting. And what about other forms of contraception, right? 'Cause there are, there's copper IUD, there's various implants. There's rings, there's a huge number of different forms of these. So what we're talking about is, as I understand, it is only the effect of oral contraception that impacts hormone output. Is that correct? - Yeah, there's a lot of other effects as well. For example, your choice of synthetic progestin will alter how high your platelets and SHBG go. It appears to be the higher your platelets and the higher your SHBG, the your higher risk of a blood clot. So a lot of women know that if they're on a oral contraceptive and they're already predisposed to a blood clot or a venous thromboembolism, in their vein they have a blood clot in either their leg, or their lung, then it can increase that chance. So you can choose a synthetic progestin that is not going to have as high of a response, but there's various pros and cons. Some synthetic progestins are weak anti-androgens as well. For example, there's one known as Slynd, which is made from spironolactone. So some women are on spironolactone and that as well, which is made from spironolactone, which probably isn't particularly necessary unless they need it for a diuretic or a hypertensive effect. - I see, I'm just going to intentionally interrupt, and I apologize, but specifically because I wanted to ask about, there is this notion that oral contraception taken over long periods of time can disrupt fertility in ways that are independent of just the age-related decrease in fertility. Is that true? - It depends on what you mean by a long time. 6 to 12 months, it's possible. Past that, it seems very unlikely. However, the persistently elevated SHBG can be present for quite some time. - Wait, so if a woman takes oral contraception for 6 to 12 months and then stops, will she essentially be aware she would've been anyway in terms of her fertility at that age? Or are you saying that it can cause permanent damage? - Her fertility would be equitable as if she had never taken it if she's certainly 12 months, but probably six months off. - And what if she... I know of women that have taken an oral contraception for many years are, in addition to the age-related decline in fertility that occurs that's inevitable, of course the slope is going to be different depending on the individual, but are they quickening the transition to infertility? - Probably not, you could make a case that because they've been on a oral contraceptive, they may have been slightly more predisposed to insulin resistance and/or lower lean body mass. But that's probably going to be a negligible difference compared to their resistance training and also their caloric restriction or caloric maintenance so- - And of course there are also effects of having children. - Yeah. - Yeah. Right, I mean on all these parameters, right? 'Cause it's a major lifestyle shift, right? That obviously people contend with and have since the beginning of human time anyway. I want to ask some questions about male hormone therapy and male hormones generally. But before I do that, I have a couple of burning questions that I get very often that I'm just going to insert now. Marijuana, I've heard that it can decrease testosterone in men and women. I've heard that it can increase testosterone. Alcohol, I think there's general consensus that high alcohol intake, high barbiturate intake does in fact reduce testosterone. What about modest increase of alcohol? I'm not a drinker, so I'm not asking these questions for me. I don't smoke pot, and whatever. I just never really liked marijuana or alcohol. They're not my thing. But many people want to know the answers to these. And the data that I've seen are very confused and conflicting, so what about marijuana, does it reduce testosterone to a significant degree or not? - Cannabinoids itself, whether it's THC or CBD, are not going to reduce testosterone by themself. If it's smoked marijuana, then it's very likely to increase your aromatase, which increases your estrogen. And that's going to, it's aromatizing from testosterone. So that is going to decrease testosterone. When you have an increased estrogen, like estradiol, that's going to work on your pituitary to make less hormones that cause release of testosterone. So you're going to have less LH and less FSH. So it's almost kind of like opiates are well known to, opiate agonists, they're going to decrease LH and FSH and subsequently testosterone. Smoked marijuana will as well. As far as alcohol, high alcohol will decrease testosterone as will any very potent GABA agonist, whether it's a barbiturate, or benzodiazepine, or a non-benzo or alcohol, they're definitely going to. Moderate alcohol, I guess it depends on what your definition of that is. The American Heart- - I guess I'm thinking like, some people I know that don't seem to be alcoholics, at least by my assessment, will have a glass or two of wine four nights a week, which to me seems like a tremendous amount, only because I don't like alcohol. I don't have a problem with other people liking alcohol, but I think for many people that would be considered low or moderate intake. - Yeah, I would consider that low intake. The American Heart Association for men recommends between one and two drinks a day on average. - They recommend it? - So around, yeah. So around one per week. - Wait, so I'm making my heart less healthy by not drinking alcohol. - Yeah, they recommend a very low amount of alcohol intake for men. For women, they recommend zero to one. So that's kind of hard to interpret, zero to one. But the protective effect of alcohol, especially if it's a red wine with polyphenols in it, outweighs the deleterious effect. - Interesting, 'cause I've seen some studies that point to the idea that even low intake of alcohol over a prolonged period of time might actually decrease brain volume or at least volume of particular brain areas. But of course we don't know the consequence of decreasing the volume of a given brain area either. I mean, one can imagine it's decreasing the size of one's amygdala and making them less stressed. Although there's no evidence to support that. I've been told that I need to drink many, many times, but I always reply that I don't need to drink anything in order to speak my mind. So again, individual differences. Very interesting, so it sounds like smoked marijuana may in fact reduce testosterone or at least increase the conversion of testosterone to estrogen, correct? - Yeah. - Okay. - And with alcohol and GABA agonists, it's important to remember that it shouldn't be daily. So one drink of alcohol a day is actually very mildly immunosuppressive. So it's better to have two drinks of alcohol one day of the week and then two more drinks of alcohol another day of the week and then no alcohol the rest of the time. The same could be said even for supplements that have GABA in them. A lot of sleep supplements have gamma-aminobutyric acid, which is GABA, so- - Yeah, I occasionally take, oh, sorry to interrupt. I occasionally take 100 to 200 milligrams of GABA in order to enhance sleep. But I do it maybe every third or four nights. No more than three or four nights a week. - Yeah. - Yeah. - That's perfect. - Okay. - So there's a lot of sleep supplements that should not be taken daily and GABA's one of them. Another one of them is Trazodone. And melatonin is kind of arguable and it depends on the situation. But in general, if you're taking a sleep supplement, it should not be taken every night. - The sleep supplements that I understand are okay to take every night or nearly every night are things like magnesium 3 and 8, apigenin, if that's not true, correct me. I certainly take them every night unless I forget them back home when I'm traveling. - Magnesium's one of the exceptions. L-theanine is also another exception. - Great, well then at least I haven't put anything into the world that's wrong in that category yet. And hopefully I won't. But if I do, I'll correct myself. So let's talk about testosterone in males. You see these headlines all the times now that testosterone levels are dropping, sperm counts are dropping. Phenotypes of men are changing over time. And I can't quite follow the literature on that, because obviously those are hard controlled experiments to do, because techniques change over time, and sensitivity of techniques change over time. But regardless, I'm aware that a lot of people are considering increasing their testosterone by taking testosterone. A few years ago that was considered steroid use, and it was really extreme kind of stance. Nowadays it seems like there's more discussion about it. First off I'd like to know does testosterone supplementation, and here I'm talking about prescription from a doctor, does it make one more prone to prostate cancer? That seems to always be the first question that comes out. - Yeah, and there is a huge amount of misinformation about this too. So testosterone is not going to cause a prostate cancer. However, normal aging causes prostate cancer and testosterone will grow your prostate cancer. So if you're a 80-year-old male and you have an autopsy and there's at least say 50% percent chance that you have a prostate cancer, if you're 90 or 100 years old, there's at least a 90% chance. So for humans with a prostate, it's only a matter of time until you get a prostate cancer. So that begs the question, do you want to take something that's going to grow it for sure once you have it? So it's an individual assessment and it's important to follow things like PSAs as well. - So a PSA of four or less, I mean, ideally you wouldn't be at four, 'cause that's kind of the upper threshold, is the simplest read out of whether or not there's excessive prostate growth. There's benign prostate hyperplasia where the prostate is growing, but it's non-cancerous, correct? And then of course there are the symptomologies, like people have challenges with urination, they have sexual difficulties, et cetera. I'm always struck by the correlation that people draw between testosterone and prostate health and the fact that, or I should say the claim that testosterone makes prostate health worse. Because if you think about it, young males have high testosterone often, if not always, or certainly often. And you don't see a lot of prostate overgrowth and cancer in young males. So something's going on here. How should we conceptualize this? - So if you have a PSA of 3.9 and you're a 25-year-old male versus a 75-year-old male and you have a PSA of 5.9, the 3.9 PSA is significantly more concerning. So think of your prostate as taking cumulative damage from, not only testosterone, but also estrogen and also growth hormone. So that's why obese individuals have higher incidences of prostate cancer as well, is because they don't have those cell checkpoints where your immune system takes a second and says, all right, stop replicating as fast prostate cells. Let's see if there's any atypical ones and then it finds those and it prevents them from reproducing. That's why immunotherapy in cancer is so promising is because they can target these certain things. So the older male is going to have that cumulative damage happen already and arguably prostate cancer is a normal, with aging, fast aging is abnormal. Very slow aging is normal. There's a fine line to walk between those two. But there's a lot of things that can be done to decrease the turnover, decrease the inflammation, and decrease the congestion of the prostate over time. There's also a lot more than just PSAs that can be done. There's prostate MRIs and things like that that can look at the structure and the function of the prostate. - So what should every male do to maintain the health of their prostate? And I realize that younger males probably aren't thinking about it at all. Although it seems like nowadays I get these kind of what I call cryptic questions. I think women are more comfortable talking about their hormone and sexual health because of they cycle, because of menstrual cycles. They're used to fluctuations that sort of give them the experience of what it's like to have different levels of progesterone, estrogen, testosterone, et cetera. But I get these kind of cryptic questions often in my direct messages where what I think people are asking is, is there something wrong with my prostate? What should I do for my prostate? These are often indirect questions for other aspects of their life where they're suffering. And I don't say that ingest. I think more direct discussion would be great. So what should all males do to maintain prostate health throughout the lifespan? - Maintaining prostate health can be looked at similarly how you can maintain a good natural optimal testosterone. So you look for things that can hurt it. You don't necessarily look for one thing that can improve it or boost it. So for young males, those are prostatitis, so it goes hand in hand with epididymitis. So different infections of the prostate. The younger the male is, the more likely it is related to something that could be sexually transmitted. But another very common cause is what we call gram negative and anerobic bacteria. The prostate is right by the end of the colon. So if you have chronic constipation or if you have colitis or if you, even just an E-coli overgrowth in the colon is very likely to cause an infection of the prostate as well. - What should males do to prevent that? - Have a diet that has good, healthy prebiotic fiber, probiotics as well. Make sure that they're having regular bowel movements, that they don't have chronic constipation. Have good sources of dietary fiber, which is also as soluble fiber, and enough insoluble fiber. Most people get enough insoluble or non-dietary fiber. So that can help prevent the chance of diverticulitis, which is another type of infection. It can also decrease the chance of colitis and decrease the chance of prostate infections as well. - Are there any foods and/or supplements that men should take or avoid? What about, you hear or about saw palmetto, yeah, supplements for, or supplements that support or cause issues for the prostate? - Yeah, if there's a strong genetic predisposition to enlarged prostates, or even just really early prostate cancers that grow fast, then they could consider taking saw palmetto or even curcumin as an anti-androgen, as long as they're able to tolerate it. It's an individualized basis and depends on their history. As far as making sure that their prostate is not congested, there's an interesting correlation between having girls and having prostate cancer. - Having girl offspring? - Yeah. - So if your offspring are females, then you're slightly more likely to have prostate cancer. There's hypotheses that link estrogen to prostate cancer rather than testosterone. So if you have hypoestrogenism, your prostate has more atypical cells. In general, the higher your C-reactive protein, which is the general marker of inflammation in your body, we call it CRP, and the test order is hsCRP, or high-sensitivity CRP. If your CRP raises up very high, if you have an autoimmune disease, like if you have a Crohn's flare or if you have lupus or an infection or a sexually transmitted infection, or even a colitis, or even the flu, your CRP is going to raise significantly. - That you would detect in a blood test of course. - Correct. Yeah. - Yeah. - So you want to get a baseline CRP when you haven't had any of those things recently. And if your CRP is higher, you also have more female offspring. If your CRP is higher, then your reactive oxygen species, which are causing mutations and atypical cell turnover in the prostate are also likely higher. So you want to keep a very low CRP. - Interesting, and what about blood flow, and pelvic floor in general? We should probably do a whole episode on pelvic floor. There's so much interesting data coming out of the fields of clinical and research urology. I realize it's kind of the Netherlands of biology and medicine. People probably aren't thinking so much about this, but pelvic floor is obviously a confluence of a ton of of vasculature, of nerves, and of course the prostate resides there. And of course the genitals reside there as well. So I would imagine that one of the six pillars, exercise, being able to maintain adequate blood flow to those regions is key. What about just postural things? People sitting too much, not hydrating well enough, you mentioned avoiding constipation. What are some other things, including medications that can serve to support the prostate over time and maybe even support pelvic floor in general, both in males and females over time? - Absolutely, and this is something that's rightfully getting more and more attention. The way I explain the pelvic floor is your abdominal cavity, which includes your peritoneum or where most of your organs are, your retroperitoneum, your pelvic space. Think of it as a box. And your abs are the front of the box. Your back muscles are the back. Your diaphragm is the top of the box. And your pelvic floor, that's where your port is to the outside world. Especially important, it has muscles as well. And you can do exercises. Pelvic floor physical therapists are becoming more and more utilized, especially after childbirth, but in other situations as well, including by men getting care from urologists. So you want to both strengthen that pelvic pelvic floor and make sure that the tubes that are docked to the outside world are working well enough, but they're not too loose. They're not working too well. So there's a lot of medications that can be positives or negatives for your pelvic floor. We kind of talked about your gut and colon health in general. As far as your prostate health and as far as your bladder and urinary system health, you think about a couple different classes. So you have your phosphodiesterase. You have your tadalafil. Basically this is going to help decrease congestion in the prostate. A lot of people take it for ED, but it can actually help you decrease your- - Could you define that? - A lot of men take to tadalafil, generic is Cialis, has a much longer half-life than Viagra or Levitra. Its half-life is almost a day. So you can take a very low dose of it. Instead of taking 20 milligrams, you take two or two and a half milligrams. - So you're saying that a lot of men take it for erectile dysfunction? - Yes. - But that at it at lower doses, it may have served purposes for prostate health, independent of erection? - Correct, the most common scenario is if a male is waking up twice at night to pee, on average, it'll cut that down to once. So if they're waking up at four times at night, then it can cut that down to twice at night, just because you have easier blood flow. We used to use other medications like Flomax, which is tamsulosin. That's an alpha antagonist, so it basically binds to a receptor in smooth muscle, and it helps relax that. There's several other alpha antagonists. And then you also have your medications that are hormonal like finasteride that a lot of people take for prostate health to decrease the enlargement of the prostate. The periurethral area, or periurethral lobe, there's several lobes of the prostate, that tends to be especially enlarged in cases of BPH and- - BPH? - Prostate hyperplasia or an enlarged prostate. And if you are able to shrink that area, then at that point, it's just a plumbing problem. And the urine is able to get by easier. - Yeah, my understanding is that now there's a growing, I don't want to say a movement, [chuckles] but the idea of taking very low dose, like 2.5 milligram or 5 milligram tadalafil, even daily is becoming pretty common for many men who do not have erectile dysfunction, simply to either maintain or enhance prostate health. Is that correct? - Yeah, that's correct. - And do you see any negative effects of doing that? - There can be negative effects. It can lower blood pressure. So theoretically it can increase your chance of vasovagal syncope. A lot of people take it as a alternative to pump, because it kind of works similarly to citrulline, or different pump products in pre-workout, and it can certainly help with that. But if you're about to go do a deadlift where you might pass out anyway, it can certainly increase the chance of that happens, because you don't have that compensatory exercise, hypertension response. - Could someone just take it away from exercise? - They could, if you took tadalafil, then that's going to be, has a long half-life. Whereas Viagra and Levitra is just a few hours, tadalafil almost today. Some interesting studies on Viagra have been done as well. It can potentially alter your rays and cones in your eye. So the usual recommendation for pilots that need to have red-green discrimination from very long distances with very small indicator lights is to not take Viagra. So I usually say if you're a pilot and that's your profession, perhaps hold off from that for a while. There's also studies with Viagra that significantly, which is also known as sildenafil as the generic now, it can increase eyebrow hair growth. So potentially what it does is it helps vasodilate and relax the veins, especially in older men. And when those veins are relaxed, you have better blood flow. That's one of the proposals or theories behind why older men get the androgenetic alopecia more. You're having less blood flow in the scalp. So theoretically it can also help prevent that, but it's not going to- - So in theory, increasing blood, oh, because it increases blood flow systemically throughout the body? - Yeah. - Not just in specific tissues. Well, I find it incredibly interesting that, yeah, there are these online forums building up now around low dose tadalafil, daily use of low dose tadalafil, again, not for sexual or erectile dysfunction, but for sake of longterm prostate health. Is there any reason why women might want to take low dose tadalafil? - tadalafil is also a weak androgen receptor sensitizer, kind of like L-carnitine, where the density of the available androgen receptors to bind increases slightly. So there could potentially be a benefit from that, but most of the time it's used in men. - Very interesting, we haven't really talked about testosterone and optimizing testosterone in males. Assuming someone is paying attention to the six pillars, there's kind of a gap as, I see it, between doing all those things and TRT, hormone replacement therapy. And again, the R, the replacement in TRT is a little bit of in quotes nowadays, because a lot of people who have testosterone in that 300 to 900 nanogram per deciliter range opt to take low dose testosterone anyway. My understanding is that there have been some new kind of movements in this area toward, for instance, not doing big, large doses injected infrequently, but rather low doses quite frequently, obviously prescribed by a doctor, monitored by a doctor, et cetera. Is that generally what you like to see in your patients if they're going to take this route? - If they're a hypogonadal patient whose benefits outweigh risks of TRT, then you want to have a nice even steady state. It's not going to be exactly the same as producing pulsatile testosterone release endogenously from your own body. When you have a steady state, you don't have a peak or a trough. And when you have a peak, that's when the antigen receptor gene is overactive, that's when you get more erythropoietin or EPO release, and that leads to a lot of the side effects of thick blood, so higher hemoglobins, and hematocrits. And then when you have a crash, you don't feel good. So it's definitely not optimal. There's a lot of ways to get around this. So when you're doing testosterone replacement, if you're someone that needs it, you can have different types of esters, or you could do topical testosterone. So the Ester is basically something that's attached to increase the biological half-life. The most common ones are cypionate, enanthate, there's also a very short-acting propionate, which has almost no clinical relevance. And there's also very long-acting ones, decanoate, and undecanoate, and different mixtures of all those. So if you're someone who has a very, very low SHBG, you're going to have trouble of regulating your serum testosterone in the long run. If you do it topically, then the testosterone is absorbed, hopefully bound to SHBG, and then a lot of times you reapply twice daily or once daily, but you have lots of variations. So for most people, especially for people who can't absorb it well, that's not going to be a great option. So injections would be preferred. Most people end up injecting, because they have either side effects from too high, too low, or just too much of a varied dose when they do topical. There's also a capsule with a special lymphatic absorption. So it's not being absorbed through the liver, it's not hepatically metabolized, but it's absorbed through the lymph. And it's essentially testosterone undecanoate, and then put into a capsule. And that's taken twice daily. It has fairly steady half-lifes, but you have to take it at specific times of the day. So that being said, and it's new enough to where there isn't a huge amount of data on it, but it is FDA approved. So it is brand name now. it's called JATENZO. But the injectables in general, the lower your SHBG, the longer of an ester you want, because when you inject it, whether it's intramuscular or subcutaneous, just talk to your doctor about the risks and the benefits of those. Subcutaneous has slightly longer active half-life, because the esterases take longer to reach that supinate or an estered clavate. So most men, a lot of people ask me about like what a usual dose is. For most people, it would be a total of about 100 to 120 per week for an actual replacement dose. - Milligrams? - Milligrams. 120 to 100 milligrams per week administered two to three times per week. - And you're not, so you're saying dividing that into two or three, right? 'Cause I'm sure a bunch of people out there are thinking, oh yeah, 103 times a week, which is actually quite a high dose. Yeah, there really does seem to be a shift toward spreading these dosages out into, dividing them into two or three smaller doses. And then along those lines, 5, 10 years ago, it was common to hear about inhibiting estrogen through aromatase inhibitors. Nowadays you hear, and I think it's true, at least by my read of the literature, that inhibiting estrogen can disrupt brain function, can cause connective tissue issues, and even can cause reductions in libido. So a lot of people think they estrogen, if you crash estrogen, that basically libido goes up, but actually the opposite is often true. You don't want estrogen too high or too low, is that correct? And for that reason, do you shy away from people taking aromatase inhibitors? - Yeah, very few people truly need aromatase inhibitor. There's almost always lifestyle interventions. It can just depend on which gene, how active your aromatase gene is. Some people's aromatase gene is very active. A lot of times these individuals have pubertal gynecomastia, which is breast tissue growth in males, even despite no other risk factor. - Even if they're lean? - Some people get it if they're lean. - I remember growing up- - It's possible. - There were a few kids that got mild cases of gynecomastia that were transient. Like it's sort of like they developed gynecomastia and then it went away. - Often it's unilateral on one side too. So growth hormone a lot of times is the fuel to that fire. - Oh, interesting. - Yeah. - Yeah, there were a couple of kids. I mean, they took some teasing 'cause back then, there wasn't online discussions about hormones and things like that, but then it would seem transient. And they were, the people I'm thinking of were actually lean individuals. So they weren't overweight, which of course can cause gynecomastia, because adipose fat tissue can convert testosterone into estrogen. So it sounds like, except in special cases, that avoiding aromatase inhibitors is probably going to be a good idea. - Yeah, there's several other ways that you can control your estrogen and keep it at a healthy level, which you do have to check. There's a lot of patients who assure me that their estrogen's going to be sky high and it's actually very low and vice versa. But calcium D-glucarate is a supplement that can help with estrogen control. - What's a typical dosage of calcium D-glucarate? - 500 To 1,000 milligrams. - But is there the risk that if someone's estrogen is in normal range and they take the supplement, that their estrogen will go too low? Is it that potent? - It's not that potent. It's not near as potent as an aromatase inhibitor. So it helps with excretion and also the sensitivity of the estrogen receptor itself. And it kind of like helps outcompete it. Some people will also take DIM or different cruciferous vegetable, they get 'em from cruciferous vegetables like kale but, or broccoli and that is both an antiestrogen and an antiandrogen. So if you're on TRT and you're on that, then you're probably just on too much TRT. - Yeah, I remember a few years ago I had a friend, and it truly is, it's not like I have a friend thing, 'cause I'm very cautious just about which supplements I take. I think people might get the impression that I'm very cavalier about this, but I'm not. I always alter one thing at a time. I talk to physicians. What I suggest other people do I actually do and have done for a long period of time. And I recall wanting to take DIM, 'cause I thought, well, back then you hear, okay, reduce estrogen. My estrogen levels weren't out of range, so they were fine, but I thought, well, what would the experience be of bringing those down? But someone I know is quite informed in this area said, yeah, exactly what you said, which is that DIM can reduce estrogen, but also testosterone. So I just never opted to try and take it. I do want, we're sort of airing in this direction, but we went straight from the six pillars to TRT or to what some people now call sports TRT, which is basically code language for saying taking exogenous testosterone even though one doesn't need it to get into a semi-super physiological range or a high end, like 900 to 1,000 nanogram per deciliter range. And people always point out, I should mention that, oh, well in certain countries, the high end range is 1,200 nanograms per deciliter. In the US, it's 900. And so if you're 1,200, are you really super physiological? All that aside, I neglected to ask about that gap in between where individuals could think about supplementation, meaning non-prescription approaches to increasing testosterone, and here we should probably also talk about things like, is it true that ice baths increase testosterone or not? Lifestyle factors that go beyond the six pillars for increasing testosterone. If you could comment on those, that would be terrific. Supplements that are useful. And it'd be wonderful if you could mention where some of these same practices and supplements might be useful for women as well as men to increase testosterone for all the reasons we talked about earlier. - Yeah, so this is where a true individualized approach comes in. When you're talking about what dose of TRT you should be on, one thing to keep in mind is the law of diminishing returns. Quality of life is a subjective thing and it's different for each person. So some people are more willing to give up a little bit of athleticism or body composition. Some people are more willing to give up, or not willing to give up libido or sexual health. And as we mentioned earlier, everybody's androgen receptor is less or more sensitive. So you can make a case that if somebody's androgen receptor is half as sensitive as somebody else, the person with the less sensitive receptor does need a level of 1,000 or 1,200. There's no great way to know that. And you can alter the sensitivity of your androgen receptor with things like L-carnitine and tadalafil as mentioned. - And we'll definitely come back to L-carnitine, because I'm really intrigued by the data on L-carnitine, both for women and men in terms of egg quality, sperm quality, fertility, and a bunch of other interesting effects. So we'll come back to L-carnitine. - But a lot of how you feel, the biofeedback or subjective, I feel like this, comes from the ratio of your androgens to your estrogens. And a lot of that is lifestyle. So if someone's also on hCG, that could upregulate aromatase as well. - hCG, you might want to just, human chorionic gonadotropin? - [Kyle] Yeah. Used to be found in pregnant, is still found in pregnant women's urine. - Still found in pregnant women, yeah. - But used to be, believe it or not, there was a black market for pregnant women's urine before this stuff was developed synthetically. So in other words, what we're saying is men typically would buy pregnant women's urine through black markets in order to get the hCG in order to get the testosterone-enhancing effects of hCG. So in other words, men were using pregnant women's urine for hCG. I do not want to how they got it into their body. Let's just skip to what you were going to say next instead. - Yeah. So that's hCG. There's a lot of other things that upregulate estrogen. Alcohol significantly increases aromatase. So if you're very sensitive to estrogen, then you probably shouldn't even consume two glasses three times a week. High fat meals also upregulate aromatase. So if you're on a ketogenic diet, but you have hyperestrogenism, then you should take care with that as well. - All kinds of fats or just saturated fats? - I'm not sure if it's just saturated fats, but fat definitely increases, both fat and your body and consumption of a high amount of calories increases aromatase. - So the it's the ratio of testosterone and estrogen. I don't want to break your flow, but since we're talking about fat, I have to ask, since estrogen and testosterone are both synthesized from the cholesterol molecule, I've heard that ingesting some amount of saturated fat can be useful because of the way that cholesterol can serve as a precursor to these molecules. Now I once said on a podcast that I like butter so much that I occasionally eat pats of butter. Somehow that got misinterpreted to mean that I eat entire many pats of butter. I'm saying like one or two pats of butter here and there, and I have no guilt or shame about it. My blood lipids are in great shape also, so I feel good. But is it possible that people who are ingesting too little of saturated fats could directly or indirectly reduce or somehow disrupt the proper ratio of testosterone to estrogen in men and women? - It's theoretically possible, but it probably doesn't happen in developed countries just like it's theoretically possible to have not enough omega-6 fatty acids, but that probably does not happen in developed countries. - So I don't need the butter pats, but I'm going to do it anyway. I'm just curious. - Yeah. - Okay. - Grass-fed butter has good omega-3 content as well. So grass-fed foods in general. It's not the end all be all and everybody doesn't need grass-fed foods, but they are one of the only sources of healthy trans fat. So a naturally occurring trans fat comes from ruminants. So ruminants, think of like cows and the rumination in the different stomachs can change your omega-3 and omega-6 to trans-linolenic and trans-linoleic fatty acids. - Which are healthy for us. - Yeah. So it's actually omega-3s and omega-6s that just happened to have a trans instead of cis-isomer. - And these healthy trans fats would be found in ruminant cheese and milk and butter from ruminants and the meat- - And the meat. - And the meats? - Yes. - And for people who are following a purely plant-based diet or mostly plant-based diet, are they at risk of not getting enough of certain types of fats or other nutrients to maintain that healthy ratio of testosterone to estrogen or not? - If they're a vegetarian, they're probably not at risk. If they're a vegan, they very well could be at risk. Most vegans are aware of this very acutely and they'll supplement with algae or they'll supplement with other sources of healthy fats. - I see, so the takeaway that I'm drawing from this is that less so than getting saturated fat, it's key to get these healthy trans fats from ruminants. - [Kyle] Yes. - Or the food products of those ruminants as well as to get proper amounts of omega-3s. - Yeah, and to be clear, you don't need any trans fats. It just happens that those omega-3s and omega-6s are in a trans-isomer. - I see, okay, so that's nutrition. What other supplements can support healthy testosterone to estrogen ratios? - Anything that alters aromatase can support healthy testosterone to estrogen. And your testosterone to estrogen ratio, think about it as how much estrogen activity do you have at the beta estradiol receptor and your alpha estradiol receptor. - How would I know that? - So [chuckles] it's hard to tell, but depending on what you're eating, if you have a lot of plant-based diets or polyphenols, many of these are beta estradiol receptors. People know about Turkesterone and also Beta-Ecdysterone, which are two ecdysteroids that are beta estradiol receptor agonist. So they activate the beta estradiol receptor. So if you have a very low amount of estrogen naturally, you're probably a better candidate for it. - For taking Turkesterone or ecdysterone? - Yeah, ecdysterone. - I've never tried them, but I know my understanding is that they work tremendously well for some people. - Yeah. - And not at all for others. And so one just simply has to try. But in promoting the activity of this estrogen receptor, is there a risk that Turkesterone or ecdysterone could cause some of the quote/unquote problems associated with increasing estrogen activity, like reduced libido, water retention? - Water retention, yes. Reduced libido, probably not. Closing growth plates in the bone, no, because that's the alpha-estradiol receptor. - I've talked before on a couple of podcasts about tongkat ali, which is Indonesian herb, I guess, is also made and found in Malaysia. But it seems to be the Indonesian variety of tongkat ali that's most effective for potentially for reducing sex hormone and binding globulin and thereby freeing up testosterone. Whether or not the effects are through that pathway, through another pathway, a lot of people report improvements in things like libido and maybe androgen-like phenotypes, right? Feeling more vital, et cetera. And of course, some of that could be placebo, correct? But what are your thoughts on tongkat ali? And please challenge my statements about tongkat ali if they're incorrect. I'm not looking for validation here. I just really want to know what your thoughts are on it. Do you ever recommend it to patients, when? Men, women, one or the other? - Yeah, so tongkat ali or longjack has multiple mechanisms of action and there have been several placebo controlled studies on it. Some of them show decrease in SHBG, at least one of them did not show any change in SHBG. However, it does act on aromatase very weakly. Probably not so strongly that you would have to be concerned of hypoestrogenism. - So it reduces aromatase and thereby can reduce estrogen. - Correct. - Okay. - It's also a weak, it's not SERM, so it's not a selective estrogen receptor modifier, but it's probably a weak, it's probably an ERM as well or a non-selective estrogen receptor modifier. And that should help with decreasing negative feedback inhibition of estradiol in various locations and also increasing testosterone. - Interesting, yeah, the dosage that I've been using for years now is, it's 400 milligrams taken once a day, typically early in the day, 'cause it can kind of have a mild stimulant effect, very mild. And I know that some of the products out there recommend dosages that are much higher. Anytime I've taken more than 400, I don't feel very good. I don't know how to describe it other than it's just a little overly stimulatory in terms of makes me kind of, it's like drinking too much coffee. - [Kyle] Yeah. - So that's interesting. And so would women ever want to take tongkat ali for any reason? - Yeah, absolutely. So there's a lot of women that have hyperestrogenism and unlike adrenal fatigue or andropause, there's actually ICD 10 codes for hypoestrogenism. - ICD 10 codes? - Yeah. - That's doctor speak, right? - Yeah. - Okay. - So there's codes to where your doctor can actually diagnose you with something. So if you go to your doctor and you say, I have adrenal fatigue, they can't diagnose you with that. Or if you say I have andropause, they also can't diagnose you with that. But if you say you have hypoestrogenism, the most common complaint that comes with it is endometriosis, which is overgrowth of the lining of the uterus. And those people could potentially, I think, that's one area where we might see tongkat supplementation more and more, because not only does it decrease aromatase. Like we mentioned, testosterone in females is higher than estrogen in females. So a lot of females get estrogen from aromatization as well. Peripheral estrogen is sometimes what we call it, because it's not directly produced in the ovaries. But they could be good candidates for tongkat if that's the case. - Very interesting and my understanding is that people should be looking for sources of Indonesian tongkat ali in particular. - Correct. - Right. - Another interesting application is essentially a, I'll call it a PCT, but essentially- - What that means is? - PCT means, I'll defined it as post-cycle therapy. - Physicians love acronyms, scientists love acronyms, military love acronym, but we, yeah. PCT, post cycle therapy, so this would be people coming off hormone therapy or steroids. - This would actually be for women that are coming off of their birth control pill, because perhaps it can help lower that SHBG back to normal, which is sometimes persistently elevated, and then it can help prevent the subsequent hypoestrogenism that happens. - Does tongkat ali need to be cycled? When I first started taking it, I would cycle it. I would do a few, three, four months, and I would take some time off. Now I've just been taking it continuously for years. - [Kyle] Yeah. - And I should say I do blood work to check my liver enzymes and everything else and I don't see any reason for me to cease taking it. - Yeah. Probably not. There's been human studies on both tongkat and Fadogia. And full disclosure, I did help design Derek's new testosterone optimization supplement, which has both Fadogia agrestis and also tongkat ali in it. - Yeah. Let's talk about Fadogia separately in a moment. But let's say someone is only taking tongkat ali for whatever reason, do they need to cycle off? - Likely not, but I would just to be safe, because it does both affect your aromatase and it's an estrogen receptor modifier. - And what would be a reasonable cycle off? So how long to take and how long to stop before taking it again? - Yeah, there's a couple different protocols that you can do, but 11 months on, 1 month off for tongkat is pretty reasonable. Now I guess this is, we'll talk about this later too, but if it's combined with Fadogia, the protocol that I would do is three weeks on, one week off. - So that's tongkat ali. But I'm curious what your thoughts are on Fadogia agrestis, this Nigerian shrub or this extract from Nigerian shrubs that at least in my experience, in my read of the literature, has the potential to increase testosterone and probably other hormones as well by way of increasing luteinizing hormone. Something that we haven't really talked about much up until now. What are your thoughts about Fadogia agrestis? What are your ideas about the proposed mechanism or mechanisms and where might this be useful for people on or off hormone replacement therapy? - Yeah, Fadogia agrestis has just reached a point where we have enough evidence till we know it probably helps both with luteinizing hormone release, which stimulates Leydig cells in the testes to produce more testosterone. And probably with LH receptor sensitivity as well, which is a good combination of the two. It does come from the Nigerian shrub, but there is not quite enough evidence for me to be able to say it's safe for someone to take this all the time, which again, full disclosure, that's why I recommended that we recommended for people to cycle this supplement. So three weeks on, one week off, that's likely safe. The only toxicity studies in general are in rats and in humans, it looks quite safe. - My understanding is that the toxicity studies in rats showed toxicity to the testicular cells, so that's certainly concerning, but that the dosages that were used or translating the dosages used to humans would lead to a situation where the dosages that humans would have to take would be very, very large. So the amount of, I no longer take Fadogia, but I took it at 600 milligrams per day for a long time. And I ceased taking it because I was experimenting with other things and I didn't want to confound those things. Not because I had any negative side effects. In fact, I was monitoring blood work, and other biological parameters that would've told me if there was testicular toxicity, and there wasn't. Let's put it that way. - Yeah. I think it's extremely safe. And I'm just not convinced that there's enough overwhelming evidence for longterm consistent administration. - So do you recommend this to people who are not taking TRT and do you recommend to men and women? - Yeah, so if you have a really high LH, then there's probably a gonadal issue, whether it's heat damage to the testes, a varicocele, a history of testicular cancer where your LH is going to be higher. So if your LH is already very high, increasing it even more is probably not going to help. However, if your LH is low, then obviously try to find out is it low? Is it deficient or is it just a little bit low? If it's low and you don't have an issue with prolactin, you don't have an issue with opioid receptor antagonism, and naltrexone can actually potentially help antagonize that to increase LH as well, especially in people recovering from opiates or likely even alcohol. So you're looking for a subclinical secondary hypogonadism, which is essentially, just think of that as low LH. So in people with that lower LH and their estrogen is fine and their prolactin is fine, then Fadogia is a particularly good option. - Interesting, so three weeks on, one week off for 600 milligrams Fadogia, 400 milligrams tongkat ali, Indonesian tongkat ali could potentially you be good. And of course, everyone should always check with their physician, clear this, do blood work, et cetera. I always say we don't just say that to protect us. We say that to protect you, meaning the consumer. And it's very, very important. You don't want to get, you don't want to fly blind with any of the stuff. You want to do blood work, right? - That's the catch-22 with supplements is most of them are safer than medications, but the only difference between them and a medication is one's prescribed and one's not. - And oftentimes with supplements, it's unclear whether or not what's listed on the bottle is actually what's in the bottle but. - Yeah. - But I think there are a number of reputable brands now. The other supplement I want to talk about in terms of testosterone augmentation is boron. What is boron thought to do? Does it actually do that? And do you ever recommend boron? - Yeah, so boron is actually an element. And you can find it on the periodic table. It's more plentiful in rich soils. So frequent farming can deplete the soils of boron. It's very plentiful in the Mediterranean area like Greece and Turkey, so a lot of people will just eat dates or raisins that are grown there. - I thought you were going to tell me people eat dirt, but there are people who eat dirt. - There are people who eat dirt. - And there's a phenomenon called pica, right? Where people in a, and that's not a good thing, they- - Often assign a iron deficiency. - Okay, but they're eating grapes and dates that were grown in soil that has high amounts of boron. Is that right? - Yeah. Yep, so boron can help regulate SHBG, but its effect is mostly acute. So it's unlikely to have a bad effect, so a lot of people take boron because it's probably not going to hurt and it will lower SHBG even if it is for a short period of time. So I guess you could make a case that maybe cycling boron can help too. - What sorts of dosages are useful for boron supplementation? - Three to six milligrams once to twice a day. - Oh, interesting, so that's higher than the amounts that I've been taking. I've long been doing this cocktail of tongkat ali, again, I stopped taking Fadogia, but for a long time with Fadogia, and boron, I think it was two to four milligrams per day, but maybe I could afford to go higher. Although my blood work is where I want it, thankfully. So circling back to Fadogia. Fadogia was attractive to me as a supplement, because I saw increases in LH, testosterone, and free testosterone. My estrogen stayed in check, but I also did not see a down-regulation of LH when I would cycle off. Whereas with hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin, which does now arrive in forms not from pregnant women's urine only, but the synthetic forms that people inject, that, as I understand, it can actually suppress endogenous hormone output if one takes it for a long period of time. So why would a man or woman want to take hCG? And what are the potential risks and benefits of taking hCG? - Yeah, so hCG or human chorionic gonadotropin is actually very similar to TSH. - Thyroid stimulating hormone? - Correct, so when a woman is pregnant, she produces more hCG, especially in the first trimester. When you take a pregnancy test, whether it's qualitative or quantitative, you see the hCG rise, and it actually doubles every 48 hours. So if you're five weeks pregnant, you can get a hCG level. And then two days later, five weeks and two days, you can see your hCG, and maybe it went from 500 to 1,000. So it precipitously increases. It does a few things. One thing is it prevents hypothyroidism or hypothyroxinemia of pregnancy, which is one of the most common causes of miscarriage. It's also why if you are, if you have hypothyroidism and you get pregnant in the first trimester, you want to increase your dose from 25 to 40% to keep your free T4 high as much as possible. And the reason why you have to do that as opposed to somebody who does not have hypothyroidism, is if you have hypothyroidism, then likely your thyroid will not respond to either TSH or hCG. So the increased hCG does not compensate for that. So if you take hCG, then it can potentially improve your thyroid function. So that along with selenium are likely the two best things that you can do for thyroid health. - hCG and selenium? - Yeah. - Well, I definitely make sure I get enough selenium by eating three to five Brazil nuts per day. - Yeah. - Which I very much enjoy the taste of also. Who should take hCG and can hCG suppress one's normal luteinizing hormone output? - Yeah, it suppresses LH in a dose-dependent manner. So the higher the dose of hCG you take, the more it suppresses LH. A common dose for fertility, fertility is usually why hCG is prescribed. - In men or women? - In both, is 10,000 IUs all at one time, which is quite a bit. - That's a tremendous dose. - Yeah, in fact, some formulations, some brand names of hCG come in autoinjector pins to where you cannot even dose lower than 5,000 units at a time. - Wow. - Yeah. - But I know a number of people who take hCG to maintain testicular function while on testosterone therapy or augmentation of some sort. Does it work to do that? - Yeah, some people are on hCG monotherapy. It can be slightly better on your lipids than being on TRT. - Oh, so people are using hCG alone as a kind of neither sort of a indirect hormone augmentation. - Yeah. Some clinics advertise it as a non-suppressive alternative to TRT, but it is suppressive of LH. - But it could also increase estrogen pretty potently? - Yeah. - And is it true that increasing LH and/or hCG can improve sensitivity of the genitals? And is that true for men and women? Yeah, I've heard this anecdotally. People say hCG makes sexual activity more pleasurable for people because of some, is it a direct effect on some of the nerve cells in the genitals? - Yeah, so LH is also an agonist in the prostate and in genital tissue in general. So it's a very common treatment for post-finasteride syndrome or post-5-alpha reductase when you've blocked the conversion of DHT for a long time, it helps re-upregulate DHT. - So someone who's been taking finasteride to prevent hair loss, comes off it, maybe 'cause they felt lousy, but then feels even lousier for reasons that you talked about earlier. And then they might use hCG as a transition treatment to transition back to normal hormone health. Is that right? - Yeah. - It's extremely helpful in many cases. Now when you come off the hCG, then you need to have a strategy of how to return to your normal as fast as possible as well. But it will upregulate those 5-alpha reductase enzymes. You have, in your genital skin, both scrotal skin and penile skin, and perineum in general, you have, I believe what's called stratum lucidum. It's skin layer that is very, very thin, but it has the highest concentration of 5-alpha reductase. So you have a lot of activity. And after you've been on something that inhibits the enzyme, the 5-AR enzyme in those tissues, then you do something else to upregulate those enzymes, whether it's waiting and taking time, whether it's trying tadalafil, whether it's trying creatine even, or whether it's trying HCG, a lot of times those are the go-tos for post-finasteride syndrome. - Any risks for women taking HCG on their ability to get pregnant or risks generally? - Yeah, obviously it'll make any pregnancy test positive. So that's a risk that some women don't know. - So one could, in theory, fake a pregnancy test by injecting hCG. - Absolutely. - Interesting. - Yeah. - I have no motivation to do that. I was just curious. [Kyle chuckles] - Yeah. - What about prolactin? The simple version of this that I was taught, because I was taught mainly from the neuroendocrine perspective was dopamine is a kind of close cousin of testosterone, and also estrogen for that matter, drives appetitive behaviors, including pursuit of sexual partners, sex itself, motivated behaviors generally, then postcopulatory, post-orgasmic states are accompanied by a prolactin increase. That's the refractory period for mating in males, and maybe even in females as well, involved in milk letdown, et cetera. What are sort of the general contours of syndromes or things that people could be on the lookout for of having too much prolactin or too little prolactin? And I'm aware of a number of people who take dopamine agonists, L-tyrosine, cabergoline, things like that, to really boost their dopamine levels. And that isn't always a good thing as it turns out. Oftentimes people become kind of hyper-dopaminergic and so they have the drive to do all these appetitive things, fill in the blanks, but they don't always have the ability, because it seems, just as testosterone and estrogen need to be in the proper ratios, dopamine and prolactin need to be in the appropriate ratios. So how should we think about and perhaps act on our prolactin systems? - Absolutely, the way I describe it is the dopamine wave pool. So if you're increasing your dopamine too much, you're going to overflow and then you're going to have that wave crash too much. So you want to have nice even waves that are not going too far above the pool of dopamine and prolactin will follow. So prolactin and estrogen are quite close cousins. Estrogen upregulates a gene called the PRL gene or prolactin gene that directly increases prolactin synthesis. So prolactin is going to also inhibit the release of testosterone from the pituitary. So if you're using a dopamine agonist, then you're to help decrease the prolactin-producing cells, including if you have a prolactin-producing microadenoma in the pituitary. - How common are those? Because, I mean, I hear a lot about these hypogonadism or, and of course that can be due to an issue at the testicles or hypergonadism could also be of course in like ovarian syndromes and then there's of course the brain side of it where the signals aren't coming from the brain. Not enough gonadotropin, not enough luteinizing hormone. And there are ways of teasing this apart with an endocrinologist that are quite elegant in fact, right? Using stimulating hormones, too much to dive into here. But how often does one actually have one of these pituitary tumors? I have heard that people that play a lot of high contact sport, so boxing, football, people that headed the soccer ball quite a lot, sadly people whose jobs force them to take head blows for, could be military. And so they were firing 50 caliber guns and the kind of woodpeckering of the brain inside of the skull. And construction workers or just a concussion can cause the pituitary to go malfunctional. Is that really common or is this something that is a rare like 1%? - Yeah, it's extremely common. It's another one of those conditions where a lot of people never know they have it. They just feel a little bit more fatigued. They have that high prolactin feeling all the time. Pituitary microadenomas can be non-producing as well. So your prolactin can be totally normal. Your growth hormone and IGF-1 can be totally normal. That's the second most common producing microadenoma, is growth hormone causing either acromegaly, which is growth of cartilage or gigantism. - This is the big brow. - Yeah. - Yeah. - So those are fairly common causes of adenomas, but a lot of people that have a very small adenoma, much less than one centimeter, it's hard to see on imaging even if you have a contrast that specifically looks at the pituitary and many people aren't symptomatic. So it's one of those things along with PCOS and pre-diabetes that are much more frequent when it comes to prevalence, which is the amount, the percentage of people that have it in the general population. - I'm glad you mentioned the dopamine wave pool. I know nowadays there's a lot of interest in augmenting dopamine. I know a number of people that do this through prescription drugs, Adderall, Ritalin, modafinil, and those drugs of course hit many transmitter systems, but dopamine is certainly involved. People taking antidepressants like Wellbutrin tap into that system. And of course people are trying to inhibit prolactin and promote serotonin or reduce serotonin. To me, it all seems like a very delicate dance, right? I mean, to just imagine the a arousal arc for mating behavior, for sexual reproduction, is such an in an elaborate dance between sympathetic drive and parasympathetic drive, even with across the span of minutes, right? I mean, I've talked about this before on the podcast that the arousal is kind of more parasympathetic, orgasm in itself is a sympathetic response, a completely different set of neurons. And so where do you see people getting into trouble just trying to hit the gas pedal on dopamine and where do you think there is a place for people who perhaps are experiencing low drive and motivation, not just sexual, but in general, to increase the amount of dopamine circulating in their brain and body? How do you think about that, given this wave pool analogy? - Yeah, so it's important to parse it out and start with the least powerful interventions. So if someone's concerned about dopamine or maybe they have a slightly higher prolactin, then they eliminate things that could be increasing that prolactin. - Such as? - Casein or gluten, which are mu opioid receptor agonists or any mu opioid receptor agonist in the gut. - Casein, so milk protein? - Correct. - Can increase prolactin? - Correct. - Interesting. - In addition to that, they should, if they need a pituitary MRI, then they should get a pituitary MRI. If they don't have an adenoma or if they don't have a high enough prolactin level to where they need an MRI, if they're having visual symptoms, or if they're having olfactory symptoms with the nose, then it's more likely that they do. But if they don't, a lot of times a prolactin under about 40 is not too big of a deal. They can take dopamine agonist that agonize that D2 receptor like P5P, which is essentially vitamin B6. It's pyridoxine-5-pyrophosphate. And pyridoxine is vitamin B6. So that can help, 50 milligrams once to twice a day. Vitamin E can also help, especially if it's mixed to tocopherols. A lot of people have high levels of vitamin E, but low levels of the gamma form of vitamin E. So that can also help. - Fascinating, I'm so glad you mentioned vitamin B6 and P5P. I have heard that one can shorten the refractory period after orgasm, essentially to be able to have sex again, to be quite direct about it, by way of vitamin B6 blunting of the prolactin response, which turns out to quite potent. But I've also heard that vitamin B6 can be neurotoxic, especially in the periphery, that it can cause peripheral neuropathies if it's taken at high doses. But that P5P is the safer form. Is that true? - It's pre-activated, so it does not build up. Think of it as a allegory to how folate can build up. It's not methyl folate, but it builds up and it can increase levels of homocystine. Or if you have too much vitamin B12, another water soluble B vitamin, you can have too much methylmalonic acid or MMA. So depending on what your enzymatic conversion is to the active form of the enzyme, often it's just safer to take the active form of the enzyme. - Yeah. Very interesting. - Yeah. - Okay, well, at risk of going down every hormonal pathway and talking about supplementation, lifestyle factors, I think touching on, as we have, testosterone and estrogen, and now prolactin, I'd love to chat a little bit about L-carnitine. We talked about this earlier, but I want to raise this discussion about L-carnitine, not in the context of L-carnitine itself, but in the context of fertility. Because my read of the literature is that L-carnitine can be very beneficial for enhancing sperm quality and egg quality and even rates of conception. What forms does L-carnitine come in that people can reasonably consider? Again, talk to your doctor, folks. What is it doing? And do we know how it's doing it? And do you often use this in your patients? - Yeah, so the way I think about L-carnitine, and I'll try to tie this in with creatine, and other things as well, is if your cell is an energy factory or car, then L-carnitine is the shuttle that helps get the fuel into the motor to use the motor. The motor is mostly due to lifestyle factors. So like your diet and your exercise. And the type of fuel itself is NAD+. We don't need to get into NAD precursors or NMN or NR, anything. And then the accessory fuel tank is your creatine phosphate. So creatine is your accessory fuel tank. Your NAD status, which is largely determined by your REM sleep and quality sleep and exercise along with supplementation as the fuel, the carnitine shuttle is carnitine palmitoyl coenzyme A. And that takes medium-chain fatty acids, it takes different molecules of fat. You have two main energy sources other than ketones. You have your glucose or carbs. You have your fat or fatty acids. And that takes it across the layer of the mitochondria so that it can be utilized. So upregulates that, that's why things that have flagella in general, the flagella are going to work better, like sperm. - The flagella being anything, sort of the wavy little tenders on cell types of which they're everywhere, right? In the gut too, right, yeah. - Yeah. - Yeah. - So those are going to work significantly better. And in general, you're mitochondria are going to work better. So the worst your mitochondria are off the bat, the better they're going to be helped by these shuttle that shuttles them across. It also slightly increases the density of the androgen receptor as well. - Is that a local effect? So if an L-carnitine is injected into a particular muscle, will it increase the density of androgen receptors in that muscle? - Likely so. - So how are people taking L-carnitine? There are capsule forms and there are injectable forms. Most people are going to be taking the capsule forms, because that's all they're going to have access to. And then we should also ask, can you get L-carnitine from food? - Yeah, so L-carnitine is just a combination of, it's actually a very small peptide. So glutathione is just a three amino acids. L-carnitine is the smallest peptide, two. So peptide is just a protein that has amino acids between two and about 200. And L-carnitine is just two amino acids. - Amazing, so it's like a micro-peptide? - Yeah, so your body synthesizes enough. It likes to absorb the amino acids by themselves. And then if it puts them together, there it makes L-carnitine. It's not very bioavailable if you take it. A lot of people take L-carnitine, L-tartrate, or a acetyl-L-carnitine, and that's about 10% bioavailable. So if you want 1 gram or 1,000 milligrams of L-carnitine, you can take 10 grams of oral L-carnitine. - Is the one gram the typical dose, you recommend one gram per day? - For fertility and androgen receptor upregulation. - So that means taking 10 grams of the capsule form? - Yeah. So it's about 15 to 20 capsules, which is a lot. - [Andrew] That is a lot. - It can also potentially increase TMAO. - Yeah, I want to ask about that, because TMAO on your blood chart is, when that's elevated, that's going to cause some concern. You taught me a trick, however, that one can take 600 milligrams of garlic capsule for the allicin. Is that what it's called? - Allicin is in it, yeah. - It's like the name Allison but with two L's? - Yeah. - Okay. And that had a remarkable effect in reducing TMAO. So that's quite potent and also was it just coincidence that it really brought my LDL down as well? - I'm not sure if the LDL is a coincidence, but depending on your gut microbiome or your microbiota, some microbiome beneficial bacteria will convert carnitine and also choline. So any choline precursor like Alpha-GPC or phosphatidylserine, it'll will convert them more or less to TMAO. So TMAO is something that you can get measured in a blood test and see if it's high or low. Some people might not even need allicin. - Interesting. - Some people do benefit from it. - Interesting, although I think it was you that also told me that allicin in garlic can have positive effects on cardiovascular tone and blood flow generally. Is that right? - Yeah. - Okay. So is 600 milligrams garlic an excessive amount or can I just eat garlic? - You can just eat- - I mean, I like eating garlic. - Yeah. - Yeah. So, okay, so one could also just eat garlic. If one were going to take L-carnitine in injectable form, how much of that is bioavailable? - 100% if you inject it. It is in a aqueous solution, so it's bacteria static water essentially. So it's not in a carrier oil. So it's going to burn a lot if you inject it subcutaneously. So it's going to be absorbed faster and more evenly and also just hurt a lot less if you inject it into a muscle. - But one could then just take one gram per day injected or divide it up into a couple doses? - Yeah, or 500, the minimally efficacious dose for injectable's probably around 200 when it comes to sperm motility, the androgen receptor upregulation. So it really depends on why you're taking it. - In terms of fertility, and in terms of blood tests generally, I always say that if possible, either by way of insurance or by way of some other way, affording it, it would be great for people to have blood tests to know what their hormone levels and other levels of other things like metabolic markers and lipids were in their 20s, also in their 30s, also in their 40s. I think there's this idea that you only take a blood test when you have a problem, but then of course one can't actually do the comparison that you mentioned earlier or state the comparison to one's physician that things are changing over time. And it seems to me that basically everyone should get at least a once-a-year blood test. Is there the hope that insurance will someday just cover it for everybody? This will be standard care? I would think that everybody should know what sorts of things are floating around in their bloodstream and what they need more of and less of in life. - I doubt it will ever be covered by insurance. In many cases, you could make an argument that it's indicated. As insurance begins to cover more of the population for pathologies, the things like FSAs or HSAs or care credit will likely cover this advanced testing, which it continues to come down and down in price. So it'll be affordable, but it won't be free. - Got it. Yeah. I'd like to shift gears slightly and talk about social interactions and relational effects on hormones. Something that I just find fascinating. We touched on this a little bit earlier in terms of oral contraception, but now that we have the backdrop of what these various hormones do, some involvement in neurotransmitter systems like dopamine and pro prolactin and associated pathways. Prolactin of course being a hormone. Not a neurotransmitter. But there's a phenomenon in human beings where people get very excited about a new partner and that excitement no doubt is related to the dopamine system among other systems. And that excitement can be maintained or can wane over time. And here I'm talking about attraction, but I'm also talking about just general excitement in the sense of novelty, because that's what dopamine's associated with. Given that you work with human beings and they have lives and relationships and lifestyles, and they have hormones, and all these things interact, what are some of the ways that we could think about adjusting our relationships in order to optimize hormones as opposed to just thinking about how to optimize hormones for sake of our relationship? Because it's bidirectional of course. And this assumes, I should say, that one is already paying attention to the six pillars talked about earlier, that people are doing most things right. How should we think about relationships in hormones: friendships, romantic relationships, new partners, longterm partners, yeah, how do you think about this kind of stuff? - Yeah, so if you have a new partner, then it is largely regulated by the dopaminergic system, which changes over time. So people may have heard the saying that you have to go through a full calendar year with someone that you're in a relationship so that you- - Very good advice, by the way. - So that you really know what to do and what not to do. But because you experience both of your families in the holidays and all the different situations. But I would argue until you have moved in together, had a baby, and then raised that baby, preferably breastfeeding, because that's when you get the prolactin spikes, you haven't really gone through every stage in life yet. Now you can't really do that with every person that you're considering. - Well, some people do, but it can be quite costly in terms of time and finances and emotionally costly. - Yeah. - And then here, I'm definitely not referring to any personal experience of having done all that many times over, but what would you suggest people do or think about as they enter a relationship or for people that are in longterm relationships where they feel like something has shifted, and indeed those shifts may reflect the output of different hormone systems and neurotransmitter systems. It almost certainly has to be the case, right? - Yeah, so just like women who spend a lot of time together, whether they're coworkers or whatever, a lot of times their menstrual cycles will align. There is a lot of pheromonal and hormonal crosstalk, including prolactin between men and women. So spending 100% of the time together, this is why people think it's so hard to work together and live together. They're around each other 24/7. You don't have the reprieve where you let that dopamine settle down, and then you're excited when you see them again. A lot of guys know that if they've gone on a hunting trip or if they've gone on a trip for a long time, they come back and they see their partner, and it's like a new, not quite like a new relationship, but almost like a new relationship. And they have that excitement again. And purposely building that into every relationship can help significantly, especially if you choose to have a child or get pregnant or be breastfeeding, because you just plan ahead for both of your prolactins to be high and both of your dopamines to be low. And both of your testosterones to be low. So there's a lot of planning that you can do. Essentially every relationship goes through a crisis. And that crisis is personal between the two of you. And you can plan ahead and figure out a way, maybe it's not supplementation. Maybe it's not even the amount of time you spend away from each other. But plan ahead to have good times if you know you're about to go into a crisis. - Got it, and so it sounds like time apart and time together, which is actually built into a number of cultures where men and women will purposefully avoid each other for some period of time, avoid physical touch and maybe in proximity, and then will reconvene, and yet those are very stable relationships over time often. Is the inverse also true? For instance, for people that are in long distance relationships, where they're only seeing each other three or four days a week or two days a week, does this explain the fact that some of those relationships can go on for a very long period of time without ever actually entering the, let's call it the hyper-prolactin phase of actually moving in together and et cetera, et cetera. Like in other words, is that a way in which people are spiking and troughing dopamine that keeps them attached? This kind of elusive, this sort of, what is it called? I think it's called like a cat string. Like if you play with a cat and you move the string away, they'll keep reaching, but you throw the string on the ground, they're like, they're totally uninterested in it. Is that what's going on? 'Cause that's a dopaminergic phenomenon, the cat string example. We know this experimentally. - In those cases, the relationship hasn't really progressed, in many of those cases, past the dopamine spike, the fun initial stage, honeymoon stage, whatever you want to call it. So it's almost kind of like a roommate. If you're looking for a roommate, if it was for college or after college or whatever, you can fill out forms and look for common interests, but until you're actually together a significant proportion of the time, you're not really going to know if you're going to be compatible or not. - And is there evidence that the appearance of an infant changes, obviously there're going to be hormonal shifts. We know actually that for in both women and in men, there's a prolactin increase when couples are expecting a child. It's almost like a brooding phenomenon. You see this in birds where it's actually called brooding and it's caused by prolactin increase, but it turns out this also occurs in humans. And some people would argue this causes the dad bod phenomenon, 'cause it actually, prolactin is involved in laying down a body fat, preparing for sleepless nights. And presumably that spike in prolactin is there also to suppress sexual activity, because there are periods of time immediately near childbirth where sexual activity is not advantageous. - Yeah, you see a prolactin spike right after breastfeeding. So if you think about it, often when you have an infant, you'll breastfeed, put the infant to bed, and then immediately go to bed with your partner, which is not particularly conducive. It's almost like trying to have intercourse back to back. And it's very difficult. - Because of in the prolactin sense? - Yeah. - Yeah. - Low dopamine, high prolactin. Oxytocin is also increased significantly to help with milk let-down as well. So yeah, as far as brooding, there's definitely a human equivalent of brooding. Some humans call it nesting instinct, which is both helpful, but it's not necessarily a bad change in a relationship. It's just a change. And as long as you know that it's coming, you're going to do better with it. Just like any medication. If you are aware of the side effect and that it might happen, then when it happens, it's not only less severe, it also happens less often. - Very interesting. - If you tell the patient. - Well as a neuroscientist, I come from the framework that of course hormones impact perception and behavior, but perception and behavior also impact hormones. I find this fascinating. I also really like the example you gave of people taking time apart, but also these affiliative bonds that are non-romantic bonds can serve as kind of a reservoir to replenish dopamine that is then released upon experience going back to one's partner or some sort of regular feature of home. Very interesting, and of course this should exist on both sides. I'm guessing that from both the male side and female side, there's an interest in kind of separation and reunion as the theme. And I guess the frequency will vary for different couples and different situations. - Yeah, and I don't want to make it seem like prolactin is all bad, so prolactin does help with the nesting instinct. It helps with breastfeeding as well. A lot of women are diagnosed with luteal phase defects, which is basically the phase after ovulation, but before a period or giving birth. A pregnancy's kind of a prolonged luteal phase. And a lot of them will go on progesterone for this. Progesterone can also decrease prolactin and prolactin is also helpful for the maturity of lungs in infants. So it helps the sphingomyelin to lecithin ratio. So if your prolactin's too low through pregnancy, it spikes up very high during pregnancy, then it can lead to increased risk of respiratory distress of the newborn. - Really interesting. Yeah. So we certainly don't want to paint a picture where prolactin is the bad hormone to avoid. Without proactive, none of us would be here of course. It's so vital. I realized that earlier I raised the question about whether or not cold exposure could modify hormone output, in particular whether or not ice baths or ice applied to specific tissues of the body, as people are doing, one way or the other, can change testosterone levels, estrogen levels. In other words, does taking ice baths and cold showers increase testosterone and/or estrogen? - Yeah, so taking a ice bath or a cold shower or cold exposure in general, it's not going to correct a vitamin D deficiency or a metabolic syndrome. So there's a lot of things that it will not correct that are causes of hypogonadism or low testosterone, but it will help acutely, specifically the application of cold to testes that are too warm. So if you have a varicocele or if you have a little bit of a primary hypogonadism, which is where testosterone is not released by the testes, but your LH and FSH signals are sufficiently high, then you'll likely respond to cold exposure better. And there's actually undergarments that are designed specifically to help with fertility. And there's probably going to be more and more of that in the future. You just need to be careful not to get frost bite, because it's a particularly bad spot to get frost bite. - Noted. Could you define varicocele? You've mentioned it a few times. That's a varicose vein? - Yeah, so it's essentially a varicose vein. It brings warm blood and the venous flow or the flow back to the heart is not as good. Just like in the legs, it can happen in the scrotum. Usually about 20 to 25% of people have one grade of varicocele. There's grades one through four, one through five. And most people just have a very mild one, usually on the left side because the blood has to go through further to get back to the heart. And it raises the temperature of the testes. Temperature is the enemy of testes. So they like to be 5 to 10 degrees cooler than the rest of the body. - So are saunas particularly bad for sperm production? - They can be, yeah. - When you say can be, I mean, how long could one safely be in the sauna, or would you want to go back and forth between the cold and sauna? Are there any data? - If someone is having infertility, then I tell them to avoid all saunas empirically. If someone has, if they're not infertile, but they have a low sperm count, I also tell them to avoid. However, it's mostly warmed water that can raise the temperature of the testes faster than the sauna. - So hot tubs and things of that sort? - Yeah, so hot tub and a jacuzzi. Those are enemies number one and number two of sperm. - What about ice baths and cold showers for women? Any evidence that it can shift hormone output in women? - Yeah, it can. It increases the activity of the beta adrenergic receptors, even in the central nervous system and the astrocytes as well. So it can do a few things. It can slightly decrease the drive for food, which astrocytes and beta adrenergic receptors have, some medications that are weight loss medicines also do similar things. But it can be beneficial in women too. - But no evidence that it changes estrogen output in women, correct? - Not that I know of. - No. Me either. Peptides, lot of discussion these days about peptides. Peptides of course just being strings of amino acids, as you mentioned the very small ones like two amino acids like L-carnitine all the way up to polypeptides, which just mean many amino acids. There's so many peptides that we should probably just do an entire episode about peptides, but I think one of the reasons I'm hearing so much about peptides these days is that they are not called steroids. The name steroids I think has come to be associated with anabolic steroids in the context of acne, testosterone rage, et cetera. But of course testoster, excuse me, estrogen is a steroid hormone, right? There are other steroid hormones, as we both know. But peptides are gaining increasing popularity. I am willing to go on record saying that you can be sure that many of the incredible transformations that you see in Hollywood are the consequence of peptide use. And I'd put my name behind that because I'm well aware of people that use these to prepare for roles, but athletes use them. And then everyday people are using them too. For instance sermorelin, tesamorelin, ipamorelin, to stimulate the release of growth hormone rather than taking growth hormone. BPC-157, which is essentially a synthetic gastric juice that normally repairs the gut, being used to treat injuries. And there are other are ones as well. What can we say generally about peptides? Are they safe? Are they not safe? What about sourcing? And are there any peptides that you think could be of particular use for people? And we should probably also touch on peptides that people shouldn't go anywhere near with a 10-foot pole. - Yeah, definitely, so peptides are very heterogeneous. There's very dangerous ones and very safe ones. My favorite peptide is the original peptide, which is insulin. So insulin is a peptide and less than 100 years ago, there was a scientist studying insulin. And at some point, they saw that an animal had its diabetes cured by insulin inject, cured, by insulin injection. Less than a year later, they were injecting insulin into every type one diabetic, because it was saving their lives. - And yet insulin can kill you if you take it at the incorrect dose? - Yeah, so just like insulin should be prescribed by a doctor, there is over-the-counter insulin, ReliOn or NPH, but ideally your insulin is prescribed by your doctor for your diabetes, as it's lifesaving. Peptides should be prescribed by doctors as well. And there's several that are FDA approved. So you mentioned a lot of different ones. Let's start with tesamorelin. So tesamorelin was recently FDA approved for something called lipodystrophy. It happens where body fat is displaced into abnormal areas, often as part of aids or severe burns, things like that. And it helps redistribute this body fat and give people their quality of life back. Tesamorelin is a GHRH, which I kind of loop into the category of GHRPs, so growth hormone-releasing peptides. So it's only a couple amino acids different from endogenously-produced growth hormone-releasing hormone. So growth hormone itself is also a peptide. It's a peptide hormone. Not a steroid hormone. So you have different somatotrophs which are very similar to growth hormone. Another fun fact is that HPL, which is human placental lactogen, we love acronyms, right? Human placental lactogen is nearly identical to growth hormone. The growth hormone in pregnancy is not what causes the sugar spike in gestational diabetes. It's the human placental lactogen. So if you look at twin pregnancies, if they have two placentas or more placental tissue making more human placental lactogen, the risk of gestational diabetes is exponentially higher. So this HPL is only a couple molecules different from growth hormone. It is interesting that these different GHRHs and GHRPs actually have pretty different mechanisms of action. Ghrelin is also a hormone that's released when you're hungry. This is probably one of the reasons why you have more growth hormone release overnight. And there's a lot of peptides that are very similar to ghrelin, so these peptides are not bioidentical peptides, but they just have a couple different amino acids changed. So they're almost identical and they're probably going to be used in the future for growth hormone deficiencies, including in kids, they've been studied. - So if somebody wants to increase their growth hormone output, in addition to not eating within two hours of sleep, getting good, deep sleep, doing all the other things in the six pillars that you mentioned earlier, especially resistance exercise at some point earlier in the day, what are the risks and benefits of taking a growth hormone-releasing hormone peptide like sermorelin prescribed by a doctor, of course. What should one be concerned about? How long could one take these? I've even heard that they can modify gene expression so that they really are changing your hypothalamus in very long lasting ways. - Yeah, there's definitely a lot of risk, tumor growth and cancer. So you look at a type one diabetic, they have very high incidences of various types of cancer. They have very high growth hormone, but low IGF-1 paradoxically. So they would likely give you a similar cancer risk to a type one diabetic that has very high growth hormone. However, the benefits of it, you think of lipolysis, decreased body fat, increased lean body mass. A lot of those, you can use other things to get those benefits. So then you don't need growth hormone for those benefits. It just leaves cosmetic benefit to which you can usually use topicals to get. Your hair and your skin and your nails, there's a lot of other things that you can do other than growth hormone. So a lot of people just don't need these GHRPs if they don't have lipodystrophy or if they don't have growth hormone deficiency. There is other uses of them, specifically in injuries. So I know that they've been studied, I'm not sure if it's in the military. We mentioned the woodpecker or the contrecoup injury. So that obviously. - The head jolting back and forth and the brain basically slamming up against the front of the skull. - So- - Football, heading the ball in soccer, definitely people who use the 50 caliber in military, although that's a fairly small population. And I think anyone that's hit their head hard more than once. - Yeah, we can talk about BPC-157 for a bit, GHK-copper peptide for a bit. TB-500 or a thymosin beta-4 analog. And then we can also talk about bremelanotide, which is melanotan III. They have melanotan I and II, and then they also have melanotan III and IV. - Yeah, let's talk about BPC-157 and melanotan, 'cause I think those are the ones that most people are eyeing, so to speak. - Yeah, so BPC-157 is body protective compound 157. It's identical or bio-identical to gastric protective compound 157 that's produced in the stomach. So as you age, you get atrophic gastritis very often. That's why you have less intrinsic factor, which is kind of another peptide that binds to vitamin B12. That's why you can get age-related B12 deficiencies. So that's one reason why you have more colitis, more or diverticulitis as you age. You don't have that gastric protective compound. It increases VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor, which basically makes your blood vessels grow more. So that's what causes your body to form a blood vessel. So another medication known as Avastin. It's on the WHO's list of essential medications for cancer. So many different types of cancer, including colon cancer, you treat it with Avastin, which is a VEGF inhibitor. So if you have cancer or a high cancer risk, you probably don't want to be taking a medication that's the exact opposite mechanism of action as your essential anti-cancer med. - In other words, if you have cancer, you're at risk of cancer, avoid BPC-157? - Correct, a lot of people prescribe it for six weeks and BPC-157, so bremelanotide, that is FDA approved for a hypoactive sexual disorder. Tesamorelin, that's also approved for lipodystrophy. Interestingly another one of the melanotans is also approved for lipodystrophy. And also deficiency in the melanocortin receptor. So the receptor that receives the alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, it's a very rare condition. It's also approved for that, because if you don't take it, then you get obesity. But BPC-157 is not FDA approved, but it is essentially standard of care at this point. I would say it's, if you're not counting insulin or growth hormone as peptides, it's one of the most commonly used peptides and anecdotally, and in some clinical literature, it's fairly well tolerated for short periods of time. I'm not in the camp that everybody needs to do it two to three times a week or even daily for six weeks no matter what. The major benefit is when you're going to take it early on, because it's going to allow your body to increase blood flow to the injured area, and the less blood flow it has, for example, cartilage, ligaments have horrible blood flow, especially as people age, it's going to make a significant difference. So I would wager that that Russian gymnast that achilles healed in one month and completely from a full rupture was likely taking BPC-157 or something very similar. - Yeah, I'm willing to wager on that as well, a remarkable recovery. And so because it is prescription, there are non-prescription forms, my understanding of the non-prescription forms and the danger of going after non-prescription forms is that oftentimes they will contain what they claim they contain, BPC-157 in this case, but they are not adequately cleaning out the LPS, the lipopolysaccharide which can cause inflammation. In fact, in the laboratory, we use LPS to deliberately induce fever and inflammation to study systemic inflammation. So this is a warning to people. If you're interested in peptides, you absolutely need to work with a physician, in my opinion. - Yeah. - Get it from a really good compounding pharmacy that cleans out the LPS. Because if you're buying it through a source that a lot of people, I don't want to name sources, but there are these common sources on the internet that everyone knows about. They're buying these sources, they'll ship it to anyone essentially. But then the LPS is really causing inflammation and many people experience a kind of mild fever or tingling from that when they inject it and they're like, oh, I can feel it working. That's probably LPS action, which is not good for the brain. I don't know about on other peripheral tissues. I haven't heard of people dropping dead from this stuff yet, but I certainly wouldn't want to be ingesting any LPs unnecessarily. So would you agree that you should work with a doctor? After all you are a doctor. - Yeah. Definitely talk to your doctor about this and talk to them about dosing regimen as well. So if they have you doing it for six weeks, ask 'em why am I doing it for six weeks? Why not two weeks or why not as soon as I feel better? Can I just stop it? Yeah, there's a lot of good questions like that that you should ask your doctor. And if somebody's trying to prescribe you a bunch of different things, then see, is this what they prescribe everybody or is this individualized for me? There are peptides like GHK-copper peptide which is produced endogenously in the liver more at younger ages. That's why the liver can regenerate fully, is this, the GHK-copper peptide helps. And if you're copper deficient, which not a whole lot of people are, but a lot of people that have had bariatric surgery are copper deficient, GHK-copper peptide can help significantly with your nervous system. And it's also synergistic. So any growth agonist like thymosin beta-4 made in kids in the thymus, which shrinks. That's another reason why kids heal really well. That and GHK is somewhat synergistic with BPC, but if you don't need all three, you don't want them. And if you don't need it for more than a week, you don't want it for more than a week. - I really appreciate you saying that. I often say that sometimes the best dose of something to take is zero. It's often the case that the best dosage is zero. You mentioned melanotan. There are several kinds of melanotan. I find it a little bit of a funny conversation, because I first learned about melanotan from reading about peptides and discovering that people were injecting melanotan to get tan, because it's in the melanin synthesis pathway. They also discovered, this isn't an individual. This is reading about this in various manuscripts and peer-reviewed papers that it could cause things like priapism, like sustained erection, that might be the last one that anyone would ever have because of damage to the vasculature. Also women taking melanotan as a way to get tan and lose body fat. So this sounds all very recreational. Are there any clinical usage of melanotan? So separate from the kind of extreme biohacking cosmetic world, which is really not the main focus of this podcast ever, more in terms of health, pursuing health optimization. - Yeah, there's actually three FDA approved indications, believe it or not. Not many people know about this, but there's three well accepted indications. One of them is the hypoactive sexual disorder, and more in women, that's for bremelanotide. - So- - Those are women that have essentially no libido whatsoever? - Yeah. - But other hormones are in check? Yeah, classically it's before menopause. So those hormonal issues are not contributing. And when you give them this peptide, it's also known as PT-141, it helps significantly. A lot of times you use it in nasal spray. It goes straight into the central nervous system and acts centrally. You can also inject it, and you can also take it via troche. - Men and women take it? - Correct. It's approved for women. But it can also help men. And it's relatively safe. The only relative contraindication that I tell people and a lot of people say, oh, there's no side effects that I know of. But if you have a family history of melanoma or potentially have a melanoma and don't know about it, that's why I'm a big advocate of dermoscopy as well on regular skin checks, then theoretically it's going to increase that alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, and it can grow that. So that's definitely not a good a thing. So be very careful about longterm administration of it. It's also approved for lipodystrophy, which is the same exact thing as tesamorelin, which I believe is also known as Evista or Egrifta. And then it's also approved for the rare genetic condition where your receptors or your melanocytes don't proliferate as well, so you usually have hypopigmentation. It's not true albinism, but it's associated with morbid obesity and very be poor outcomes from that in childhood, so it's used in kids actually. - Interesting, well, peptides are a fascinating landscape, but thank you for that deep dive into several of them. We will probably return to you to talk about peptides again in the near future, because I know there's a lot more there. And a lot of interest. I want to talk about the sixth pillar, all right? So just to remind people, you said diet, exercise, where appropriate, caloric restriction, managing stress, sleep and sunlight are critical for everyone at all ages to manage and optimize hormone health. Then you have the sixth category, which is a really intriguing one, which is spirit. Which is kind of unusual thing to hear coming from a medical doctor, except that I have many colleagues and indeed our former director of the National Institutes of Health, Francis Collins has talked about this notion of spirit. We've talked about belief effects on this podcast before with Alia Crum, how one's understanding of the things that they do and their world in general really creates an important effect on everything at the level of physiology, not just psychology. So as a physician, how do you conceptualize this spiritual aspect? And how do you talk to patients about this, given that people walking into your clinic presumably have a bunch of different religious and not a religious backgrounds. I'm sure some are atheists. Some are probably strong believers. How do you deal with that? And how should people think about this? - Yeah, I believe it is surprisingly well received. You wouldn't think at first glance that a patient really wants to talk about their spiritual health with their doctor, but the way I think about it and the way that it really is is it's like a Venn diagram and you have a body and a mind and a soul. And you can't have one healthy without the other healthy, even if your mental health is phenomenal, and even if your physical health is phenomenal, the mental aspect of spirituality, if that piece is not there, then that's going to affect your body physiologically as well. And Alia Crum's done some excellent work. There's also been a lot of other studies regarding prayer. And I'm a Christian, I believe in God. And that gives me a lot of that resilience and motivation. It gives me the cornerstone or the groundwork, how I can interact with life. And regardless if someone's an atheist or regardless of what someone believes as far as religion or the origin of the species, they can know that their spirituality is going to have a profound effect on their mental and physical health as well. People like to compartmentalize it. So they like to talk to their doctor only about the physical health 'cause it's comfortable to do that. They only talk to their pastor or a mom or reiki healer for their spiritual health. And they just talk to their therapist or psychiatrist about their mental health. But you need to bring all three of those things together. It's well known that interdisciplinary clinics lead to improved patient outcomes and that's just disciplines within medicine. So that's just doctors that are specializing in this or this. So this takes a step back in the upper part of that tree before you've reached those dichotomies or the split-offs. You have your body and your mind and your soul, so your spiritual health and your mental health and your physical health. So if you're in line in all three of those things, that builds the cornerstone for the rest of your health and the rest of your life. - So if someone comes into your clinic and they say, they're feeling one way in their body, they're feeling one way in their emotional life, you run their charts, you get their blood work, and they're an atheist or they're agnostic, what are some of the sixth pillar practices that they can consider that are in keeping with their atheism or agnosticism? Because I have to assume that people who are in participate or feel that they belong to a particular religious sex will have particular prescriptives from those religious sex that will direct them towards particular types of prayer. But how would somebody who doesn't have a prescriptive coming to them from some other source, what could they do or would they do? - Yeah, so I certainly don't force prayer on anybody or anything like that. But it's my belief that being, especially being an agnostic, it's almost the hardest thing, because if you're an atheist, then you have some groundwork and you have some spirituality, even if it has to do with the human spirits' interaction with the environment, things that can't be physically explained well, phenomenon like the work that Alia Crum does. But if you're agnostic, you're still trying to find that. So I hope that everybody does find what they truly believe in as far as their own spirituality. But yeah, that's a personal journey. From a physician's standpoint, and even if I'm friends with them as well from a friend's standpoint, I don't like to push anybody in any specific direction. So I don't think that everybody should believe what I believe. And I don't feel like there should be any pressure for them to believe something different. So I think that there can be excellent physician-patient rapport, regardless of what we believe and what our backgrounds are. - Yeah. That's wonderful to hear. I can say without revealing any names that I have close colleagues that, in every bin of this spectrum, like hardcore atheists, hardcore religious in different domains, different religions, I don't know, I don't know if I know many agnostic, as to whether or not I know any agnostics, I should say. It's not something that people commonly discuss, but in the context of science and medicine, but it's starting to happen more and more. And certainly this issue of spirituality is one of the areas in which neuroscience is asking a lot of questions. Like what spiritual experiences really are in terms of how they're grounded in the brain or not grounded in the brain. I think it's a really interesting area for discovery. And I appreciate that you bring it up, and you bring it up in the non-pressured way that you do. I think that it will stimulate a lot of thinking, which is ultimately the goal of this podcast. Well, I have one final question that a listener insisted I ask, and it's a very straightforward one. It's not at all a curve ball and not at all related to what we were just talking about. But it was the most common question when I told people that I was going to be talking to you, which is, is caffeine problematic for hormones? It's amazing, I received hundreds of the same question about caffeine. And since it's probably the most commonly used drug on the planet, I know it's taking us back into the very practical, but in closing, we're not quite there yet, but in closing is caffeine having an effect, one way or the other, on testosterone, estrogen, or other hormones that is positive, negative or neutral? - Only if it affects your sleep. So it works on adenosine and it can actually slightly improve allergies as well, but negligible effects otherwise. - Great. - Yep. - Well, sorry to end on such a practical brass tacks type of question, but I did promise to the listeners that I would ask that question. Listen, I want to sincerely thank you. We covered basically an endocrinology textbook, a neuroendocrinology textbook's worth of information, a ton of practical tips in there. Where can people find out more about you? We will certainly provide links. And I guess the other question is, are you taking patients? I'm sure you'll hear that in the various venues where people can contact you. But where are you active in terms of public facing work? - I'm active on Instagram, kylegillettmd. I'm also active on the social medias of my brand new clinic, which is Gillett Health. That's @GillettHealth on Instagram or GillettHealth.com. - Great. We'll provide links to those. And I should say that the content you've been putting out on Instagram is terrific because you actually pointed to specific studies and you put things into actionable context, which is very meaningful for me. Kyle, Dr. Gillett, I should say, thanks so much for your time. I really appreciate it and I know the listeners will too. - Thank you. My pleasure. - Thank you for joining me for my discussion about hormone health and optimization with Dr. Kyle Gillett. As you just heard, he is a treasure trove of actionable clear information. And again, you can find him teaching more about hormones and other aspects of health on Instagram @kylegillett, that's Gillett with two T's and two L's, but no E, kylegillettmd on Instagram and Gillett Health on all other platforms. And if you would like more information about his practice, you can find that at gilletthealth.com. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. That's a terrific zero cost way to support the podcast. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments about this, or any episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast, or if you'd like to suggest topics that you'd like us to cover or guests that you would like me to talk to, please put that in the comment section on YouTube. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode. That is the best way to support the podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's episode and on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements certainly aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like optimizing sleep and focus, and indeed hormone health. Anytime you're considering taking a supplement, you want to make sure that the supplements are of the very highest quality. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorne supplements are known to have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of their ingredients and precision about the amounts of the ingredients that they put in each bottle. Meaning what is listed on the packaging is actually what's contained in those supplements, which is not true for many supplement companies out there. If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that thorne.com/u/huberman, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. Also if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, so go to thorne.com/u/huberman, but then pass into thorne.com, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements in the Thorne catalog. If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. It's Huberman Lab on both Instagram and Twitter. And there I cover science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the contents of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but much of which is distinct from the contents of the Huberman Lab Podcast. And again, we are hosting two live events. One in Seattle on May 17th. Another in Portland on May 18th. That series is called "The Brain Body Contract" where I'll talk about science and science-based tools, some of which I have never about in a public forum before. And there will be an open question and answer format for you to ask me your questions, and I will do my best to answer them in real time. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Kyle Gillett. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [energetic music]

========================================

--- Video 281 ---
Video ID: pq6WHJzOkno
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pq6WHJzOkno
Title: Using Deliberate Cold Exposure for Health and Performance | Huberman Lab Podcast #66
Published: 2022-04-04 12:00:32 UTC
Description:
I describe mechanisms by which deliberate cold exposure can enhance mental health, physical health, and performance. I detail specific protocols to safely engage in deliberate cold exposure, including minimal exposure times, time-of-day effects, determining optimal temperatures, recovery, mindset, and movement during cold exposure. I discuss how cold exposure can be used to safely stress the body to improve attention, mood, and cognitive focus and boost metabolism and reduce inflammation. Also, I explain how cold exposure on specific regions of the body (called glabrous skin surfaces) can be leveraged to enhance endurance and weight training and increase work output.  

#HubermanLab #ColdExposure #IceBaths

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com - use code "huberman"
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
Tuesday, May 17th: Seattle, WA
Wednesday, May 18th: Portland, OR  
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast:
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
Brief aerobic exercise immediately enhances visual attentional control and perceptual speed. Testing the mediating role of feelings of energy: https://bit.ly/3KbiF6U
Human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures: https://bit.ly/3x09iTO
Altered brown fat thermoregulation and enhanced cold-induced thermogenesis in young, healthy, winter-swimming men: https://bit.ly/3IZwCnb
Adipose-tissue plasticity in health and disease: https://bit.ly/3J7nr41
Caffeine increases striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor availability in the human brain: https://go.nature.com/3DDegY7
Impact of Cold-Water Immersion Compared with Passive Recovery Following a Single Bout of Strenuous Exercise on Athletic Performance in Physically Active Participants: A Systematic Review with Meta-analysis and Meta-regression: https://bit.ly/35Au696
Novel Application of Chemical Cold Packs for Treatment of Exercise-Induced Hyperthermia: A Randomized Controlled Trial: https://bit.ly/3NJTpXy
Work Volume and Strength Training Responses to Resistive Exercise Improve with Periodic Heat Extraction from the Palm: https://bit.ly/3u5qGoi

Timestamps
00:00:00 Deliberate Cold Exposure, Health Warning   
00:04:23 Tool: Moderate Exercise & Cognitive Work 
00:10:47 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:11:32 AG1 (Athletic Greens), ROKA, Helix Sleep
00:15:37 Circadian Rhythm & Body Temperature
00:18:41 Tool: Quickly Decrease Core Body Temperature, Glabrous Skin 
00:25:26 Mental Effects of Cold Exposure 
00:29:02 Physical Effects of Cold Exposure
00:30:11 How Cold Should the Temperature Be? 
00:34:53 Cold Showers vs. Cold Water Immersion
00:38:27 Protocols for Cold Exposure 
00:50:57 Optimal Mindset(s) During Cold Exposure 
00:55:26 Tool: Using Movement During Cold Exposure 
00:57:51 Optimal Frequency of Cold Exposure 
01:00:22 Cold Exposure for Dopamine, Mood & Focus
01:12:55 Cold Exposure & Metabolism, Brown Fat 
01:25:55 Tool: Caffeine, Dopamine & Cold Exposure  
01:29:14 Tools: Increasing Metabolism w/Cold – The Søberg Principle, Shivering
01:34:15 Norepinephrine & Fat Cells 
01:36:22 Cold, Physical Performance, Inflammation   
01:47:36 Hyperthermia & Glabrous Skin Cooling 
01:53:27 Tool: Palmar Cooling & Endurance
02:03:18 Cold Exposure to Groin, Increasing Testosterone
02:07:50 Tool: Optimal Timing for Daily Cold Exposure
02:11:16 Neural Network Newsletter, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify Reviews, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter

Disclaimer: The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user's own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss the use of deliberate cold exposure for health and performance. Temperature is a powerful stimulus on our nervous system and indeed on every organ and system of our body and cold in particular can be leveraged to improve mental health, physical health, and performance, meaning for endurance exercise, for recovering from various forms of exercise, for actually improving strength and power and for enhancing mental capacity. In order to properly leverage deliberate cold exposure for sake of mental health, physical health and performance, you have to understand how cold impacts the brain and body. So today we are going to discuss that. We're going to talk about some of the neural circuits and pathways, some of the hormones involved. I promise to make it all clear and accessible regardless of whether or not you have a scientific background or not. We are also going to discuss very specific protocols that you can apply, which leverage variables like temperature, how cold, how to deliver the cold, for instance, whether or not you use a cold shower, cold immersion, ice bath, circulating water, or still water, whether or not you're going for walks outside in a t-shirt when it's cold or whether or not you're purposefully using things like cryo, if you have access to that or not. One thing I can promise you is that by the end of today's episode, you will know a lot about the biology of thermal regulation, that is how your brain and body regulates its temperature. You will also have a lot of tools in your arsenal that you can use and leverage toward improving mental health, physical health, reducing inflammation in the body, improving athletic performance, improving mental performance. I promise to spell out all those protocols in detail as I go along and to summarize them again at the end. I'd like to make a point now that I'm going to make several additional times during today's episode and that is that temperature is a very potent stimulus for the brain and body. That also means that it carries certain hazards if it's not done correctly. Now, everyone shows up to the table, meaning to protocols, with a different background of health status and there's simply no way that I can know what your health status is. So anytime you are going to take on a new protocol, that means a behavioral protocol or a nutritional protocol or a supplementation protocol, you should absolutely consult a board certified physician before initiating that protocol. I don't just say this to protect us, I also say this to protect you. If you'd like to see our medical disclaimer, you can go to our show notes, it's described there. In fact, I encourage you to please do that. And in general, when embarking on new protocols in particular, if they involve strong stimuli like changing temperature or placing yourself into unusual temperatures, I would encourage you to progress gradually. I would also encourage you to not look at gradual progression as the kind of weak version of a protocol. In fact, today I'm going to discuss a really beautiful peer reviewed study that involved having people do deliberate cold exposure so they were immersing themselves into water up to about their neck and the water was actually not that cold. It was only about 60 degrees Fahrenheit, which for most people is pretty tolerable. So nowhere near the kinds of extreme temperatures that one could use in other protocols. And the interesting thing is despite that fairly modest cold temperature, by simply extending the duration of time that people were in that water, they experienced enormous increases in neurochemicals that ought to translate to improvements in focus and mood. And indeed, that's what's been observed in subsequent studies. So again, please see our medical disclaimer in our show notes, please proceed with caution always, please also understand that the most potent stimulus isn't always the one that you experience as the most intense in the moment. In fact, I would encourage you to you find the minimum threshold of stimulus that will allow you to drive the maximum benefit from each protocol and indeed, I will point out what those thresholds ought to be today. I'll give you some simple formulas, gauges or guides that you can use in order to navigate this extremely interesting and potent tool that we call deliberate cold exposure. Before we talk about deliberate cold exposure and its many powerful applications, I'd like to highlight a study that I find particularly interesting, that I think you will find particularly interesting and useful. The title of this study is brief aerobic exercise immediately enhances visual attentional control and perceptual speed, testing the mediated role of feelings of energy. Now, the reason I like this study is first of all, it's a fairly large size sample group. They looked at 101 students. These were college-aged students and they had two groups. One group did 15 minutes of jogging at moderate intensity. So they did measure percent heart rates, et cetera, but this would be analogous to zone two cardio, which I've discussed on this podcast before. Zone two cardio is cardiovascular exercise that places you at a level where you can hold a conversation with a little bit of strain, meaning that you can get the words out, but every once in a while you have to catch your breath whereas if you were to push any harder by any mechanism going faster or on a steeper incline, et cetera, that you would have a hard time carrying out a conversation. So zone two cardio is a common form of describing that level of intensity that they call moderate intensity. So one group did 15 minute of jogging at moderate intensity, which I'm translating to roughly zone two cardio. The other group did 15 minutes of relaxation concentration that is somewhat akin to mindfulness meditation. And then they were analyzed for perceptual speed, visual attentional control, something called working memory, which is your ability to keep certain batches of information online. Just imagine someone telling you their phone number, and you have to remember that sequence of numbers in your head for some period of time, that's working memory. And it depends very heavily on the so-called prefrontal cortical networks, which are involved in planning and action. And they also looked at people's feelings of energy and they measured that subjectively, how energetic people felt. Now the major takeaways from this study that I'd like to emphasize are that the 15 minutes of jogging group experienced elevated levels of energy for some period of time after they ceased the exercise whereas the group that did mindfulness meditation actually reported feeling more calm and having less overall energy. Now that's very subjective and indeed they used subjective measures to analyze energy, but what gets interesting is when they looked at performance on these various cognitive tasks and the two tasks that they use were called the trail making tests, they have different versions of this, version A, version B, I don't want to go into too much detail, but version A essentially involves having a page of numbers that are distributed somewhat randomly. So one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight and so on, but distributed randomly across the page and people have to use visual search to circle those numbers in sequence. So this involves visual attention, it involves some motor skills, involves a number of things that certainly require energy and focus. The second test was the trail making test part B, as I mentioned earlier, and this involved also circling numbers in sequence, but interspersed between those numbers were letters. So rather than just having to circle off numbers in sequence, they actually had to connect one, then the letter A, then two, then the letter B, et cetera and remember these are randomly distributed across the page. The major takeaway from the study is that the group that did the 15 minutes of moderate exercise prior to these two tests showed significant decreases in the amount of time required to complete these tests accurately. That is interesting and indeed surprising at least to me, because there have been many studies looking at the effects of mindfulness meditation on the ability to focus. The key variable in the study turned out to be energy. This subjectively measured feeling I should say of having more energy and thereby the ability to focus, especially in these high cognitive demand tasks. Now the takeaway from this study for all of us I think is pretty straightforward. If you are going to sit down to do some work that requires focus and working memory and cognitive attention and especially if it's some visual spatial control, meaning you have to search for things on a page, you have to organize things on a page, so some writing, arithmetic, basically cognitive work of any kind, 15 minutes of moderate exercise done prior to that work about could be very beneficial for you. This does not mean that mindfulness meditation would not be a benefit to you. I wouldn't want you to conclude that, but if you had to choose between doing 15 minutes of mindfulness meditation and doing 15 minutes of moderate exercise prior to a cognitive work about, I would say the 15 minutes of moderate exercise would be more valuable at least based on the data in this paper. In many previous podcasts, I have talked about the powerful effects of doing things like mindfulness meditation, and other forms of NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. So these could be 20 minute naps or just lying there quietly with your eyes closed or yoga nidra or NSDR scripts are available on YouTube and various other places free of cost of any kind. You just go to YouTube, put in NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. Those protocols have been shown to be very beneficial for enhancing neuroplasticity, the changes in the brain and body that encode or shift the neural circuits that allow for memory to change, that allow for learning to occur after a learning about. What I'm referring to today in this particular study is the use of moderate exercise in order to increase one's focus and attention in order to trigger that neuroplasticity. So the simple sequence here is get energetic and alert, do that prior to the learning about, engage in the cognitive work or learning about, and then mindfulness meditation, NSDR and so forth should follow. And if you would like to access this paper and like to look more at the details in the paper, we'll be sure to put a link in the show notes. The first author is Legrand. And again, the title of this paper is brief aerobic exercise immediately enhances visual potential control and perceptual speed, testing the mediating role of feeling of energy. And I also just want to emphasize immediately. I think most people out there are interested in tools and protocols that work the first time and that work every time and indeed, I think this protocol fits that bill. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th, both are part of a lecture series entitled the Brain Body Contract during which I will discuss science and science-based tools for mental health, physical health and performance. And I should point out that while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast and on various social media posts, most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere. So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th. You can access tickets by going to hubermanlab.com/tour and I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, also called AG One. I started taking AG One way back in 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG One and the reason I still take AG One once or twice a day is that it covers my foundational vitamin mineral and probiotic needs. It also has adaptogens and things like zinc for immune system function, but the probiotics are one of the key features in there. I've done several podcasts on the gut microbiome, which are these trillions of microbiota that live in our digestive tract, and that are crucial for our immune system, brain function and so on. One way to enhance our gut microbiome to ensure that it's healthy is to make sure that we get the correct probiotics and Athletic Greens has the correct prebiotics and probiotics that ensure a healthy gut microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. So in the car and on the plane. I should mention the Athletic Greens is delicious. I love the way it tastes. I mix mine with some water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. The special offer is the five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D three, K two. Vitamin D three has been shown to be important for a tremendous number of biological functions. Many of us who get sunlight get enough vitamin D three, many of us, even if we do get sunlight, do not get enough vitamin D three. So the year supply of vitamin D three also has K two, which is important for cardiovascular function, for calcium regulation. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D three, K two. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their eye glasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind. Now the glasses were initially designed for athletic performance, meaning they were designed to be worn while cycling or running. And indeed you can wear them while cycling or running. If you get sweaty, they won't slip off your face. They're very lightweight. In fact, you hardly ever remember that they're on your face, at least I can't remember that they're on my face. I wear the sunglasses when I drive, I wear readers at night, but they're not just for athletic performance. They have a terrific aesthetic so you could wear them to the office or to work or to school, they look great. Unlike a lot of high performance sunglasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, these you would be happy to wear anywhere. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com. Enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are uniquely designed to your sleep needs. Everybody knows the importance of sleep for mental health, physical health, and performance, but probably what everyone doesn't realize is that you have unique sleep needs, your body and indeed the way you sleep need to be matched the correct mattress in order to get the best possible sleep. Helix understands that and if you go to their website, they have a brief two minute quiz that anyone can take that will match your body type and sleep preferences to the perfect mattress for you. So they ask questions like, do you sleep on your side, your back of your stomach, or maybe you don't know. Do you tend to run hot or cold through the night or maybe you don't know? I matched to the dusk mattress, D-U-S-K, because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm nor too soft and I've been sleeping on that mattress for over a year now, it's the best sleep I've ever had. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. They have a 10 year warranty and you get to try the mattress out for a hundred nights risk free. They'll even pick it up for you if you don't like it although I think you will like it. I certainly love mine. Again if you're interested, go to helixsleep.com/huberman to get up to $200 off your mattress order and two free pillows. Let's talk about the use of cold for health and performance. I confess I love this topic because it takes me back to my undergraduate years when I worked in a laboratory studying cold physiology, its effects on the brain and its effects the body. And over the years, I've always kept track of the literature in this area and indeed there have been some tremendous discoveries, both in animal models, so in rodents like mice and rats, but also in humans and today we're going to talk about both categories of studies and I'll be careful to point out when discoveries were made in animal models and when they were made in humans. A key point when thinking about the use of cold as a tool, and the key point is that you have a baseline level of temperature that is varying, changing across the 24 hour cycle. So any use of deliberate cold exposure is going to be super imposed on that rhythm, that circadian rhythm, meaning that 24 hour rhythm. The basic contour of your circadian rhythm in temperature is that approximately two hours before the time you wake up is your so-called temperature minimum. So your temperature minimum is a time within the 24 hour cycle when your body temperature is at its lowest. So if you normally wake up around 6:00 AM, your temperature minimum is probably about 4:00 AM. If you normally wake up at about 7:00 AM, your temperature minimum is probably about 5:00 AM. It's not exactly two hours before your wake up time, it's approximately two hours before your wake up time. Now, as you go from your temperature minimum to the time in which you're going to awake, your temperature is rising slightly. And then at the point where you wake up, your temperature starts to go up more sharply and will continue to go up into the early and sometimes even into the late afternoon. And then sometime in the late afternoon and evening, your temperature will start to decline. And indeed, as you approach sleep, your body temperature will drop by anywhere from one to three degrees. And in fact that decrease in core body temperature is important if not essential for getting into and staying in deep sleep. So temperature rises with waking, that's easy to remember. It tends to continue to rise throughout the day and in the late afternoon and evening, your temperature WILL start to go down and the drop in temperature actually helps you access sleep. That background or what we call baseline circadian rhythm in core body temperature is important to remember because it helps us frame both the effects of deliberate cold exposure and helps us frame when you might want to use deliberate cold exposure in order to access specific states. It also points to times within the 24 hour cycle when you might want to avoid using deliberate cold exposure, if your primary goal is to get to sleep. So that's the circadian rhythm in temperature. Now I just briefly want to touch on thermal regulation at the level of body and the brain. And this will be very surprising to many of you. Let's do what's called a Gedanken experiment, which is a thought experiment. Let's say I send you out into the desert heat for a jog or a run and it's very hot outside, 102 or 103 degrees, and you start to move, you start to sweat and of course your core body temperature goes up. Now, then I offer you a cold towel, maybe a really, really cold towel and this towel is saturated with water so you could actually squeeze the water out of that and cool your body off. And our Gedanken experiment is for me to say okay, where are you going to place the towel? How are you going to cool yourself off? And I'm guessing that most of you would think that the best way to cool yourself off would be to drape that towel over your head, maybe your neck, over your torso, that it would feel really, really good, and it would cool you off. Well, that's exactly the wrong approach if you want to cool off. And in fact, if you were to use that approach, your body temperature would continue to increase even more. Yes, even more than had you not placed that cold towel on your head or your torso. And here is why. Thermal regulation meaning your brain and body's ability to regulate your internal core temperature is somewhat like a thermostat and that thermostat resides in your brain. So if you think about the thermostat in your home or apartment, if it's too warm in your home or apartment and you were to take a bag of ice and to put it on that thermostat, what would the thermostat do? It would register the environment as artificially cool. It would think that the environment was actually much colder than it is. And so as a consequence, it would trigger a mechanism to further increase the temperature in the room. And you have such a thermostat as well. It's called the medial preoptic area of the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is a small region of brain tissue about over the roof of your mouth and a little bit in front of that. So it's basically right behind your nose and over the roof of your mouth and it's a collection of neurons. Those neurons have a lot of different functions that include things like the control of aggression, the control of sex behavior, the control of temperature regulation and so on. The medial preoptic area has connections with the rest of the brain or areas within the brain, I should say and with many areas within the body, it receives input from receptors in our skin and inside our body that register temperature and it acts as a thermostat. So if the surface of your body is made cool, your medial preoptic area will send signals by way of hormones and by way of chemicals that will serve to heat your body up. So what this means is that if you want to cool down, the last thing you want to do is to bring a cold surface of any kind, towel or splashing water, to the majority of your body surface. It might be very, very surprising to you. And you might say, wait, if I want to cool down, I should jump into a cold lake or something of that sort. That's a different thing altogether. What I'll tell you, and we'll get into this in more depth later, is that if you really want to cool down quickly and efficiently, you should leverage particular portals, meaning particular sites on your body where heat can leave your body more readily and where cooling can have a dramatic and fast impact on your core body temperature, can even save your life if you're going hyperthermic. We're going to talk more about the specific protocols to reduce core body temperature for sake of performance and avoiding hyperthermia later in the episode. Hyperthermia of course is a very, very dangerous situation because while your body can drop in core temperature somewhat and still be safe, you can't really increase your body temperature that much before your brain starts to cook and other organs start to cook and by cook, I mean the cells actually start to die. So you have to be very, very careful with the use of heat. Heat stroke is no joke. People die from heat stroke all the time. You really want to avoid that. One way to avoid that is to cool the appropriate surfaces of your body and the appropriate surfaces in this case are the upper cheeks or I would say the upper half of the face, the palms of your hands and the bottoms of your feet. I've talked about this on the podcast before and in the guest episode with Dr. Craig Heller, my colleague in the biology department at Stanford, but just very briefly, these surfaces, the upper half of the face, the palms of the hands and the bottoms of the feet are what we call glabrous skin surfaces, G-L-A-B-R-O-U-S, glabrous. And those surfaces are unique in that just below them, the vasculature is different than elsewhere in the body. Normally the passage of blood goes from arteries to capillaries to veins, but just beneath the glabrous skin on the bottoms of the feet, the hands in the upper half of the face, you have what are called arterio-venous anastomoses. These are portals of blood that go directly from arteries to veins and in doing so, allow the body to dump heat more readily, more quickly. So as it turns out that if you are to cool the palms of the hands, the bottoms of the feet and the upper half of the face, you can more efficiently reduce core body temperature for sake of offsetting hyperthermia and for improving athletic performance and maybe even cognitive performance. So we will return to the specific protocols for doing that later in the episode, I'll give you a lot of details about how to do that, how to do that without the use of any fancy or expensive technology. There are some technologies that are now commercially available, for instance, the so-called CoolMitt that will allow you to do that with maximum efficiency, but I'll also give you some at home methods to do this either in the gym or on runs or for sake of cognitive work. So the two key themes again are understand that baseline circadian rhythm in temperature, and understand that the best way to cool the body is going to be by making sure that something cold contacts the bottoms of your feet, the palms of your hands and the upper half of the face. Ideally all three if your goal is to lower core body temperature quickly, and again, just cooling off the back of your neck or the top of your head or your torso with a towel is going to be the least efficient way to lower core body temperature and might even increase body temperature under certain conditions. With those two points in mind, we can start to think about directed deliberate cold exposure protocols, and there are a number of different reasons to use deliberate cold exposure. And I want to separate those out for you. There are cold protocols that have been tested in peer reviewed studies that are designed to improve mental performance. They are designed to improve things like resilience or your grittiness, or your ability to move through challenge or to regulate your mind and your internal state under conditions of stress and we can define stress very specifically as times when adrenaline also called epinephrine and or norepinephrine also called noradrenaline, are elevated in your body. Forgive me for the noradrenaline, norepinephrine, adrenaline, epinephrine nomenclature, I didn't make that up. It turns out that every once in a while, scientists disagree, imagine that, and you'll get multiple scientists naming the same molecule different things. So epinephrine and adrenaline are the same thing. I will use them interchangeably. Norepinephrine and noradrenaline are the same thing. I will use those terms interchangeably. Noradrenaline and adrenaline are often co-released in the brain and body. So they work as kind of a pair to increase our level of agitation, our level of focus and our desire and our ability to move. They are often co-released from different sites in the brain and body with dopamine, a molecule that is commonly misunderstood as the molecule of pleasure, but is actually the molecule of motivation, reward and pursuit. So dopamine, norepinephrine and noradrenaline tend to be released together under certain conditions and today you'll learn how deliberate cold exposure can be used to cause increases in the release of several, if not, all of these in ways that can improve your levels of attention and your mood. But the key point is that your mental state is shifted when you are exposed to certain forms of cold, and many people use deliberate cold exposure specifically to shift their body state as a way to train their mental state so that they can better cope with stress in real life and by real life, I mean when life presents stressful events, and I will give you specific protocols as to how you can do that, in other words, how you can become more resilient through the use of deliberate cold exposure. Now, because of the ways in which deliberate cold exposure can increase this category of chemicals called the catecholamines, that includes dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, it can also be used to elevate mood for long periods of time. And I'm going to discuss a specific protocol that has been shown to increase these chemicals anywhere from 2.5X to 250%, to as high as 500%, five times over baseline. Now you might be asking whether or not it is a good thing to raise chemicals like norepinephrine and dopamine to such a great degree, whether or not that's healthy for us, whether or not they can harm us. But it turns out that these elevations in norepinephrine and dopamine are very long lasting in ways that people report feeling vast improvements in mood and vast improvements in levels of cognitive attention and energy. So by my read of the literature, these seem to be healthy increases in our baseline levels of these chemicals in ways that can really support us so I'll give you a protocol for that. Now, those are some of the mental effects of deliberate cold exposure, but deliberate cold exposure has also been studied in animal models and in humans in the context of increasing metabolism, even in converting certain fat cells that we call white fat cells, which are the ones where energy is stored, they're the ones that we typically think of as kind of blubbery fat, to beige or brown fat, which is thermogenic fat, meaning that it can increase core body temperature and serves kind of the furnace by which we increase our core metabolism. So with a very broad stroke, I can say that white fat is generally the kind of fat that people want less of and beige fat and brown fat is generally the kind of fat that if you're going to have fat cells and you certainly need fat cells that you want more of. They are thermogenic, they help you stay lean. They actually serve as a reservoir for heating your body up if you're ever confronted with a cold challenge. So we're going to talk about how to use cold for metabolism as well. And of course, people are using deliberate cold exposure to reduce inflammation post exercise, to reduce inflammation generally. And people are also using cold to enhance performance in the context of strength training, in the context of endurance training and we'll talk about those data as well, but where I'd like to start is with mental performance and I'd like to detail what happens when we deliberately expose ourselves to cold. It's key to point out the word deliberate. If I don't say otherwise, then throughout this episode, if I say cold exposure, I mean deliberate cold exposure. And the reason I point that out is that as my colleague, David Spiegel, and the department of psychiatry at Stanford says, it's not just about the state that we are in, it's about the state that we are in and whether or not we had anything to with placing ourselves into that state and whether or not we did that on purpose or not. And what he really means by that statement is that there are important effects of what we call mindset. Mindset was a topic discussed in the guest episode with Ali Crumb some weeks ago. If you haven't seen that episode, I highly recommend it. And the science of my mindset tells us that if we are doing something deliberately and we believe that it's going to be good for us, it actually can lead to a different set of physiological effects than if something is happening to us against our will or without our control. Now, this is different than placebo effects. Placebo effects are distinct from mindset effects. If you want to learn more about that distinction, please see the episode with Ali Crumb. But again, when I talk about cold exposure in this episode, I'm talking about deliberate cold exposure, meaning that you are placing yourself into a cold environment on purpose in order to extract a particular set of benefits. When we talk about deliberate cold exposure, almost always, that means getting uncomfortable. And one of the most common questions I get when discussing the use of cold for sake of mental or physical performance, metabolism, et cetera, is how cold should it be? How cold should the water be? How cold should the environment be? And I just will tell you now and I'm going to say this again and again throughout the episode, cause it will continue to be true throughout the episode and long after the episode is over, how cold depends on your cold tolerance, your core metabolism, and a number of other features that there is simply no way I could know or have access to. So I would like you to use this rule of thumb. If you are using deliberate cold exposure, the environment that you place yourself into should place your mind into a state of whoa, I would really like to get out of this environment, but I can stay in safely. Now that might seem a little bit arbitrary, but let's say you were to get into a warm shower and it would feel really, really nice and you were to start turning down the warm and turning up the cold. There would be some threshold at which it would feel uncomfortable to you. And if you were to continue to make a little bit colder than that, you would really want to get out of the shower, but you are confident that you could stay in without risking your health, without risking a heart attack. Now that's very different than jumping into a very, very cold lake or I've seen these images of people that will cut holes into frozen over lakes and they'll get into that cold water. If you are trained to do that and you have the right conditions, et cetera, that can be done reasonably safely, but that's certainly not what I would start with. And for many people, that would be too cold and indeed some people can go into cold shock and can die as a consequence of getting to that extremely cold water very quickly. Now that's not to scare you away from deliberate cold exposure. It's just to say that there's no simple prescriptive of how cold to make environment in order to extract maximum benefit for mental or physical performance. So the simple rule of thumb is going to be place yourself into an environment that is uncomfortably cold, but that you can stay in safely. And you'll have to experiment a bit and that number, meaning that temperature, will vary from day to day. It will vary across the 24 hour cycle because of that endogenous, meaning that internal rhythm, in temperature that I talked about earlier. Low early in the day, rises into the afternoon, drops at night. You can actually do this experiment if you like. Try getting into a cold shower at 11 o'clock at night if you want versus try doing it in the middle of the afternoon. It's quite a different experience and by quite a different experience, I mean it requires quite a different degree of resilience and leaning into the practice. Your willpower will have to be higher I suspect late in the day as it compared to early in the day, but that will vary of course between individuals as well. So the most common question I get about deliberate cold exposure is how cold should the water be? And we've answered that with uncomfortably cold to the point where you want to get out, but you can safely stay in. The second most common question I get about deliberate cold exposure is whether or not cold showers are as good, better or worse than cold water immersion up to the neck, for instance. I also get a lot of questions about whether or not cryo chambers are better than all the others, et cetera, et cetera. I'm going to make all of that very simple for you by saying cold water immersion up to the neck with your feet and hands submerged also is going to be the most effective. Second best would be cold shower. Third best would be to go outside with a minimum amount of clothing, but of course, clothing that is culturally appropriate and that would allow you to experience cold to the point where you would almost want to shiver or start shivering. Now there are a number of different, important constraints that are going to dictate whether or not you use one form of cold exposure or the other. For instance, some people don't have access to cold water immersion. They don't have access to ice baths or cold water tanks, cold ocean or cold lakes, et cetera. In that case, showers would be the next best solution. I do want to emphasize that there have been very few, if any, studies of cold showers, and you can imagine why this would be the case. In a laboratory, you want to control for as many variables as possible. So placing people into a cold water immersion or an ice bath up to the neck and insisting they keep their hands and feet under is very easy to control. It means that everyone can do essentially the same thing whereas with cold showers, people are different sized bodies. Some people are going to put their head under. Some people are going to lean forward. Measuring the amount of cold water exposure on the body is very hard to do and so there aren't a lot of studies of cold showers, but of course, a lot of people don't have access to cold water immersion so they have to use cold showers. And if you don't have access to both, of course, then going outside on a cold day can be of a benefit. But I will point out that the heat transfer from your body into water is much higher, four times greater, if not even greater, depending on the temperature of the water, in water as opposed to in air. So it's going to be much more efficient to do cold water immersion than anything else, cold showers after that and put yourself into a cold environment would be the third best thing. I'm not going to get into cryo chambers because they carry quite a high degree of cost. And again, there aren't many studies of them. So if you have access to cryo chambers, I'm sure that the cryo chamber facility has told you about all these incredible benefits and I don't doubt that some of those benefits truly exist, but most people just don't have the resources or the access to those so we're going to leave cryo chambers out of today's discussion. And of course I realize there's a fourth category of cold exposure out there. People are wearing ice vests. Believe it or not, those exist, ice underwear. Yes, those exist. You can look for them on Amazon if you like. They are putting cold packs in their armpits or in their groin or elsewhere in order to stimulate some of the effects of cold on mental and physical performance. I'm not going to address those in too much detail today. They can be efficient in certain ways, but as you'll learn about later in the episode, cooling the palms, the upper face and the bottoms of the feet is going to be far more efficient and unfortunately I think most of the people that are using ice packs to increase their core metabolism are not aware of the glabrous skin cooling and how it can be a very, very potent stimulus so we'll return to that later. Unless I say otherwise, I'm mainly going to be focusing on cold water immersion and cold showers. So let's talk about protocols for enhancing mental health and performance using deliberate cold exposure. What happens when we get into cold is that we experience an increase in norepinephrine, in noradrenaline release and in adrenaline release. The fact that cold exposure, deliberate or no, increases norepinephrine and epinephrine in our brain and body means that it is a very reliable stimulus for increasing norepinephrine and epinephrine. That's sort of an obvious statement, but that obvious statement can be leveraged to systematically build up what we call resilience. Now, when we experience a stressor in life, whether or not it's something bad happens in our relationship or something bad happens in the world and we feel stress, that stress is the consequence of increases in norepinephrine and epinephrine in our brain and body. Very similar, if not identical, to the kinds of increases that come from deliberate cold exposure. So deliberate cold exposure is an opportunity to deliberately stress our body and yet, because it's deliberate and because we can take certain steps, which I'll describe in a moment, we can learn to maintain mental clarity, we can learn to maintain calm while our body is in a state of stress. And that can be immensely useful when encountering stressors in other parts of life. And that's what we call resilience or grit, our ability or mental toughness, our ability to lean into challenge or to tolerate challenge while keeping our heads straight, so to speak. So one simple protocol for increasing resilience is to pick a temperature that's uncomfortable of shower or cold immersion, and then to get in for a certain duration of time and then to get out. Now, it's important to understand that people will experience different levels of norepinephrine and adrenaline release when getting into cold water. Some people, because they dread the cold so much, will actually experience norepinephrine and epinephrine increases even before they get into the cold water or under the cold shower. Now you may have experienced this. I've certainly experienced this. I'm dreading it, I don't want to do it and I have to force myself to do it. And indeed epinephrine and norepinephrine and its surges can be thought of as sort of walls that we have to confront and go over. And I'd like you to conceptualize them that way, because it allows us to build protocols that can be very objective and can allow us to monitor our progress in terms of building resilience. So one option is to simply say, okay, I'm going to force myself to get into the cold shower for one minute. How cold, again, uncomfortably cold, but you can stay in safely or I'm going to get into the ice bath for one minute. Ice baths are very cold inevitably. And what is also inevitable is that when you get into the cold, you will experience a surge in epinephrine and norepinephrine. That's non-negotiable because it's mediated by cold receptors on the surface of your body and your skin and the way that they trigger the release of norepinephrine and epinephrine, not just from the adrenals, from the adrenal glands above your kidneys, but also from regions of your brain, like the locus coeruleus, which cause increases in the tension and alertness, and from other locations in your body where epinephrine and norepinephrine are released. In other words, cold is a non-negotiable stimulus for increasing epinephrine and norepinephrine. Even if you are the toughest person in the world and you love the cold, that increase in epinephrine and norepinephrine is going to happen. So the way to think about norepinephrine and epinephrine in this context of building mental resilience is that you have two options. You can either try to extend the duration of time that you are in the deliberate cold exposure. So going from one minute to 75 seconds to two minutes and so on over a period of days or one way to approach this and the way that I particularly favor is to take the context of the day and the moment into account, meaning we have different levels of grit and resilience on different days and depending on the landscape of our life at the time, even the time of day that we're doing these protocols and start to be able to sense the release of epinephrine, and norepinephrine in our brain and body and see those as walls that we want to climb over in order to build resilience and to start counting the number of walls that we traverse and the distance between those walls as we do deliberate cold exposure. Let me give you an example of the timed protocol because that one is very straightforward, although I do not think it is as powerful for building mental resilience. The time protocol would be Monday, I do one minute of deliberate cold exposure at a given temperature. Wednesday, I extend that by 50% and Friday, I do deliberate cold exposure for twice as long as I did it on Monday. And if I were to continue that every week, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, I would continue to either increase the duration or I would lower the temperature and reduce the duration, this kind of thing, very much like sets and reps in the gym. Now that option is very objective. You could even log it in a book and as you develop the ability to stay in cold temperatures, even progressively colder and colder temperatures for longer and longer periods of time, you will become more resilient. What do I mean by that? Well, my operational definition of resilience is that you are able to resist escape from the stressor, the cold, by virtue of your willpower, which is really your prefrontal cortex causing top down control on your reflexes and your limbic system and your hypothalamus, which are basically telling you to get out of that cold water, get out of that cold environment and in doing so, you are basically getting better at controlling your behavior when your brain and body are flooded with norepinephrine and epinephrine. That's a very reductionist way to explain resilience or grit or mental toughness, but it's a reductionist way of explaining it that is very closely tied to the biology end of the psychology. And it is a fact that norepinephrine and epinephrine release in the brain and body are the generic universal code for stressor. There is no unique chemical signature for different forms of stressors, that is the only one, although of course there are other chemicals involved as well. So you could go for time and you could try and reduce the temperature and increase the time over a period of days or weeks. Now that's an attractive way to approach things, but the problem is that you don't have an infinite amount of room with which to lower temperature, because eventually you will get into temperatures that are either so cold that they are dangerous or you have to stay in cold temperatures for such long periods that it becomes impractical because presumably you also have to take care of other aspects of your life, you can't just sit all day in the ice bath. Now for that reason, I favor a protocol in which you build mental resilience and mental toughness through two different types of protocols. The first one involves counting walls. Now, what do I mean by walls? I mean the sensation of, no, I don't want to do this and the idea or the sensation in your brain and body that you actually want to leave that environment and go warm up. Now again, for some people, that will be even before getting into the ice bath or cold shower. So if you are feeling very resistant to getting into the ice bath or cold shower and you manage to do that, that's going over what I would call one wall. Then for some period of time, you might actually feel comfortable in the ice bath, cold water or cold shower. And you feel like you could stay there for some period of time, that you could stay there for a minute or two minutes, but inevitably, the next wall will arrive. And I would encourage you to pay attention to when that next wall arrives and actually having an awareness, that so-called interceptive awareness as we call it, of when that next surge adrenaline epinephrine comes or whether or not it reaches a certain threshold in your brain and body that you feel you want to get out and you're able to stay in for even just 10 seconds longer, that means you've traversed yet another wall. And if you continue to stay in that cold environment, you'll find that the next wall will come and the next wall will come. Now eventually of course, you will get very, very numb depending on how cold it is and you could also place yourself into danger. So you have to maintain cognitive control, counting these walls, traversing these walls, but getting out at some point, of course. So my favorite protocol for building mental toughness AKA grit, AKA resilience, is to take into account that some days, just getting into the ice bath or cold shower represents a wall, some days it doesn't. Some days you get in and you feel you could go 10 minutes, other days you get in and you feel like you could only go a minute and setting a designated number of walls before you start the protocol is going to be very beneficial here. So you say, as long as I can do it safely, I'm going to do three walls today. The first wall is getting in. The second wall will arrive when it arrives and the third wall will arrive when it arrives and I'll get over that wall and then I'll get out. The next day, you might do five walls. The next day, you might do three walls again, but you might lower the temperature. This gives you tremendous flexibility and indeed it gives you much more latitude to be able to use the same temperatures in different ways, or to reduce the temperature only a little bit and still get a lot of stimulus, meaning a lot of results out of a given protocol. Whereas people who are just going for temperature and time eventually become cold adapted. They get very, very good at doing three minutes or six minutes or even 10 minutes at a given temperature and so then they feel like they have to lower the temperature even more and even more and eventually they just bought them out. There's nowhere else to go. There's no way to get improvements out of the protocol. At least not in terms of mental resilience. Of course, there's still the positive effects on inflammation and metabolism, et cetera, that we'll talk about in a little bit. But the key thing here is to design protocols that are going to work for you over time and for you very, very hardy, very, very tough guys and gals out there that can get right into an ice bath or a very, very cold immersion and you can just grind it out for six or 10 minutes, or you can even do that by remaining peaceful, well more points to you, but guess what? That's the equivalent of already having loaded up the barbell with 600 pounds and done your 10 reps. There's not a whole lot more variable space with which to get benefits from that stimulus. And in the weight room, people understand that you can adjust, for instance, the speed of the movement, or you can start combining that movement with pre-exhaustion, et cetera. With cold exposure, you don't have as much variable space to play with. So if your goal is to build resilience, either go for time as a function of temperature, or what I suggest is to start recognizing these walls as an experience of resistance in you and going over those walls, set a certain number of walls that you're going to go over on a given day and do that at a given temperature, and then to mix it up. And ideally you might even throw in one more wall at the end, if you're really feeling bold and brave because that's going to build out further resilience. But if you want cold exposure to work for you for sake of building up resilience and mental toughness over time, you're going to want to vary this parameter space in some sort of way. And you don't have to be super systematic about it. That's the beauty of this kind of approach because you're relying on the fact that those walls really represent times in which you are forcing your top down control, your prefrontal cortex to clamp down on your reflex and you're learning behavioral control in the context of your body having elevated levels of these catecholamines, norepinephrine and epinephrine. And that translates to real life in a much more realistic way I believe because in real life, you're not really engaging in stressors for a given amount of time that you know how long it's going to last and you know the context, no. Most stressors arrive in the form of surprises we don't like, text messages that deliver bad news, information about the outside world or real world and online interactions that send our system into a state of increased norepinephrine and epinephrine. And if you start to think of those as walls that you can tolerate and climb over while staying and calm and clear of mind, then you can really imagine how the ice bath and other forms of cold exposure are really serving to train you up for real life stressors. The next question that I always get is what should my mental state be while I'm exposing myself to this uncomfortable, yet safe condition of cold? Well, you have two options and there are probably other options as well. One is to try and calm yourself to remain as mentally still as possible. The other is to lean into that challenge and so to grind it out and here, I have to say that this is a lot like teaching someone to drive on a gravel road. For any of you that have driven on a gravel road, you know that there is no optimal speed for all gravel roads. It depends on the density of the gravel, et cetera, and the vehicle, et cetera. So for instance, on some gravel roads, when you start to drive and the dust starts to kick up, your best option is to drive fast and put that dust cloud behind you. On other gravel roads, if you try and do that, the dust actually kicks up around the vehicle and it makes it hard to see and sometimes you have to slow down. The same thing is true for getting through deliberate cold exposure. Sometimes it's easier to calm yourself. One way to do that is through double inhales through the nose and extended exhales through the mouth, or simply by trying to control your breathing and reduce the pace of your breath and increase the volume of your breathing. I have to say that everyone experiences a shortening of breath when they get into uncomfortably cold water, that is a universal physiological response. Everyone also experiences a 30 to 80% decrease in cognitive function, in particular, the frontal cortex. The metabolism of your frontal cortex goes down, the metabolism meaning the activity of brain areas associated with stress and panic goes way up. And so anchoring your mind in cognitive activities as you get into the cold can be very, very helpful for maintaining clarity of mind. In fact, one thing that I sometimes recommend is that people try and engage in some sort of cognitive exercise while in the cold, not as a form of distraction, but as a way to maintain clarity of thinking and to learn how to do that when the body is flooded with all these chemicals that make us stressed. So for instance, you could do math problems and not two plus two equals four, not three times three equals nine, but things that require a little bit more focus and attention working memory and so forth. You could also start to have thoughts that you deliberately impose a full sentence structure on. That's actually quite tough. You could try and recall specific bouts of information that are challenging. This is teaching your mind how to stay online, or rather I should say, this is you teaching your prefrontal cortex, how to stay engaged while you have high levels of stress in your body. Years ago, I had a friend who works in the neuroscience world, research neuroscientist, who was obsessed with this very bizarre sport that I don't necessarily recommend at all, which is the combination of boxing and chess. You may have seen this on YouTube where people will box around, legitimate boxing around, they're sparring all out often. And then at the end of the round, instead of resting in the corner, they actually sit down and play chess, and then they go back to boxing and back to chess. Again, not a sport that I recommend, but the reason he was obsessed with this is because he studies the impact of stress on cognitive performance. And what that particular very bizarre sport was doing was toggling back and forth between different states of mind. Now it's used both to increase cognitive clarity for the fighter when they box, because staying calm and clear thinking is very important to winning boxing matches. Believe it or not, it's not an all outrage. It's a very calculated game of mental chess and physical chess that's quite high stakes as you can imagine. It's also used in some circles as a way to teach people how to engage in cognitive performance when their body is simply filled to a stress. So in the boxing chess example, the replacement for the cold water is actually the boxing, it's the thing that's supposed to induce the stress cause getting hit is stressful and the risk of getting hit is stressful for most people. So again, if you think about deliberate cold exposure as a way of just systematically and reliably inducing epinephrine and norepinephrine release and delivering stress, well then this idea of maintaining cognitive clarity and actually engaging in cognitive tasks while in the ice bath or cold shower can actually be very beneficial. Even though it might sound a little bit silly, you are really training up your ability to keep your brain working when the reflex is to shut down the parts of your brain that are involved in deliberate planning and thinking. Now another important aspect of deliberate cold exposure that I rarely if ever hear discussed, but is vitally important is whether or not you move around or not. And here's the reason. When you get into cold water and you remain there for some period of time, your body is generating heat and that heat generates what's called a thermal layer that surrounds your entire body. So if you stay still, you are actually warmer than if you move around, you can try this the next time you're doing your deliberate cold exposure. If you're submerged up to the neck, sit there for about 10, 30 seconds and be very, very still of body. In fact, this is the way that most people start to do deliberate cold exposure. They give this very stoic look. They don't blink, they look very peaceful. Some of them even look tough or they make a very even A, emotional face and so it looks like they're really tough, but they are so still that believe it or not, they're not providing the most potent stimulus. If they or you were to move around in that water, what would happen is you'd break up the thermal layer and that you actually experience that as much colder. So if you really want to push the resilience aspect, or for instance, if you want to use a given temperature that you're comfortable in, but that you want to increase the stimulus and you want to get some more benefit for mental resilience training, well then get into the cold water, move your body around continuously, but try and keep your mind still, or even do some sort of cognitive task. So as you're starting to realize, there are a bunch of different variables that you can play with while maintaining the same temperature of water and in doing so, really keep you in the zone of what should and absolutely has to be safe for you without having to just continually drop the temperature from say 60 degrees to 55 to 40 to 33 because as I mentioned before, eventually you're going to bottom out. So if you're one of those people that likes to look tough or really relaxed while you're in the ice bath or cold water immersion, just realize that you're actually cheating yourself out of part of the stimulus. Keep those limbs moving and of course, limbs under the water, feet and hands is going to be a more potent stimulus than hands and feet out for reasons that should be obvious based on what we talked about in terms of glabrous skin cooling. Keep those submerged, move your body, maybe move your knees up and down, pedal your feet and trust me, it's going to feel a lot colder than were you to remain stone still. Another very common question is how often to do deliberate cold exposure. It's tough to make a recommendation on that based on any peer reviewed study although there are a few in humans that point to a threshold of 11 minutes total per week. So that's total throughout the week divided into two or four sessions of two or three minutes or so. Now that 11 minute cutoff is not a strict threshold and is actually geared more towards increases in metabolism, we'll get into this a little bit later in the episode, but I think the 11 minute threshold, meaning 11 minutes total of deliberate cold exposure per week is a pretty good number to use if you need a number in order to keep you consistent. But as we talked about earlier, some of you are going to be in the ice bath or cold immersion or cold shower for one minute, others of you will be in there for 10 minutes, depending on how frequent and how high, if you will, those walls of adrenaline are coming. So for some of you, getting into a cold shower for three minutes total for the whole week will represent a tremendous achievement in terms of willpower and overcoming the resistance to doing that, overcoming those walls. For others of you, three minutes is nothing. So what do I recommend, I recommend that you get at least 11 minutes total per week, but at the point where 11 minutes total per week is very easy for you, where is no longer representing a significant mental challenge, meaning you're not experiencing many of these walls, you're excited to get into the cold shower immersion, you're going through it easily, you're cruising basically. Then I would say either lower the temperature safely, of course, extend the duration safely, of course, or increase the frequency so that you're doing this perhaps every day or maybe five days a week or three days a week. I personally get tremendous benefit from doing deliberate cold exposure three times a week and using the walls method that I described earlier as my gauge for how long to stay in and typically that means that I'm staying in for anywhere from two minutes to six minutes per session and that averages out to about 11 to 15 minutes total per week. So again, I do not think that you need to be super strict about these guidelines. It's most important when embracing a protocol A, that you do it safely, but secondarily that you do it consistently. So find what you can do consistently and then vary the parameters that will allow you to continue to do deliberate cold exposure consistently, regardless of whether or not you have access to a shower or cold immersion, et cetera. So we've been talking about mental effects and the use of deliberate cold exposure for sake of building resilience, which I do believe can be tremendously powerful. Look, it's no coincidence that the screening and the training for Navy Seals involves a lot of exposure to cold water. One could argue that it is deliberate because they elect to go to buds, but when they get into the cold water at buds is dictated by the instructors and the reason they use cold water exposure as the stressor is that it does offer considerable leeway in terms of duration and temperature, in terms of how you can use it as a stressor whereas things like heat don't offer much variable space as we say. There isn't a lot of room beyond which you start injuring or even killing people by using heat. So there are a lot of forms of stressors out there, but cold is one that we can titrate, that we can adjust in ways that can allow us to continually build up and or maintain mental toughness. Now, deliberate cold exposure also has many effects on chemicals other than norepinephrine and epinephrine, most notably the neuromodulator dopamine, which is involved in elevating our mood, making us feel energized and enhancing our ability to focus. And that has a lot to do with how dopamine engages us in motivated states, tends to narrow our thinking in our behavior into a particular trench of goal-directed behavior. If you want to learn more about dopamine, you can learn a lot about dopamine in our episode about dopamine, it's at hubermanlab.com. You can find it, it's a two and a half hour plus kind of deep dive into all things dopamine, focus, motivation, et cetera. Deliberate cold exposure has a very powerful effect on the release of dopamine in our brain and body. And this is one of the main reasons why people continue to do deliberate cold exposure. Basically it makes us feel good and it continues to make us feel good even after we get out of the cold environment. In fact, some people would say they don't feel good in the cold environment, it's all stress for them, but afterwards they feel great. One of our previous guests, Dr. Anna Lembke, who's a medical doctor at Stanford University School of Medicine, she's a close colleague of mine, described the use dopamine in her book, Dopamine Nation, an incredible book about addiction and dopamine I should mention. And the use of dopamine elicited by cold water exposure by one of her patients. What I'm referring to is the fact that one of her patients helped themselves get and stay sober off drugs by using deliberate cold exposure to increase dopamine. So a healthier form of dopamine release than they were engaged in prior to getting sober. Now, the basis for dopamine release in response to cold exposure is that the catecholamines, norepinephrine, epinephrine and dopamine tend to be co-released by the same sorts of stimuli, but most stressors and in particular things that evoke stress or our feelings of stress internally that we don't like do not increase dopamine. They only increase norepinephrine and epinephrine, but deliberate cold exposure seems to cause a dramatic increase in dopamine. And this has actually been substantiated in a really beautiful study entitled human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures. The first author is Sramek. I'm almost certainly pronouncing that poorly and if not incorrectly, S-R-A-M-E-K. This was published in the European Journal of Applied Physiology in the year 2000, really a beautiful study, I love this study. They took people and they had them sit in chairs underwater but their head was out and so they were immersed up to the neck in either of three different temperatures. 32 degrees Celsius, which is 89 degrees Fahrenheit, 20 degrees Celsius, which is 68 degrees Fahrenheit, or 14 degrees Celsius, which is 57.2 degrees Fahrenheit. So not super cold, but then what they did is they measured people's core body temperature throughout. They measured their metabolism and they looked at serum levels of things like norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and cortisol, serum meaning within the blood. So a really nice and quite thorough study. There were not a huge number of subjects in the study, but nonetheless, it was a very thorough study in terms of the number of variables that they explored. So I just want to briefly highlight some of what they saw or what they observed in this study. First of all, all the groups were in the water of a given temperature for one hour, which is much longer than most of the deliberate cold exposure protocols that anyone is using at home. I mean, maybe you're taking one hour long cold showers, maybe you're getting into the ice bath for an hour although I don't recommend that. I think you'd probably get badly hypothermic or maybe you're getting into a cold water immersion for some period of time, but I have a hard time imagining that it would be an hour and I don't suggest that if it's very cold. So this study focused on actually somewhat moderately cool temperatures, not what I think most people would consider very, very cold temperatures, but extended the duration for quite a while. So again, 32 degree Celsius, 20 degree Celsius or 14 degree Celsius. Here's what they observed. The group that was immersed up to the neck in 32 degrees Celsius, that is 89 degrees Fahrenheit, water did not experience a shift in metabolism nor a significant increase in dopamine, norepinephrine or these other catecholamines. The group that was in 20 degree Celsius, meaning 68 degree Fahrenheit, water for an hour experienced a 93% increase in metabolic rate, which is remarkable given that the water wasn't that cold and yet an hour is a pretty long time to be in there. And again, it speaks to the dramatic effect of heat transfer that water has, which I mentioned earlier, as opposed to being out in the air at 68 degrees, it would certainly not cause that increase in metabolic rate. The group that was at 14 degrees Celsius, meaning 57.2 degrees Fahrenheit, water for an hour experienced a 350% increase in metabolism. So huge increases in metabolism. Now the most interesting data to me, at least in terms of mental effects of deliberate cold exposure, were that the plasma or serum levels of norepinephrine in the blood increased 530%. These are huge increases in norepinephrine so it suggests that this is a stressful stimulus at least neurochemically speaking, stressful, despite the fact that it's not super super cold, although 57.2 degrees Fahrenheit, 14 degrees Celsius it's not a warm environment, but it's not a ultra, ultra cold environment, but an hour is a very long time to be in there. The subjects also experienced a 250% increase in dopamine concentrations, which while not 530% as it was with norepinephrine is still a very large increase in baseline levels of dopamine. And what was interesting is that those increases in dopamine persisted for a very long period of time afterwards, even out to two hours. And they stopped the study after 120 minutes of getting out of the cold, but nonetheless, these increases in norepinephrine are huge and long lasting and these increases in dopamine are very large and long lasting. And I do believe that these documented effects in humans explain much of the enhancement of attention and of feelings of wellbeing and mood that people typically experience after doing deliberate cold exposure. And the reason I say that is that if you were to go back to the episode that I did on dopamine, or you were to go back to the episode that I did with Dr. Anna Lembke on addiction and dopamine, what you would find is that increases in dopamine of the sort evoked by deliberate cold exposure are actually very similar to the kinds of increases in dopamine that are elicited by things like nicotine or from other behaviors that are known to be addictive and bad for us because they lead to other effects on the brain and body that we simply don't want. And yet deliberate cold exposure provided is done safely can create similar if not greater increases in dopamine that are not just fleeting, that don't just occur during, say the consumption of some deleterious drug or activity, but that are very long lasting and that can be leveraged toward activities other than deliberate cold exposure. So I want to emphasize this. I'm not suggesting that people do deliberate cold exposure for an hour a day. And unfortunately there are not many studies yet exploring how shorter colder temperature environment exposure, say one minute or three minutes or six minutes at 55 degrees or at 50 degrees, whether or not that leads to similar, greater or reduced levels of dopamine in the brain and body. And yet almost everybody who does deliberate cold exposure will say yeah, it was stressful. I didn't enjoy it, or I eventually grew to like it, but that I always feel better afterwards and then that feeling last a very long period of time. And I think it's almost certain that those experiences that people report relate to these increases in dopamine and in concert with the increases in norepinephrine also explain the other effect that's commonly reported, which is an enhancement in mental acuity and the ability to focus. Now, here we can extrapolate to the study that I discussed at the early part of the episode, where I was talking about the use of short 15 minute exercise, kind of moderate intensity exercise and how that was shown to increase levels of energy and mental acuity in these working memory, visual attention tasks. And there, again, we have to assume somewhat because they weren't doing neurochemical measurements, but we can reasonably assume that those improvements in cognitive performance were due at least in part to the increase in catecholamines known to a company, moderate intensity zone two cardio. So what you're starting to see here is a theme. The theme is that virtually any stimulus that delivers more norepinephrine, epinephrine and dopamine to our system will sharpen our mental acuity and elevate our mood and will do so for some period of time. Deliberate cold exposure, it turns out, is a very potent way to increase these catecholamines, this category of chemicals and thereby to improve mood, mental acuity and levels of alertness. And as we'll next see, it not only has that effect, which can be very beneficial for many people in a bunch of different circumstances, but it also has the positive effects that many people seek in terms of metabolism, in lowering inflammation in the body and other physiological effects as well. And forgive me, I was almost ready to move on to effects of deliberate cold exposure on metabolism and inflammation and so forth, but I neglected to point out one of the other very interesting aspects of the study showing deliberate cold exposure can increase in norepinephrine and dopamine, which is that they observed no significant increases in the stress hormone cortisol and that is both surprising, interesting, and important because what it means is that the quality of stress that deliberate cold exposure is creating in the body is likely to be one of what we call use stress. Hans Selye, the great physiologist, won a Nobel Prize for distinguishing between distress, which is stress in the brain and body that causes the release of things like cortisol along with the other catecholamines, and that we experience as negative happening to us and can lead to negative health outcomes. And he distinguished that from eustress, which was stress that we now understand is associated with increases in things like norepinephrine and dopamine, but no increases or minimal increases in cortisol, and that can lead to positive health outcomes. So it appears that deliberate cold exposure can create what we call or what Hans Selye called eustress. In other words, it can create a condition in the brain and body in which we are stressing ourselves, we are training up resilience, and yet we are creating a neurochemical milieu that actually has many health benefits. Now I'd like to shift our attention to the effects of deliberate cold exposure on metabolism. And I'd like to start by detailing a study that was performed on humans and published just at the end of last year. The title of the study is altered brown fat thermoregulation, and enhanced cold induced thermogenesis in young, healthy winter swimming men. And I should point out that while the study was only performed on male subjects, there's no reason to think that the effects that they discovered would only pertain to men. I would hope that they would also do a study on women at some point in the future, but the effects that they describe are very basic core physiological processes. What they did is they looked at at deliberate cold exposure in this group of young men, and they used that 11 minute threshold per week. So in other words, they had them get into cold water for approximately 11 minutes per week. And again, that's 11 minutes total per week. They divided that into two sessions although in speaking with the first author of this study, Dr. Susanna Søberg, I learned that it probably is not important that it be two sessions, it could be three or even four sessions, as long as it reaches that 11 minute threshold. What they discovered was that by going into these cold environments, in this case cold water immersion up to the neck, for 11 minutes total per week, that these men experienced increases in so-called brown fat thermogenesis, I'll talk more about what that is in a moment, and increases in core body temperature that translate to increases in core body metabolism. Now, the overall increases in core body metabolism that they experienced were not extremely large. They were statistically significant, but they weren't extremely large. However, the changes in brown fat stores are perhaps what's most interesting about this study and I'll tell you why. The metabolic increases of deliberate cold exposure are both acute meaning happening in the short term. When you get into the cold and immediately after, one does experience an increase in core metabolism, you burn some calories, in other words, and while those might not be very significant increases, or I should say they can be statistically significant, but they are not enormously large numbers of calories burned, the longer lasting effects of deliberate cold exposure on metabolism seem to take place by changes that occur in the types of fat that we store in our body and the way that that fat impacts our metabolism at other times throughout the 24 hour cycle. This actually has a somewhat anecdotal basis, in particular in Scandinavia. I don't speak Swedish nor I speak Danish, nor do I speak Norwegian, but I do have Danish relatives and they were able to help me decipher a common Swedish saying, which essentially translates to the fact that in preparation for the summer, they say, one should expose themselves to warm environments so that one is comfortable in warm environments in the summer. That's one half of this traditional Swedish and also Danish saying. The other half of this traditional Danish-Swedish saying is that in preparation for winter, in order to not feel too cold in cold environments, one should prepare for those in the fall by not wearing a jacket and exposing one's self to cold environments. Now, of course, this is just anecdotal cultural lore, but it actually has a physiological basis, which is by exposing oneself to cold environments on a repeated basis in anticipation of exposure to more extreme cold environments, one can feel more comfortable in those extreme cold environments. And that's exactly what they observed in this study by Søberg et al. The men felt more comfortable in extreme cold if they had trained through deliberate cold exposure, which might not seem surprising at all, but based on what we talked about earlier, whereby deliberate cold exposure evokes this discomfort and this experience of norepinephrine release, at least in the short term, then you would say, well, shouldn't that deliberate cold exposure also make them feel uncomfortable like they really want to get out? Well, that is true in the beginning of a deliberate cold exposure protocol, meaning in the first week or in the second week or the third week, but what one finds and what you will find if you do deliberate cold exposure consistently is that you will then become more comfortable at cold temperatures away from the deliberate cold exposure. So whereas you might have previously been the person who is always cold in the room with air conditioning, or always seeking a sweater, always wanting to bundle up, you will be more comfortable in those cold environments. And the reason for that is well substantiated from this study and from animal studies whereby deliberate cold exposure converts one particular kind of fat cell, the white fat cell, which is a very low metabolic output cell. It's basically a storage site for energy in the body fat cells to a different type of fat cell, which is the beige fat cell called beige because it's actually beige or slightly brown under the microscope, or even to brown fat cells, which are very dark under the microscope and dark because they contain mitochondria and are very metabolically and thermogenetically active. In other words, white fat doesn't burn many calories. It's basically a storage site. It's a bank account for energy. It's filled with lipids, and those lipids can be used if the body needs energy and if it goes into a caloric deficit. Beige fat and brown fat acts as sort of a furnace or the sort of fat that you would find in a kindle, a fuel that can increase core body temperature. So beige fat and brown fat is very good at raising our metabolism and helps burn white fat. Now of course, it does that only in the context of a caloric deficit, but it can actually help create that caloric deficit. Having more beige fat and brown fat can increase your overall core metabolism, in other words, the number of calories that you burn per day, and therefore the number of calories that you need to either maintain or to lose weight. The simple translation of this is that getting into cold water for a total of 11 minutes, perhaps more, but at least 11 minutes per week divided into two or four sessions can increase your core metabolism in part by increasing your beige and brown fat stores. And we know how that works at least in animal models and there's now reason to suspect that the exact same mechanisms are occurring in humans. The primary way in which deliberate cold exposure converts white fat cells into these more metabolically thermogenetically active metabolism increasing beige and brown fat cells is because norepinephrine released when we get into the cold binds to receptors on the surface of white fat cells and activates downstream pathways such as UCP1, so this is an uncoupling protein one, that acts on the mitochondrial metabolism of cells and increases the mitochondrial output of those cells and the mitochondrial density of those cells. In other words, it takes a cell that has a kind of a weak engine or no engine for generating energy. Although every cell has some mitochondria, it takes cells that have very few mitochondria and increases the engine size. It kind of stokes the furnace of those particular cells and actually can change gene expression in those cells. So that's what's really interesting. Deliberate cold exposure causes increases in norepinephrine. which bind to receptors on the surfaces of white fat cells, which triggers the release of things like UCP1. It also causes the release of things like P-part gamma, and co-factor PGC1. I'm going to refer you to a review if you want to learn more about these. For those of you that don't want to learn more, all you need to know is that the downstream of all that are increases in mitochondria and metabolism and actual genetic changes in the white fat cells that convert them into beige and brown fat cells. This is especially important for adults because babies and young children actually don't have the ability to shiver or they have a less robust capacity to shiver. Very small babies really can't shiver so they have a lot of brown fat in order to keep them warm. Young children eventually develop the ability to shiver and maintain these brown fat stores, mainly around the clavicles, the heart, the upper spine, and in the upper back. And it's no coincidence that kids can often run around with a minimal of clothing and be comfortable in environments that adults would be cold in. As life goes on, we tend to lose beige and brown fat, but this mechanism that I'm referring to points to the plasticity of white fat, meaning the ability for white fat to actually convert its identity into this metabolically thermogenetically enhancing form of beige and brown fat. So deliberate cold exposure is a terrific way to increase your core metabolism and oftentimes critics will say, well, the increase in metabolism isn't that significant although I do want to point out again, the 93% and 350% increases in metabolism from that previous study. But critics then will say, well, that doesn't really translate to that big of a caloric burn during the deliberate cold exposure. But to that, you should say, ah, but that's only limiting your optics to just a portion of the effects of deliberate cold exposure because deliberate cold exposure can also convert white fat to beige fat and brown fat and lead to these more lasting increases in metabolism. So for any of you interested in increasing your metabolism and or being comfortable in cold environments and or being comfortable in terms of being able to combat stress mentally, deliberate cold exposure, I do believe is a powerful tool. And there is simply no reason why you couldn't and shouldn't use the same protocols that I described earlier for building resilience to increase metabolism. Provided you're hitting that 11 minute per week threshold, you ought to be stimulating both mechanism increases in resilience and increases in core metabolism. As I mentioned earlier, most of the detailed studies on the conversion of white fat to beige fat and brown fat through the use of cold have been done in animal models, but the human data are starting to emerge. And if you'd like to do the deep dive into these mechanisms, things like UCP1, P-part gamma, et cetera, there's a beautiful review that was published recently in the journal cell, which is one of the three apex journals, nature, science, cell. And the title of that paper is adipose tissue plasticity in health and disease. I love this review. It has beautiful diagrams detailing all of the pathways from cold to norepinephrine through UCP1 downstream of things like cyclic AMP. If none of those names mean anything to you, don't worry about it. You certainly don't need to know these mechanisms to benefit from deliberate cold exposure protocols. If those names do mean something to you, or you are interested in exploring the downstream effects of deliberate cold exposure and something else that's really nice that's covered in this paper is how deliberate cold exposure interacts with fasted states and fed states. I think you'll also find this review very interesting. I don't want to go too deeply into fasted states and fed states right now, suffice to say that when we are fasted, meaning when we have an eaten for some period of time, our baseline levels of norepinephrine and epinephrine are already elevated. And so cold exposure at those times ought to have an even greater effect on metabolism and resilience and so on. So for you fasters or your intermittent fasters out there, if you really want to get fancy, you can do your deliberate cold exposure when you are fasted. I certainly wouldn't recommend doing it with a very full stomach in any case. And as I mentioned before on this podcast, intermittent fasting is, but one way, and certainly there are other ways to limit total caloric intake for sake of maintaining or losing weight if that's your goal. I know many people are using and benefit from intermittent fasting, however, and so it certainly can be combined with deliberate cold exposures in order to get even greater increases in norepinephrine and epinephrine. So for those of you that are primarily interested in using deliberate cold exposure to increase dopamine levels in your brain and body, you can also do a combined protocol whereby you ingest caffeine 60 to 120 minutes before the deliberate cold exposure. This is based on a study that I've talked about before entitled caffeine increases striatal dopamine D-2, D-3 receptor availability in the human brain. And as the title suggests, this study was done on humans, looking at the density and or efficacy of these dopamine receptors in an area of the brain called the striatum, which is involved in planning in action and also suppressing planning in action. It's involved very closely with whether or not we can engage in behavior and withhold behavior, the so-called go and no go ways in the brain. Dopamine plays a critical role in that and many other things as well as you now know. So why would you want to ingest caffeine 60 to 120 minutes before deliberate cold exposure? Well, as I talked about earlier, dopamine can increase quite substantially in response to deliberate cold exposure, but dopamine on its own doesn't do anything, it has to bind to receptors and this paper shows quite definitively that ingesting caffeine in this case, it was 300 milligram dose of caffeine, which is about the dose of caffeine in two or three cups of coffee, it depends on the strength of the coffee, of course, but it's not an outrageous amount of caffeine, that increases the density and or efficacy of these receptors, which you would allow that dopamine to have its greatest effect. And for those of you that want to get really, really fancy, I suppose you could do this fasted so you get the further increase in norepinephrine, then you get the dopamine increase from the cold exposure, the binding of the dopamine. Although I do want to point out that at some point, you start layering together enough protocols that you would to be spending your entire day trying to get this dopamine pulse and I would hope that you would have other activities that you would engage in, but if you're getting up in the morning and you're fasted because you haven't eaten all night and you have a cup of coffee, and then 60 minutes later, you take your cold shower or two hours later, you do your cold immersion or your cold shower, you would be layering together these different mechanisms of dopamine receptors, epinephrine and so forth in a way that at least to me, doesn't seem incompatible with having some other life like going to school and having relationships, et cetera. And this increase in dopamine, particularly in the striatum is not a trivial one. I do want to point out as the authors do that preclinical studies have shown that increases in striatal dopamine induced by things like modafinil, which is used to treat ADHD and treat narcolepsy, is necessary for their wake promoting actions. What this really says is that just having elevated levels of dopamine from a drug or from an ice bath, or what have you is not sufficient to get the effects of dopamine, you really need the receptors to be available and you need those receptors to be available in the appropriate density and you need those receptors to be available in the appropriate density in the striatum in particular. So I think there are a number of reasons why if it's compatible with the other aspects of your health, cause of course always you have to consider this on a background of cardiovascular health and blood pressure, et cetera, that ingesting a cup or two of coffee an hour before your ice bath may be fasted as well could be quite beneficial for increasing dopamine over quite extended periods of time. A couple of key points that you'll want to pay attention to in thinking about deliberate cold exposure and metabolism. In the Søberg study, they also explored the use of sauna and how to use sauna, meaning deliberate heat in conjunction with cold. We are going to do an entire episode about the use of heat for health and performance. So that is not the focus now, however, it does raise an important point that we do need to address at this moment, which is if you are using sauna or if you are taking warm showers or if you are simply using deliberate cold exposure of any kind, should you get into the heat afterward or before or not at all? And this is where we can point to the so-called Søberg principle, at least I call it the Søberg principle, the Søberg principle named after first author of this study, I referred to earlier, Dr. Susanna Søberg. In science, it is appropriate to take a key piece of data and call it a principle if in fact it translates to something larger, which I believe it does. It is generally not appropriate for people to name a principle after themselves although there are a few scientists that have done that. So I have named it the Søberg principle, but I did that to give it appropriate credit to Dr. Susanna Søberg, who discovered that and pointed out quite appropriately, that to achieve the greatest increases in metabolism through deliberate cold exposure, you want to force yourself to reheat on your own after the deliberate cold exposure, meaning you wouldn't want to go from the cold shower to a hot shower or from the cold shower to a sauna. Rather if you were going to start with a hot shower or you're going to start with a sauna that you would end with the cold, and then you would reheat naturally. Now I personally take a cold shower a few times a week or do cold immersion and because I'm not specifically focused on increasing metabolism, although I probably should be, that's not what I'm using it for now, I will take a hot shower afterwards and in doing so, I'm short circuiting some of the further metabolic increases that I would achieve were I to just end with the cold. So the Søberg principle is if you want to increase your metabolism, end with cold, and we can take this a step further and say that if you want to use deliberate cold exposure to increase metabolism, that you should make sure that you get to the point where you shiver. And the reason in for this is that there are a series of studies, but in particular, one study published in the journal Nature, excellent journal in the year 2018, showing that deliberate cold exposure that evokes shivering from the muscles causes the release of a molecule called succinate from the muscles and that succinate plays a key role in activating brown fat thermogenesis, which you now have heard about and understand as critical to the increases in metabolism caused by deliberate cold exposure. So what this means is if you want to increase your metabolism, end on cold, that's a Søberg principle and as best you can, try and get to the point where you are shivering either when you are in the cold exposure or immediately afterwards. Now one efficient way to do this is to, for instance, you could get into the cold shower for a minute or two minutes or three minutes, uncomfortably cold, but safe to stay in. Remember that's our general rule of thumb. Then turn off the water and stand there, make sure that you're not holding yourself close to your body, you're not hugging yourself to try and keep yourself warm, but rather your limbs are extended at your sides. And then if that fails to induce shiver than to turn on the cold water again, and then turn it off again, so alternating perhaps a minute to three minutes of cold exposure followed by a minute to three minutes of drying out in air and going back into the cold exposure, et cetera. I can tell you this from experience, this is a pretty brutal protocol. If you have never tried getting into an ice bath or cold water immersion or shower for one minute and then getting out and trying to stand there with your arms extended in cool or cold air for one minute, and then getting back into the cold shower or water immersion, you are in for an experience because even for those of you that are pretty shiver resistant, you'll find that it is much, much harder to get out of that cold water and stand there arms extended and drying off by evaporation, which further draws heat from the body than it is to wrap yourself in a towel, get in a warm shower or a sauna. So there's certainly no requirement to end on cold. There's certainly no requirement to induce shiver, but if your primary goal is to induce increases in metabolism, both in the short term and in the long term, following the cold exposure, well then you'll want to end on cold and you'll want to find a way to shiver provided that the level of cold that you're exposing yourself to is still safe for you overall. So up until now, I've been talking about deliberate cold exposure as a potent stimulus for the release of norepinephrine in the brain and body and indeed it is, but the way I've been describing it has been in the context of circulating plasma levels of norepinephrine, meaning circulating within the blood. What I haven't mentioned, but is absolutely true is that the fat cells themselves actually receive input from neurons. So there are neurons that release norepinephrine in response to cold, directly into the fat. So I want to give you this picture of how the architecture of all this works, because I think it can help you navigate and indeed build better deliberate cold exposure protocols. Your adrenal glands release norepinephrine and epinephrine. Your brain has sites within it like the locus coeruleus that release norepinephrine and epinephrine, but there are also neurons within your skin that sense cold and other neurons that can directly release norepinephrine into the fat stores and cause those white fat cells to convert to beige and brown fat. And I think this particular aspect of our physiology is often overlooked in studies. And when people say, oh, well the increases in metabolism aren't that great, the circulating levels of norepinephrine, those are very large, but they're very transient and so on, that fails to understand that neurons that actually sense cold are in a position to communicate via other neurons directly to the fat cells and release norepinephrine into those fat cells, which as I pointed out earlier, set off a huge set of immediate and long term cascades of even gene expression changes. So the picture that I'd like you to have in your mind is that when you get into the cold, yes, of course you experience that as a experience of I don't want to do this, I'm going to overcome this, I'm going to climb over these mental walls that represent adrenaline release in my brain and body, but also that your fat cells are receiving signals, norepinephrine signals that are changing those fat cells and the way that they metabolize energy. Now I'd like to shift our attention to the use of deliberate cold exposure for sake of physical performance. And there are a lot of opinions out there about the use of deliberate cold, whether or not it should be done for instance, before or after exercise, whether or not if done immediately after strength training or hypertrophy training, meaning training designed to grow muscles or make them stronger, whether or not it can inhibit that process and so on and so forth. I think today in looking over the literature and trying to bring forward the simplest and most straightforward, and yet scientifically grounded protocols, we can set up some general guidelines that will allow most, if not, all of you to still extract the benefits of deliberate cold exposure on physical performance without getting too neurotic about the exact timing, but for sake of discussion and because it's a prominent theme in many online communities, let's just start with the big one out there, meaning the question of whether or not doing an ice bath or doing deliberate cold exposure or taking a cold shower after strength slash hypertrophy training, meaning training designed to increase strength and or I should say the size of muscles will somehow short circuit or diminish that process, whether or not it will reduce or eliminate those strength gains and hypertrophy gains. And the short answer that I was able to arrive at on the basis of a review article that I'll talk about in a moment and some other studies as well, is that if your main goal is hypertrophy and strength, it is probably best to avoid cold water immersion and ice bath immersion in the four hours immediately following that strength and or hypertrophy training. Again, if your main goal is to achieve hypertrophy or strength or some combination of those, probably best to avoid cold water immersion up to the neck or ice bath immersion up to the neck immediately after strength and hypertrophy training and extending out to about four hours after that training. If you're really neurotic about this, then perhaps you'd want to move the cold water exposure to a different day entirely, but it all depends on how neurotically attached you are to getting every last bit of strength and hypertrophy. And if that's your goal, terrific, well then probably moving the cold exposure four hours or more away from that training is going to be necessary for you. Now you'll notice I did not talk about cold showers and the reason I did not talk about cold showers is that there simply are not very many studies of deliberate cold exposure through cold showers for the reasons I talked about at the beginning of the episode. It's hard for me to imagine that taking a brief cold shower after a strength or hypertrophy training session would completely reverse or short circuit the effects of that strength and hypertrophy training. But again, if you're neurotically attached to getting every last bit of strength and hypertrophy out of your training sessions, then by all means, err on the side of caution and wait four hours or more to do your cold shower just as you would wait four hours or more to do your cold water immersion. Now there are nice data pointing to the fact that doing cold water immersion after a hard run, so endurance training, or even sprint and interval training or after a weight workout where your main focus is on performance of those movements or after a skill training workout where your main focus on performance of those movements, that there's no reason to think that that cold water immersion or ice bath or cold shower would inhibit the progress or the stimulus that would lead to progress that occurred during that training session. In other words, I don't see any reason based on the literature to avoid deliberate cold exposure immediately after training, again unless your goal is hypertrophy and strength. And in fact, there's a very nice review recently published on deliberate cold exposure and how it can impact physical performance, whether or not it's done before or after, different types of training and so forth. The paper is entitled impact of cold water immersion compared with passive recovery, following a single about of strenuous exercise on athletic performance in physically active participants, a systematic review with meta-analysis and meta regression. So this is a meta-analysis of 52 studies that looked at a tremendous number of variables and contexts, as you would expect in a meta-analysis of 52 studies. I'm going to read you the conclusions of the study and I will provide a link. We certainly don't have the time to go through all the details of the study. I will highlight a few specific outcomes that I found particularly interesting, but here I am paraphrasing their conclusions, that cold water immersion, I want to emphasize immersion, not cold showers, but cold water immersion they say was an effective recovery tool after high intensity exercise. They observed positive outcomes, meaning improvements in certain variables, for muscular power, muscular soreness, meaning reduced muscular soreness, increased muscular power, perceived recovery after 24 hours of exercise. However, there were certain forms of exercise that were not benefited by cold water immersion, such as eccentric exercise, exercise focusing only on the lowering component or the so-called eccentric component of resistance exercise. They saw some very entry dose response relationships for things like endurance training, meaning the longer the cold exposure post-endurance training, the more improvement in endurance performance, reductions in circulating creatine kinases and things that relate to muscle damage under certain conditions. At some point in the future, by the way, we'll do an entire episode on creatine and creatine kinase, which are important not just for muscular function, but also for brain function. But the basic takeaway was that cold water immersion performed after high intensity exercise was beneficial from a number of different standpoints and indicated that shorter duration, cold exposure and lower temperatures can improve the efficacy of cold water exposure if used after high intensity exercise. There I'm directly pulling from their conclusions. So what this says is that it's not just those longer duration, 30, 45 minute and 60 minute protocols of cold water immersion that we discussed earlier, but also shorter duration of one minute, three minute, five minute exposures to lower temperatures. Temperatures that would make you psychologically want to get out as soon as you possibly can, but again that you can safely stay in done after training really have been shown to improve outcomes in terms of reducing soreness and improving training efficacy, meaning your ability to get back into training more quickly and thereby deliver more training stimuli to a given muscle or in your endurance training protocol. Translate to English, what this means is that taking a cold shower or getting into an ice bath or some other form of cold water immersion within the immediate minutes or even the immediate hours following your training has been shown to be beneficial. I'm sure a number of you have questions for instance, how long should you be in that cold exposure? Is it the same as the 11 minute threshold described earlier? To be honest with you, there are not enough studies to really point to the critical threshold for eliminating or reducing delayed onset muscle soreness or for getting maximal results from power and endurance training, but this study does make a couple of key points and here I will just paraphrase. For instance, that cold water immersion is more likely to positively influence muscular power performance, to reduce muscle soreness, to reduce serum creatine kinase, and to improve perceived recovery after high intensity exercise, as compared with passive recovery. This can be translated to cold water exposure after training is beneficial and probably better than passive recovery from a number of standpoints. In addition, they say that dose response relationships meaning the amount and the degree of cold that people were exposed to and how often they did that in particular in lower temperature cold immersion. So these would be the sorts of cold immersion protocols that are one minute or two minutes, three minutes, maybe five minutes, but that one couldn't stay in there longer because it feels stressful and one wants to get out. Maybe more effective after high intensity exercise for removal of serum creatine kinase as well that these shorter duration cold water immersion approaches may be more effective after high intensity endurance performance as well. So all of this can be translated to say that unless your main goal is hypertrophy and strength, that cold exposure, ideally cold immersion and cold water ice bath, but if you don't have access to that, then cold showers is likely going to be beneficial if done immediately after or in the minutes or hours after your training, especially high intensity training. One particularly nice thing about this meta-analysis is that it included some studies that involve the use of cooling packs. So again, vests that can essentially ice packs and indeed even cryotherapy chambers and so on. There's a nice table in the study if you want to get really detailed and go and look specifically at those studies, I invite you to do that. We'll put a link to this study in the caption for this episode, but all in all, what this study shows is that deliberate cold exposure can be very useful for recovery likely through reductions in inflammation, in muscle and connective tissue. And while this study did not look specifically at the mechanisms of reduced inflammation caused by deliberate cold exposure, those mechanisms are somewhat known. There are a number of studies that have pointed to the fact that deliberate cold and cold generally can reduce inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, interleukin six. It can increase anti-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 10 and so on. Without getting into all those details, I think it's sufficient to say that if you are somebody who experiences a lot of delayed onset muscle soreness, taking a cold shower after your training or getting into a cold immersion after your training, even if it's a few hours later ought to help. And if you are doing particularly intense training, then you probably want to ratchet up the number of cold exposure sessions that you're doing even if those have to be done on separate days from your training, because a lot of the inflammatory effects of training, endurance and strength training are actually occurring some hours away from the training stimulus. So it's not just that inflammation goes up radically during training, which it often can, but that it can occur even in the days and even weeks afterwards, depending how intense and how long duration that training is. So deliberate cold exposure is very powerful as an anti-inflammatory tool. Now I'd like to emphasize the topic that we touched on at the beginning of the episode, which are those glabrous skin surfaces, the hands, the upper face, and the bottoms of the feet through which heat is especially good at leaving the body. And another way of putting that is that one can cool the body much more efficiently through the glabrous skin surfaces. Now, if you want to understand all of the science behind this and all of the various applications, I invite you to please listen to the episode that I did with Dr. Craig Heller, again, in the biology department at Stanford. For sake of this episode, I'm just going to detail a couple of findings from his laboratory. The first one, dealing with exercise induced hyperthermia, because I think this is very interesting and it can even save lives if you understand the way this works. There's a particular paper that focuses on this, and we will put a link to this as well. The title of this paper is novel application of chemical cold packs for treatment of exercise induced hyperthermia, a randomized control trial. This is a pretty brutal study, brutal for the subjects that is. This study involved was having subjects walk on a treadmill at a pretty significant incline and anywhere from nine to 17% wearing a substantial amount of clothing that was not well ventilated and the room was kept to 40 degrees Celsius, which is 104 degrees Fahrenheit. This is definitely not something to do at home. This study was designed to induce hyperthermia, which as I mentioned earlier, can be quite dangerous. And they compared two types of cooling. In the first form of cooling that they call traditional cooling, they had ice packs on their neck, in their armpits and in their groin. And in the other group, there was the so-called glabrous skin cooling. So the palms, the soles of the feet, which were actually so they were cooling inside the boots or inside of gloves and on the upper portion of the face. And the basic takeaway of this study is that by cooling the glabrous skin, the subjects were able to sustain this walking on these inclined treadmills for much longer than were the people who received traditional cooling. And also the return to baseline temperature was much faster in the glabrous skin cooling group. So how this translates to the real world is that if ever you are hyperthermic or someone else's hyperthermic, one way to cool them down quickly is to cool these palmer glabrous, soles of the feet glabrous and upper portion of the face glabrous portions of the body using cool rags, using ice packs or using any number of different cold objects or temperatures. One key thing, if you're going to use glabrous skin cooling, is that whatever you use to cool those surfaces cannot be so cold that it causes vasoconstriction. Because as I mentioned earlier, the arterio-venous anastomoses these portals of arteries directly to veins that exist only in these glabrous skin surfaces, the way that they're able to cool the body and essentially pass cool into the body although that's not really what they're doing, they're actually extracting heat from the body to be technical, they're extracting heat from the body, the only way they can do that is if those veins don't collapse and veins will collapse if they are made very, very cold. So if you want to use glabrous skin cooling to offset hyperthermia or for the other forms of performance, which we'll talk about in a moment, you need to use a cool object or surface that is not so cold that it causes vasoconstriction. And this can be a little bit tough to dial in, meaning it can be tough to identify such an object. And for that reason, Dr. Heller and some of his colleagues have developed a commercial product called the CoolMitt. You can actually go to their website, coolmitt.com. I don't have any financial or other relationship to them. I know they've been developing this technology for some period of time. It involves a glove that you put your hand into, it circulates water of a given temperature and it does so, and does so at a tempera or that is sure to not cause vasoconstriction of the palm. And you may be asking, how can you just put your hand into one glove and have this work? Well, that's how powerful these glabrous skin surfaces are. Even just by cooling one palm, the core body temperature drops radically. Now that's their commercial technology. I know that some people out there have started to experiment with a home version of this, which would be taking a package for instance of frozen blueberries or some other cold drink or cold metal object, and actually bringing it into the gym or out on a run. There are even people who are now developing cooled psych bicycle handles for long rides. This might seem a little kooky or crazy to you, but as you'll soon hear in the study I'm about to describe, the increases in endurance and in the volume of strength training that people can conduct if they appropriately cool their body through these glabrous skin portals is actually quite significant. So again, as it relates to hyperthermia, if someone is overheating by all means, try and get them out of that heat, get them to stop exercising, you can die from hyperthermia, try and cool the bottoms of the feet, the palms of their hands and the upper portion of their face. That does not mean it would be a bad idea to put cold water on the top of their head. That probably would also help and perhaps on their neck. What is probably not going to be a good idea is to do the more standard thing of draping someone in cold towels on the surface of their body because as I mentioned, the beginning of the episode, that thermostat in the hypothalamus, the medial preoptic area will typically react to that by increasing core body temperature further. The effects of glabrous skin cooling on physical performance are truly remarkable provided the glabrous skin cooling is done correctly. And I want to point out that the main degree of effect is on volume or the ability to do more work. And I want to point this out because I think that many people, certainly in the exercise science community, but even in the general public, when they hear about some of these effects that are measured in the laboratory, they sort of look at those effects a bit of scans and they think, well, that's not possible. Effects for instance, that have been documented showing doubling or tripling of the number of dips that one can do in a relatively short amount of time or doubling of the number of pullups one can do or 14% increases in strength or even comparable degrees in increase in weight training output to people who are on performance enhancing drugs, et cetera, et cetera. Part of the confusion is that the effects of proper palmer cooling, because it almost always is done by palmer cooling and less often in these experiments by cooling of the bottoms of the feet and the upper portion of the face, but those effects tend to be the ability to do more work over time and just to illustrate some of the major effects that the Heller lab is seen and they are document entered in this manuscript that I'll share with you in a moment. The typical protocol is to have people come in and do some endurance training so running on a treadmill and to have a condition where one group is actually doing palmer cooling while they are on a bike or on a treadmill and inevitably the outcome is that they can do more work. They can pedal further at a given speed, or they can run longer at a given speed than people who are not doing palmer cooling or who are receiving cooling by way of cold compress to the back of the neck or ice pack to the armpits, et cetera. So the effects of palmer cooling are very clear and very robust. And in the context of endurance exercise almost always allow people to do more work, to go longer with less perceived effort and to quit later so to speak. In terms of strength training, they've looked at the capacity to perform sets of dips. So one of the more famous examples of this that Dr. Heller shares in the episode that we did earlier, and that you can find at hubermanlab.com involves someone coming in and doing sets of dips, maybe 40 dips. This person actually could do 40 dips on their first set, then resting for a period of two to three minutes and then doing 35 and then resting for a period of two or three minutes, and then doing progressively fewer and fewer and fewer to the point where over a period of time, they add up the total number of dips that they can do and then they have them come back after a period of recovery, so not immediately after, but take a couple of days, come back and do effectively the same protocol, but during their rest periods, they're doing two minutes of palmer cooling, which essentially allows heat to move out of the body, lowering core body temperature in other words. And what they find is that they see enormous increases in the total number of dips that people can do, but that doesn't mean that the person goes from being able to do 40 dips, to being able to do 50 dips or 60 dips on that first set, what it means is they are able to do 40 on the first set, then 40 on the second, then 38 on the third and so on and so forth so that the total duration of the workout is extended and yet they're doing much more work, even though it takes more time. So that's an important point and I think a point that perhaps wasn't as clear or as clearly made by me in the previous episodes that discuss this topic. For those of you that are interested in exploring palmer cooling, first of all, I recommend taking a brief glance or even a deep dive into this study, which is entitled work volume and strength training responses to resistive exercise improve with periodic heat extraction from the palm. In this study, they describe big increases in anaerobic, meaning strength training output, things like improvement in dips, improvement in bench press, improvement in pull-ups, et cetera, in human subjects. And it's a really nice study and points to some of the protocols that you might be able to adapt in your own setup. For instance, over six weeks of pull up training, palm cooling in between sets improved volume by 144%, and this was in experienced subjects. So that's interesting because a lot of studies of strength training and improvements in hypertrophy and strength are done in inexperienced untrained athletes, which changes the picture somewhat compared to experienced athletes. They found that strength, meaning the one repetition maximum, increased 22% over 10 weeks in bench press training. And they point to the particularly strong effects of using palmer cooling when people reach plateaus in endurance and strength training. And there, I think it's an important point. I think that if you're going to explore palmer cooling, it's probably not the sort of thing that you're going to do in every run or in every about of cycling or in every strength training session, but that it might be used to vastly increase your volume or vastly increase your endurance in a given session or a set of sessions in order to push through plateaus. A particularly interesting point in light of that is Dr. Heller has observed again and again that palmer cooling reduces delayed onset muscle soreness, or it can eliminate it entirely. And that's very interest because it also points to the fact that reducing core body temperature may somehow be involved in short circuiting the normal mechanisms of delayed onset muscle soreness. And you might say, well, how would temperature be involved in delayed onset muscle soreness? Well, I want to refer you back to the meta-analysis that we talked about earlier, where the short duration, very cold temperature exposure after training did indeed reduce delayed onset muscle soreness in part through reduction, excuse me, in creatine kinase. So it's not inconceivable that temperature and delayed onset muscle soreness are related. And that raises perhaps the most important point, which is the way that palmer cooling can improve performance by way of reducing core body temperature is known and that is because when one engages in exercise or muscular output of any kind, strength or endurance exercise, the range of temperatures under which a muscle can perform is actually very narrow. There's an enzyme called pyruvate kinase, which is critical to muscle contractions and pyruvate kinase can only function in a very narrow range of temperatures. If that temperature gets too hot, meaning if the muscle heats up locally, whether or not by running or cycling or swimming or weightlifting, the ability for that muscle to continue to contract is reduced and eventually is short circuited completely. And I think this is a much underexplored or at least a much under discussed aspect of so-called muscular failure or the failure of one to continue to endure in running. So for instance, when you run as compared to a bench press or something, you don't stop running because you can't actually contract the muscles further, but somehow signals about the heating up of muscular tissue are conveyed to the brain. There's a crosstalk there, it's probably bidirectional and people stop, they quit. This is the quitting reflex. In strength training, one can no longer perform a repetition or set of repetitions in part because of heating up of the muscle locally. There are other mechanisms as well, of course, and I realize that, but what's very clear from the palmer cooling work is that by simply holding onto a cool object, remember not an object so cold that it constricts the vessels of the palms or constricts the vessels on the bottoms of the feet, but by holding onto a relatively cool object in one or both hands in between sets for two minutes or so, you can very efficiently reduce your core body temperature and in doing so, reduce the temperature of the muscles that are doing the work, increase the capacity for pyruvate kinase to continue to allow your muscles to contract and thereby allow you to do more volume of endurance and strength training. So a simple protocol that Dr. Heller passed to me is find a relatively cool object. So you could, for instance, fill two bottles with cold water, maybe put a few ice cubes in there. This is not exact because we're not talking about the commercial CoolMitt product here, we're talking about an at home version or use a pack of frozen blueberries or broccoli sort of pack of those as what he described. And then in between sets to put your hands and ideally you'd put the bottoms of your feet, but that's not always feasible in most gyms where they won't let you take off your shoes and so forth, but to put the palms of your hands on that cool surface for a minute or two minutes between sets and then returning to your sets of work. Now, if you are heating up through other mechanisms like you're wearing a stocking cap and you're in a very warm environment, this might not have as potent effect as if you were to do this cooling in a more moderate environment, wearing lighter clothing, et cetera. So by all means warm up to do your exercise, lubricate your joints, and get into a place where you're not going to injure yourself, doing whatever form of exercise you do. But then if you'd like to explore palmer cooling, I know a number of people who've written to me saying they heard about palmer cooling on the episode with Dr. Heller. They've tried this and they see quite excellent results. It does take some discipline. It's one thing to just kind of hang out in the gym and play on your phone in between sets. It's another to do deliberate cooling with your palms or the bottom of your feet or the upper portion of your face. You might get some weird looks, but of course you'll be the one doing significantly more volume, not experiencing delayed onset muscle soreness and achieving better endurance and strength gains were you to do this properly. Now as a final topic related to the use of deliberate cold exposure for improving health and performance, I'd like to touch on this theme that exists online, on social media, on YouTube and in various fitness communities of using deliberate cold exposure to the groin, in particular to the testicles, in order to try and increase testosterone. And while this might sound really kooky, indeed this practice exists. Indeed if you were to go onto Amazon, there are actually ice pack underwear that are being marketed for sake of increasing testosterone. Now, I am not aware of any specific well-controlled studies that show that this indeed works. I can imagine based on what I know about the nervous system, testosterone and cold, et cetera, that there are a couple of mechanisms by which one might experience increases in testosterone as a consequence of deliberate cold exposure. First off, let me say there is no reason why you would have to apply these ice packs in the way that I just described. One could of course take a cold shower. One could of course use cold immersion of various kinds, and you're still going to get that exposure of the groin and the testicles to cold. Now I should point out that people do report at least anecdotally increases in testosterone as a consequence of this practice and I have to imagine that they are measuring their serum testosterone, that they're not just guessing that their testosterone went up. If you know of a study exploring this directly, please let me know, put in the comment section on YouTube, or even just email me. We have a email that you can find it, hubermanlab.com. Please email me the reference. I wasn't able to find a reference, but I can imagine two reasonably plausible mechanisms by which deliberate cold exposure to the groin, in particular the testicles, would increase testosterone. The first is somewhat direct, which is that anytime you cool a body surface, that if it's cold enough, you're going to get vasoconstriction. And then subsequently you're going to get a rebound increase in vasodilation, meaning you're going to constrict the blood vessels in that area. And then after the cold is removed, there's going to be more blood flow to that area. And of course, blood flow relates to organ health and tissue health generally. So perfusion of that region and the gonads to be specific with additional blood, you could imagine in some ways increasing testosterone, that's reasonably plausible. The other probably more likely mechanism relates to the dopamine increases caused by cold exposure that we talked about earlier. Again, anytime you have a somewhat stressful stimulus, but in particular with cold exposure, it seems that the catecholamines, norepinephrine, epinephrine and dopamine all increase and dopamine is known to be in the pathway that can stimulate testosterone. And so while there isn't a direct relationship between dopamine stimulating testosterone, there is an interesting pathway way whereby dopamine increases can trigger increases in things like luteinizing hormone, which can trigger increases in testosterone as well as estrogen for that matter. So I know that there are a lot of people out there that are interested in the use of cold exposure for increasing testosterone. And some of those people in communities are indeed using cold exposure directly on the gonads, on the testees in order to do this. I'm not certain that that direct contact is necessary. And in some cases it might actually be quite dangerous or you at least should be careful in terms of tissues there and avoiding damage. But nonetheless, I think that a dopamine impact on testosterone is very likely given the 250% increases in dopamine that have been observed with cold water immersion and all of that points to the fact that cold water immersion very likely increases testosterone, but as a downstream consequence of the cold water immersion effects on dopamine and luteinizing hormone, and again there's no reason to think that the increases in luteinizing hormone would also increase estrogen. Probably not to dangerous or levels that one would want to avoid, but I don't think that there's anything particularly specific about cold for inducing testosterone and not other hormones. I think it's very likely to increases a number of different hormones. I do hope that there will be a systematic study on this in the not too distant future. I also hope to not be a subject in the cooling of the gonads experiment. Now I promise you the last topic was the last topic, but there's one other really important point that I think everyone should be aware of if you're going to use deliberate cold exposure. And that brings us back to the very first thing that we discussed today, along the lines of deliberate cold exposure, which is that your baseline temperature is going to be lowest about two hours before you wake up, it's going to increase in the morning and as you wake up and increase throughout the day and afternoon, and then start to drop in the evening and come down at night as you head to sleep. I also want you to remember that if you are to cool the external portion of your body, in particular your torso, the net effect of that is going to be an increase in body temperature. So for many people, not all, but for many people, if you are going to do deliberate cold exposure, you are going to increase your core body temperature and that makes sense if you think about how deliberate cold exposure can increase metabolism by increasing thermogenesis. What that all means is that if you are doing your deliberate cold exposure early in the day, you are going to get yet a further increase in core body temperature that would be associated with wakefulness, your ability to be alert that morning or throughout the day and so on. It also means that if you do your deliberate cold exposure very late in the evening, or at night, so 6:00 PM, 7:00 PM, 9:00 PM and so on, you are going to increase your core body temperature and if you recall, a decrease in core body temperature of one to three degrees is not just beneficial, but is necessary in order to get into deep sleep and remain in deep sleep. So the takeaway from this is deliberate cold exposure done properly will increase your core body temperature and make you feel more alert. So if you're doing it early in the day, that's probably terrific given that most of us want to be alert during the day. However, if you do it too late in the day, evening or night, it can disrupt sleep by way of disrupting your core body temperature. Now, the caveat to that is I myself tend to do deliberate cold exposure early in the day. Maybe not first thing in the morning, but mid morning, maybe as late as three or four in the afternoon in some cases. In the longer days of summer, I might do it even later, five or 6:00 PM and have no trouble sleeping. I have done deliberate cold exposure very late at night, 10:00 PM, 11:00 PM and so on as part of a 30 day challenge of doing deliberate cold exposure every day for 30 days and I got sloppy with my timing and then in order to not miss a day, I would do it at 11 o'clock at night. And I must say I found that I could still fall asleep very easily, even doing deliberate cold exposure very late at night. However, on those particular days, I was particularly busy and so I was particularly exhausted when I arrived at the deliberate cold exposure and I had no trouble falling asleep after doing deliberate cold exposure, and then taking a nice warm shower and then going to sleep. But I could imagine that because of the increases in core body temperature caused by deliberate cold exposure, that were one to do that too late in the day, evening or night that it could indeed disrupt your sleep. So my recommendation would be for most people only do deliberate cold exposure if you are prepared to be fairly alert for the next one to four or maybe had been six hours following that deliberate cold exposure. So for today's episode, as is the case with most episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I covered a lot of material. We talked about mechanisms of catecholamines and stress and pulsatile release of epinephrine, metabolism, mental effects, performance, glabrous skin cooling and on and on and on. And while the goal of course is to make sure that everyone arrives at specific, very clear mechanistic and actionable protocols, I do realize that it is an immense amount of information. And for that reason, I've created a list of deliberate cold exposure protocols aimed at improving mental toughness and resilience, mood, performance, metabolism, reducing inflammation, and so on and so forth. All of those have been condensed into succinct form and can be found at the Huberman Lab Neural Network Newsletter. This is a monthly or semi-monthly newsletter that we release that includes takeaways from the podcast and protocols. You can access those as protocols zero cost by simply going to hubermanlab.com, signing up for the neural network newsletter. It's very easy to do, you just supply your email and you will receive the newsletter. We do not share your email with anybody else. In fact, we have our privacy policy laid out on the hubermanlab.com website so you can find that there and the protocols that I've designed should make it very straightforward for you to create a set of protocols that you could use with cold showers, with cold immersion, with or without ice in combination with exercise specifically for one goal or another, or to accomplish multiple goals simultaneously. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and or Apple and on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. You can also now leave reviews on Spotify so we'd appreciate if you would do so. If you have suggestions for future guests or topics that you would like us to cover or feedback generally for the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put that in the comment section on YouTube. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that is the best way to support this podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. On many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like sleep and focus and other aspects of health and performance. One issue with the supplement industry that's very serious, however, is that these supplement companies simply do not use high quality ingredients or the amounts of the ingredients they list on the packaging does not match what's actually contained in their product. For that reason, we partner with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are known to be of the very highest quality ingredients and the very highest degree of specificity in terms of the amounts of the ingredients that are listed on the packaging accurately match what's contained in their products. If you'd like to see the Thorne products that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's thorne.com/u/huberman. And there, you can see the Thorne products that I take and get 20% off any of those products. In addition, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that portal, Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other products that Thorne makes. If you're not already subscribed to Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I cover science and science related tools that sometimes overlap with the content of the podcast, but oftentimes is distinct from the information covered on this podcast. So thank you once again for joining me in the discussion about the use of deliberate cold exposure for health and performance and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 282 ---
Video ID: IAnhFUUCq6c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAnhFUUCq6c
Title: Dr. Andy Galpin: How to Build Strength, Muscle Size & Endurance
Published: 2022-03-28 12:00:18 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Andy Galpin, Professor of Kinesiology at California State University, Fullerton, and one of the foremost experts in the world on the science and application of methods to increase strength, hypertrophy and endurance performance. We discuss fundamental principles of strength and hypertrophy training and building endurance, the mechanisms underlying them and we review specific protocols to optimize training and recovery. We also discuss hydration, sleep, nutrition, supplements, and mental tools that can be leveraged to accelerate adaptations leading to enhanced strength, muscle growth and/or endurance.

Access the full show notes for this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/KjoyquK

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website - https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Dr. Andy Galpin*
Twitter: https://twitter.com/DrAndyGalpin
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/drandygalpin
Website: https://www.andygalpin.com
Published Work: https://bit.ly/35lBS6Q
RAPID Health: https://rapidhealthreport.com
Absolute Rest: https://www.absoluterest.com 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Dr. Andy Galpin, Strength & Endurance Training  
00:03:08 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:03:55 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, InsideTracker
00:08:20 Adaptations of Exercise, Progressive Overload 
00:14:40 Modifiable Variables, One-Rep Max, Muscle Soreness
00:27:30 Modifiable Variables of Strength Training, Supersets  
00:43:50 How to Select Training Frequency: Strength vs. Hypertrophy 
00:58:45 Hypertrophy Training, Repetition Ranges, Blood Flow Restriction 
01:08:50 Tools: Protocols for Strength Training, the 3 by 5 Concept 
01:10:48 Mind-Muscle Connection 
01:16:16 Mental Awareness 
01:27:57 Breathing Tools for Resistance Training & Post-Training 
01:37:25 Endurance Training & Combining with Strength
01:51:20 Tools: Protocols for Endurance Training
02:08:15 Muscular Endurance, Fast vs. Slow Twitch Muscle 
02:16:35 Hydration & the Galpin Equation, Sodium, Fasting   
02:35:57 Cold Exposure & Training  
02:43:15 Heat Exposure & Training 
02:53:47 Recovery  
03:04:02 Tool: Sodium Bicarbonate
03:17:26 Tool: Creatine Monohydrate
03:20:08 Absolute Rest
03:29:08 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter

#HubermanLab #Strength #Fitness

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Andy Galpin. Dr. Galpin is a full and tenured professor in the department of kinesiology at California State University in Fullerton. He is also a world expert in all things exercise science and kinesiology. Today, you are going to hear what is essentially a masterclass in how to build fitness, no matter what level of fitness you happen to have. He talks about how to build endurance, and the multiple types of endurance. He talks about how to build strength and hypertrophy, which is the growth of muscle fibers. So if you're seeking to get stronger, or build bigger muscles, or build endurance, or all of those things, today you're going to learn how. You're also going to learn how to build flexibility, how to hydrate properly for exercise. And we'll also talk about nutrition and supplementation. What makes Dr. Galpin so unique is his ability to span all levels of exercise science. He has the ability to clearly communicate the sets and repetition schemes that one would want to follow, for instance, to build more strength or to build larger muscles. He also clearly describes exactly how to train if you want to build more endurance, or enhance cardiovascular function. What's highly unique about Dr. Galpin and the information he teaches, and the way he communicates that information, is that he can take specific recommendations of how recreational exercisers, or even professional athletes ought to train for their specific goals, and link that to specific mechanisms. That is the specific changes that need to occur in the nervous system and in muscle fibers, and indeed right down to the genetics of individual cells in your brain and body, in order for those exercise adaptations to occur. It's truly rare to find somebody that can span so many different levels of analyses, and who is able to communicate all those levels of understanding in such a clear and actionable way. Indeed, Dr. Galpin is one of just a handful of people to which I and many others look when they want to make sure that the information that they're getting about exercise is gleaned from quality peer-reviewed studies, hands-on experience with a wide variety of research subjects, meaning everyday people all the way up to professional athletes in a wide variety of sports. So it's no surprise that he's not only one of the most knowledgeable, but also the most trusted voices in exercise science. Dr. Galpin is also an avid communicator of zero cost to consumer information about exercise science. You can find him on Instagram at Dr. Andy Galpin, and also on Twitter at Dr. Andy Galpin. Both places he provides terrific information about recent studies, both from his laboratory and from other laboratories, more in depth protocols of the sort that you'll hear about today. So if you're not already following him, be sure to do so. He provides only the best information. He's extremely nuanced and precise and clear in delivering that information. I'm certain that by the end of today's conversation, you'll come away with a tremendous amount of new knowledge that you can devote to your exercise pursuits. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled "The Brain Body Contract", during which I will discuss science and science-based tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. I should point out that while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the "Huberman Lab Podcast", and on various social media posts, most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere. So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th. You can access tickets by going to hubermanlab.com/tour. And I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day, is that it helps me cover all of my basic nutritional needs. It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have. In addition, it has probiotics which are vital for microbiome health. I've done a couple of episodes now on the so-called gut microbiome and the ways in which the microbiome interacts with your immune system, with your brain, to regulate mood, and essentially with every biological system relevant to health throughout your brain and body. With Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins I need, the minerals I need, and the probiotics to support my microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. There are a ton of data now showing that vitamin D3 is essential for various aspects of our brain and body health. Even if we're getting a lot of sunshine, many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3. And K2 is also important because it regulates things like cardiovascular function, calcium in the body, and so on. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes what are called nootropics, which means smart drugs. Now, to be honest, I am not a fan of the term nootropics. I don't believe in smart drugs in the sense that I don't believe that there's any one substance or collection of substances that can make us smarter. I do believe, based on science however, that there are particular neural circuits and brain functions that allow us to be more focused, more alert, access creativity, be more motivated, et cetera. That's just the way that the brain works. Different neural circuits for different brain states. And so the idea of a nootropic that's just going to make us smarter all around, fails to acknowledge that smarter is many things, right? If you're an artist, you're a musician, you're doing math, you're doing accounting, a different part of the day you need to be creative, these are all different brain processes. Thesis understands this. And as far as I know, they're the first nootropics company to create targeted nootropics for specific outcomes. They only use the highest quality ingredients, which of course is essential. Some of those I've talked about on the podcast, things like DHA, Ginko biloba, phosphatidylserine. They give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month, discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics and goals, and with that personalization, design a kit of nootropics that's ideal for the different brain and body states you want to access. I've been using Thesis for more than six months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game-changer. My go-to formula is the clarity formula, or sometimes I'll use their energy formula before training. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take a three minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman, and use the code Huberman at checkout for 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA, to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done, for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. What's unique about Inside Tracker is that while there are a lot of different tests out there for hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, with Inside Tracker, you get the numbers back in terms of your levels, but they also give you very clear directives in terms of lifestyle, nutrition and supplementation, that can help you bring those values into the ranges that are best for you and your health goals. And that's very different than a lot of the other programs, where you get a lot of information, but you don't really know what to do with that information. Inside Tracker makes that all very easy to understand and very actionable, based on the very easy to use dashboard at Inside Tracker. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. And now for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin. Welcome Dr. Professor Andy Galpin. It's been a long time coming. We have friends in common, but this is actually the first time we've sat down face-to-face. - Yeah, I'm very excited. - Yeah, there are only a handful, meaning about three or four people, who I trust enough in the exercise physiology space, that when they speak, I not only listen, but I modify my protocols, and you are among those three or four people. So first of all, a debt of gratitude, thank you. You've greatly shaped the protocols that I use. And I know there's far more for me and for others to learn. So you're a professor, you teach in university, and you have a tremendous range of levels of exploration. Muscle biopsy, literally images down the microscope, all the way to training professional athletes and everything in between. So you are truly an N-of-1. And just to start us off, I would love to have you share with us what you think most everybody, or even everybody should know, about principles of strength training, principles of endurance training, and principles of, let's call it hypertrophy power and the other sort of categories of training. And this could be very top contour. But what do you think everybody on planet Earth should know about these categories of personal and athletic development? - Well, that's a great first question. Holy cow! I think I'll start it this way. I tend to think about, there's about nine different adaptations you can get from exercise. Fat loss is not one of those. It is a byproduct. But that's not really what I'm getting at. And so we can kind of categorize everything like that. And what we're going to, we can talk about, or what are the concepts that you need to hit within each one. And then you could have infinite discussion of the different methodologies, right? And so that first thing to hit is the concepts are actually fairly few, but the methods are many, right? People have said that in iterations throughout time. So if you walk from the very beginning, the first one to think about is what we'll just call skill. So this is improving anything from say a golf swing, to a squatting technique, to running. And this is just simply moving mechanically, how you want your body to move. I'm just going to globally call that skill. From there, we're going to get into speed. So this is moving as fast as possible. The next one is power, and power is a function of speed, but it is also a function of the next one, which is strength. So if you actually multiply strength by speed, you get power. And the reason I'm making this distinction by the way is, some of these are very close, and I'm going in a specific order on purpose here. For example, power is, like I just said, it's a function of speed and strength. So if you improve speed, you've also likely improved power. But not necessarily, right, 'cause it could've come from the force direction either. So there's carryover, so like a lot of things that you would do for the development of strength and power, they are somewhat similar, but then there's differences, right? So things that you would do correctly for power would really not develop much strength, and vice versa. So we can get into all these details later. Once you get past strength, and the next one kind of down the list is hypertrophy, this is muscle size, right? Growing muscle mass is one way to think about it. After hypertrophy, you get into these categories of, the next one is, these are all globally endurance-based issues. And the very first one is called muscular endurance. So this is your ability to do how many pushups can you do in one minute? You know, things like that. Past muscular endurance, you're now into more of an energetic or even cardiovascular fatigue. So you've left the local muscle, and you're now into the entire physiological system, and its ability to produce and sustain work. And we can get into a bunch of differentiations with an endurance, but just to keep it really simple right now, the very first one, think about this as, I call this anaerobic power, right? So this is your ability to produce a lot of work for say 30 seconds to maybe one minute, kind of two minutes like that. The next one down then is more closely aligned to what we'll call your VO2 max. So this is your ability to kind of do the same thing, but more of a time domain of say three to 12 minutes. So this is going to be a maximum heart rate, but it's going to be well past just max heart rate. Then after that we have what I call long duration endurance. So this is your ability to sustain work. The time domain doesn't matter in terms of how fast you're going. It's how long can you sustain work? This is 30 plus minutes of no break. Like that. So as just an high level overview, those are the different things you can target. And again, some of those crossover, and some are actually a little bit contrarian to the other ones. So pushing towards one is maybe going to sacrifice something else. So as an overall start, that's really what we're looking at. Within all those though, they do have similar concepts, in terms of there is a handful of things you have got to do to make all of those things work. And we could talk about as many of those as you want, but one of them is functionally called progressive overload. So whichever one you're trying to improve at, if you want to continue to improve, you have to have some method of overload. And as you well know, and you've talked about a lot, adaptation, physiologically, happens as a byproduct of stress. So you have to push a system. So if you continue to do say the exact same workout over time, you better not expect much improvement. You can keep maintenance, but you're not going to be adding additional stress. So in general, you have to have some sort of progressive overload, and we can talk in detail about what that means for each category. But this could come from adding more weights. This could come from adding more repetitions. It could come from doing it more often in the week. It could come from adding complexity to the movement. So going from say a partial range of motion to a full range of motion, or adding other variables. So there's a lot of different ways to progress. But you have to have some sort of movement forward. So if you have this kind of routine where you've built Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday or something, and you just do that infinitely, you're not going to get very far. So that's, I guess the most high level overview of all the things people can go after, and then we can go from whatever direction you want from there. - Well I'd love to do the deep dive on each one of these - Yeah man. - for several hours. But, and I imagine that over time, we probably will. I'd love to chat about a couple of these in a bit more depth. So in terms of defining what the progressive overload variables are, - Yeah. - for these different categories, maybe we could hit the two most common combinations of these nine things. The first one being strength and hypertrophy. - Yeah. - And maybe we could lump power in there. Maybe not. You're the exercise physiologist. - Yes and no, yeah. - But strength and hypertrophy, which at least bears some relationship. And then maybe separately we could explore sustained work endurance. This 30 minutes or longer continuously, 'cause I think many people train in that regime. And probably something like VO2 max anaerobic as well, because I know that a number of people now incorporate so-called HIIT or high intensity interval training, I think with the hopes of either shortening their workout. - Yeah. - And or, gaining some additional cardiovascular benefit. So if we could start with strength and hypertrophy, I know many people want to be stronger. They want to grow larger muscles, or at least maintain what they have. So what are the progressive overload principles that are most effective over time for strength and hypertrophy? - Yeah, okay. So I'll actually go a little step back. With every one of those categories I talked about, you have what we call your modifiable variables. So this is a very short list of all the things you can modify, the different variables within your workout that can be modified, that will change the outcome. A fancy way of saying, if you do this differently, then you're going to get a different result. So modifiable variables. The very first one of those is called choice. So this is the exercise choice that you select. Now one of, I'm going to go double back here, so I'm kind of doing a little bit of inception. So follow me here as I'm going up a layer to come down a couple layers. I have these fundamental laws of strength and conditioning that, they're kind of like a little bit of a joke. But progressive overload's one of those laws. Another one of those laws is your exercises themselves do not determine adaptations. So here's what I mean. If you're like I want to get stronger, you can't select an exercise. That doesn't determine you getting strong. If you don't do the exercise correctly, and I'm not even referring to the technique. That of course matters. But if you don't execute it in the right fashion, then you're not going to get that adaptation. So if you choose I want to get stronger, I'm going to do a bench press. Well, if you do the wrong set range, the wrong repetition range, the wrong speed, you won't get strength, you maybe get muscular endurance, and very little strength adaptation. So the exercise selection itself is important, but it does not determine the outcome adaptation. So the very first thing that you need to think about if you're like I want to get stronger or add muscle, is not the exercise choice, right? It is the application of the exercise. What are the sets, what are the reps, what are the rest ranges that you're using? That's going to be your primary determinant. Now some exercises are certainly better for some adaptations. For example, a deadlift is probably not a great exercise to do for long duration endurance. Like you could theoretically do 30 straight minutes of dead-lifting, but it's probably not our best choice, right? It's probably a pretty good choice for strength development, right, 'cause you're going to do a low repetition, high set range. You could theoretically do bicep curls for power, but probably not your best choice, right? Single joint isolation movement is not the best for developing power. If you've ever done a bicep curl as fast as you possibly can, like that's not going to go well. So in theory, any exercise can produce any adaptation, given the execution is performed properly. So now that we've understood that a little bit, the exercise itself does not determine the adaptation. Coming within each one of these categories, exercise choice is an important variable because it does lend you to things like what movement pattern you're in. So in other words, if you want to get stronger and you're thinking, okay, what exercise do I do, you need to think a little bit about what muscle groups do I want to use, and that's going to be leading you towards the exercise choice. For example, I want to use my quads more. Okay, fine. Maybe you're going to choose more of a front squat type of variation, a goblet squat, so the bar, the load is in front of you. If you want to emphasize maybe more of your hamstrings and glutes, you're going to maybe put a barbell on your back or do a different one. So the exercise choice is important to the prescription because it's going to determine a lot of your success. Okay, another kind of simpler way to think about this. If you're a beginner, or moderate to intermediate, or maybe you don't have a coach, you probably want to hedge towards an exercise selection that is a little bit easier technically. So you maybe don't want to do a barbell back squat. It's actually a pretty complicated movement. Maybe you want to do a little bit more of, again, a goblet squat, or even use some machines, or a split squat, something that's a little bit simpler because you don't have a coach, you're not a professional athlete. The likelihood of success is higher, and the risk is now gone lower. So the very first variable within all of these is the exercise choice. The second one is the intensity, and that refers to, in this context, not perceived effort, like, wow, that was a really intense workout. It is quite literally either a percentage of your one rep at max, or a percentage of your maximum heart rate or VO2 max. So for the strength-based things, you want to think about what's the percentage of the maximum weight I could lift one time, and that's what we're going to call one rep max. Or it's a percentage of my heart rate, right? So if I tell you to get on a bike and I want you to do intervals, and I want you to get 75%, I'm typically referring to 75% of your max heart rate, or VO2 max, or something like that. If I tell you to do squats at 75%, that means 75% of the maximum amount of weight you could lift one time, or close. - In terms of determining one rep max, I confess I've never actually taken the one rep max for any exercise. But I have some internal sense of what that might be or what range it might be. Is it necessary for people to assess their one repetition maximum, before going into these sorts of programs? - No, not at all. I think a more intuitive way is to take a repetition range. Well, you can do this a couple of different ways. So there are equations you can run, and you can just Google these anywhere, and these are called conversion charts. And so it says okay, if I did 75 pounds on my bench press and I did it eight times, you can just run an estimate to say, okay, you're probably going to be able to bench about 95 pounds for one rep max or something. So that's a very easy conversion chart. So just pick a load that you feel comfortable with, but it's kind of heavy but not like crazy heavy, and do as many repetitions as you can with a really good technique. And then look what that number would be. So conversion charts. - Probably safer than doing it one repetition maximum. - For the general public who has, again, no coaching, it's safer. For a professional athlete, it's not any safer, but, or not even a professional athlete, but a trained person with a coach. But for most people, yeah, that's a good way to go about it. You can also just kind of do it with feel, in the sense that say you want to do a set of five repetitions, and you do the load, and you think I could've done one or two more. And then you kind of have an idea of what that number's going to be. If you think, man, that last one I had to kind of really, really, really get after it, then maybe just call that that number, right? So you don't have to get overly concerned. In fact, when we start getting into these number ranges, you're going to see that they're all ranges. We're not going to give a specific 95%, for one of these exact reasons. It's not that precise for most of 'em. In fact, some of 'em like hypertrophy have enormous ranges that you like almost can't miss. So the intensity in that case doesn't even matter for the most part, because that's not the primary determinant. Some of these you're going to see intensity as a determinant, and some of these you're going to see volume is the true determinant. So intensity though is that second one, choice was the very first one, manipulable variable. Intensity was the second one. The third one is what we call volume. And so this is just how many reps and how many sets are you doing, right? So if you're going to do three sets of 10, that volume would be 30, right? Five sets of five, that volume is 25. It's just a simple equation. How much work are you totally doing? The next one past that is called rest intervals. So this is the amount of time you're taking in between typically a set. Then from there, you have progression, which is what we started to talk about, this progressive overload, are you increasing by weight, or reps, or rest intervals, or complexity, or whatever. So all of those things can be changed as a method of progression. And so maybe you want to go progressing from a single joint exercise, like a leg extension on a machine, and you want to progress by moving to a whole body movement like a squat. That in of itself, you don't have to change the load, or the reps, or the rest. That is a representation of progressive overload. And it's probably a pretty good place to start, because number one, especially for beginners, you want to make sure that the movement pattern is correct. Don't worry about intensity. Don't worry about rep ranges or any of these things. You need to learn to move correctly, and you need to give your body some time to develop some tissue tolerance. So that you're not getting overtly sore. In general, soreness is a terrible proxy for exercise quality. It's a really bad way to estimate whether it was a good or a bad workout, especially for people in that beginner to middle to moderate. In fact, even for our professional athletes, we do not use soreness as a metric of a good workout. It's a really bad idea for a bunch of reasons. On the same token, because stress is required for adaptation, you don't want to leave the gym and feel like I didn't really do much. There has to be there. So if you think about soreness on a scale of one to 10, you probably want to spend most of your time in like the three. - You mean post-exercise? - Yeah. - In between workouts. - [Andy] Totally. - And I know we'll talk about recovery extensively later, but if one body part or set of body parts is sore, is that an indication that one should stay out of training? I would imagine the answer is no. - Right. - In most cases. And secondarily to that, if a particular muscle is sore, does that mean that muscle is not ready to be trained again? - Yeah, the answer to both those is the same, which is no. Right? You can certainly train a sore muscle. You need to, I guess, have a little bit of feel on that, right? So if you're sore of like, okay, and you're moving around a little bit and you're like, man, this is a little bit sore, you can train. If you're like, I can't sit on the couch without crying because my glutes are so sore, like we probably don't need to train again, right. - Does whimpering count as crying? - Yeah, in that particular case I'd say you've actually gone to a place of detriment, because now you're going to have to skip a training session. And now you're behind, so your actual total volume say across the month is actually going to be lower because you went way too hard in those workouts, had to take too many days off in between. You're going to see that you're going to cover less distance over the course of a month, or six month, or even a year. So you want to walk a pretty fine line, and for most people I would say hedge a little bit on the side of less sore than more so. Because frequency is very, very important for almost all these adaptations. - Training frequency. - Which is the last modifiable variable, right? Frequency. Which is how many times per week are you doing that thing? So those are, kind of are global things that we can play with. So when I'm trying to manipulate, and you can get strength versus hypertrophy, or, you know, I want like a little bit of both, all those variables are the things that are going through my mind. Which one do I need to move in which direction, so that I can get this outcome and not this outcome over here? For example, some folks might want to get stronger, but not put muscle mass on. Some folks just kind of want both. And that's a lot of the general public. I want to get a little stronger and a little bit more muscle. Great. But there are instances where people, for performance reasons or for purely personal preference, like I don't want to get any more muscle, great, but I want to get stronger. Awesome. If you manipulate those variables correctly, you can get exactly that. Very little development of muscle size, and a lot of development in strength. And this is why we continue to break world records in sports like power lifting and weightlifting, that have weight classes. So there's a top number that we can hit in terms of body size, but yet we continue to get stronger and faster. So this is very possible, if you understand how to manipulate all those variables. So that being said, we can start off with, you wanted to go strength and- - Yeah strength, and I love that you mention the fact that it is possible to increase strength without increasing muscle size, at least not dramatically, because think it's not just weight class athletes. I know a lot of people who, for aesthetic reasons, they'd like to be stronger, they're hearing that having strong bones and strong muscles and tendons, it's great for longevity and for avoiding injury, and so many other features of life. And yet they don't want to fill out progressively larger and larger sizes of clothing. - And we can go harder to the mechanisms on that piece if you want, or we can save that and come back to it. - Sure. What I'd love to, both, what I'd love to know was if we could define some of these modifiable variables, - Yeah. - in the context of strength. So let's say I- - Oh okay, yes. - was somebody who, I come to you and I say, and let's just say for sake of balance here, 'cause she actually does do some weight training. I bring my sister in, and I say, me and my sister both want to get stronger. What modifiable variables should, how should we modify the variables? - Love it, all right, great. I'm going to do inception on you one more time. So one of my other laws, this one will be fast, I promise, of strength and conditioning, is in general, the default is all joints through all range of motion. So this is important because it's going to answer your very first question on this strength category. So in general, the ankle should go through the full range of motion in the ankle. The knee should go through the full range of motion in the knee. The hip, the elbow, et cetera, et cetera, right? - Across the workout, not in a single movement. - Well, right. - I would hope. Unless there's an amazing exercise I haven't heard about. - Well there are some exercises that we're going to call more full body. Think about a full snatch. Like you're going to take a lot of your muscles, a lot of your joints through a lot of the range of motions. Other ones like in isolation, we call these single joint exercises. So imagine a bicep curl. You have one joint in that particular case, the elbow moving. The shoulder and everything else is pretty much stable. And this is how we'll differentiate multi-joint from single joint movements. But yeah, so across, I would even say it doesn't even have to be the day, but maybe throughout the week, try to get every joint through full range of motion. Now, a couple of quick caveats to that. I am not advocating using full range of motion, and allowing really bad exercise technique. So when I say full range of motion, that's the default. That doesn't mean every single person can do that for every single exercise. It means that's where we should be striving to, and that's our starting point. You're going to see a lot less injury and a lot more productivity out of your training sessions. In fact, the science is fairly clear on this one. Strength development as well as hypertrophy is generally enhanced with a larger range of motion of training. And the mechanisms are like somewhat understood on that. So that being said, if you have to get into say a bad position with your say lower back, the spine is a very good one. In general, the spine should stay, it's very neutral is what we call it. So no flexion, no extension, especially in the lumbar region. So if you're doing a, say a deadlift, and in order to take your knee through a full range of motion or deadlift, you have to compromise your back position, that's no [speaking in foreign language]. So, caveats there aside, don't kill me, like in good positions always. - And don't kill yourselves. - Yes. - More importantly. - So why that matters is if we walk through strength, the very first thing I'm going to go through is the exercise selection. So let's choose an exercise which ideally has a full range of motion or close to it, that doesn't induce injury for you, that you can still maintain good neck and low back and position and everything else. You feel comfortable with, so you can feel strong but you don't feel like, oh my gosh, if you've never snatched before, having you do a snatch for a maximum, even 75%, like it's a terrible idea. You're not going to feel confident, it's going to be a train wreck. I would rather put you on a machine bench press, so you can go I feel stable, I feel safe here, and I could just express my strength. So exercise choice in general, full range of motion, and you want to kind of balance between the movement areas. So this is an upper body press, so this is pushing away from you. Bench press, things like that. Upper body pull, pulling an implement towards you. Bent row, pull up. The pressing should be horizontal. So perpendicular to your body, as well as vertical. So this is lifting a weight over top of your head, lifting a weight away from you. The pull version is pulling horizontally to you and pulling vertically down. Pull up, things like that. From the lower body, we typically call these hinges. It's sort of a funny muscle thing that no one's going to laugh at, but like maybe me and you here, is we'll categorize muscles as, or movements, exercises, as pushes and pulls, right? So like a squat tends to be a push, 'cause you're pushing away the ground. A deadlift is a pull, 'cause you're pulling the implement up to you. But in reality, every single exercise is only ever a pull, 'cause muscle doesn't push things away, muscle can only contract and pull on itself. And so again, super nerdy thing that like most people are like, yeah, and everyone's like, that's so dumb. - No, but I think it's a really important point because it also speaks to something I think we'll get into later, which is that, you know, posterior chain, anterior chain. - [Andy] Totally. - And if that's mysterious to people, it'll become clear before long. Posterior chain, anterior chain, makes a lot of sense to me because of the way it's grounded in the firing of motor neurons, which is ultimately what controls muscle. So it's also I think- - You and your nerves all the time. - Exactly, so it also depends on the lens through which one looks at life and exercise. Of course my lens is primarily neuroscience. But I realized that the importance, I like this idea of pushing perpendicular the body overhead, pulling both toward the body and from overhead. That just makes really good, intuitive sense, especially since a lot of people are just listening to this and not watching it. So in your minds, folks, you can think about pushing away like a punch or overhead, like lifting something overhead, and then pulling toward your midline or towards your body rather, and then pulling yourself up like a pull up in PE class, for those of. - Yeah. - That experienced- - So the lower body's the same thing, right? It's some sort of pushing away like a squat, or a split squat, or a lunge, or something like that. And then some sort of, again, what we'll call pull or hinge. So a deadlift or Romanian deadlift, or a hamstring curl, or something where you're contracting and pulling the thing. And you could split these into like a thousand different categories. If you're really in that field, you're going to want to add a bunch of other ones. But that's just like a rough conception, so if you're going to do a single workout, you could choose four exercises, and you could choose one of each. One press, upper body press, one upper body pull, one lower body hinge, one lower body press. And then that would be like a decently well-rounded exercise. That's your exercise selection. And if you're taking those through a full range of motion, you're at a pretty good spot. As close as you can. The next one is intensity. So if you want to develop strength, this comes back to one of my favorite scientists of all time who happens to be a nerve guy actually. And generally, I like to shit on nerves as much as I possibly can, 'cause I'm a muscle guy. But I have to give Henneman some credit here, right. And I know you know who that is. - Henneman size principle. - Yeah, of course, right? So this is a series of papers, I think in the, I think it was in nature. - At least some of them, yeah. - Yeah, in 1954, '56, or like something. You can fact check me, I'm sure you will. But he basically outlined this idea that, okay, there's a certain recruitment threshold needed for neurons to fire. And we have muscle fibers in what we'll call fast twitch muscle fibers and slow twitch muscle fibers. And in general, you're going to activate the slow twitch ones first because they tend to be associated with low threshold motor neurons. It's not exactly that way, but it's close enough, right? Well, the only way that you activate some of these higher threshold neurons is to demand the muscle to produce more force, and it's fairly specific to force, right? It's not something you can do over an endurance thing, right, unless it gets really extreme and fatigue happens. So in general, the only way to use these big chunks of your muscle, which are incredibly important for aging by the way, one of the major problems we have with aging developing or development of aging-related issues with muscle, is the fact that we lose fast twitch fibers preferentially. And then we have major problems as we go down the line, because we've lost a big chunk of our strength in size. So you want to make sure these fibers stay alive and intact. Okay, so if that being said, the only way to develop strength is then to challenge the muscle to produce more total force. If you are fairly untrained or new, I guess I should have stated this all at the beginning as well, one more inception then I'll stop. When it comes to this level of detail of exercise prescription, a fairly untrained person is going to respond basically the same to every single thing you do. In fact, we've done this in the lab many times, we've done training studies doing things like 30 minutes of cycling, and seen huge increases in muscle strength and size, which is not a prescription for most people to increase size, but people that are really untrained, if you did plyometrics or strength training or endurance running, they all just get better at everything. So that caveat kind of aside, if you want to be more intentional and more specific to the goal of strength, you need to produce more force. Specificity matters, right? So we have size principle to help understand this. And we have our laws of specificity which say SAID principle, right? Specific adaptation to imposed demand. So the adaptation you get, or the result of your training, is going to be a reflection of the demand that you imposed. So if you want to get stronger, you need to impose a demand of strength, not repetitions. So this has to be, the load has to be very high. In general, you're probably looking at above 85% of your one rep at max. If you're moderately trained, maybe 75% will work. Lowly trained, again, everything works. But in general, we want to be pressing a load that's very high. So because the intensity demand is so high, that is going to force you to do a low repetition range. You can't do 12 reps at 95%. Then it wouldn't be 95% of your one rep at max. So by definition, true strength training is really going to be in the like five repetitions per set or less range. That's where most of it's going to occur. With specificity. So we've covered choice, intensity, and repetitions, right? The total amount of sets that you do is really kind of up to your personal fitness level, right? If you did as little as like three sets per exercise, that's probably enough. - Work sets. - Totally, yeah, totally work sets, right. So get fully warmed up and build up to that 85%. Don't just walk into the gym and throw 85% on and go thank you, that's an important distinction. So work your way up. Do some, like a very classic warm up thing would be like a set of 10 at 50%. A set of eight at 60%. A set of maybe eight again at 70%. And then maybe like a set of five at 75%. So two or three or four sets kind of building intensity and lowering rep range. And then you would go after your two or three working sets. Also, in terms of rest intervals, now, because we're trying to, the primary driver of strength is intensity. It's not the volume, right, it's the intensity. So in order to maintain that we have to do a low repetition range. But in addition, we also have to have a high rest interval. Because if we start to, if we have any amount of fatiguing occur, and we have to then either reduce the reps or reduce the intensity, we've lost the primary driver. We've lost that main signal. So the number we're going to throw out typically is like two to four minutes. So imagine you did your set of bench press and you did five repetitions at 85%. You probably want to rest two to four minutes before coming back to the bench. That doesn't mean you have to sit there on your phone. In fact, please don't. Everyone will thank you for not doing that, I promise. You can engage other muscle groups. This is what we would call super setting. So you're doing your bench press, and while that two minute clock is running for your chest, to rest, you can go over and do your deadlifts. And so you can kind of move back and forth, and this is how you can make strength training not a seven hour workout. If you're a professional athlete, you're going to take that time, because you want to maximize the outcome. We've done this actually in our lab too, super sets will reduce the strength gains, but by a tiny amount, and most of us don't care enough, relative to it's going to triple the length of your training session. It's not worth it. So for the average person I will tell them, yeah, super set. For someone who's trying to break a world record in weightlifting or power lifting, don't super set. - Interesting. Yeah, I think, I've found that I don't recover particularly well from strength and hypertrophy training. So- - Like in the workout or the next day? - From workout to workout, unless I keep the total duration of those workouts, I like to say no more than 60 minutes of work, of real work. - Yep, yep. - Maybe 75. Past 75. I find that I just start to- - [Andy] That's a lot. - I have to introduce additional rest days, or I just get weaker over time. So I'd set a kind of a limit at 50 minutes and then I usually violate that limit and end up doing 60 minutes. So I'm excited to hear that one can super set exercises, as long as they work different muscle groups, of course. - Yeah. - Right. So I wouldn't want to do like bench press and overhead press, super set it, 'cause you're going to weaken- - Yeah. - I think that goes without saying for most people, but just to point that out. But that I could do some push, pull, push, pull, without compromising total intensity that much. And I certainly would be willing to give up a rep here or there, or a few pounds here or there. And may I ask whether or not in doing that, one gets any even tiny bit, or more of additional benefit in terms of cardiovascular work? Because I imagine after a, even a one rep max which I've never done as I mentioned, but let's say I get three reps on the overhead press and then I get four reps on a weighted pull up, and I'm going back and forth. I'm no doubt going to be breathing harder than if I was sitting there texting away on my phone. - Yeah. - In between sets. - Yep, of course. Yeah, and so in fact in general, one of the things that I'll present in my class is a giant list of, in fact on the top is all these different exercise adaptations I started the conversation with. And on the vertical column are as many of the physiological potential adaptations one would get. So changes in endogenous pH. Blood pressure. Lymphatic changes. Bone density. All these things, right, and just have this giant list. And then you can run a matrix and you can start to look at, okay, if I do speed training, am I going to see changes in the nervous system? Well, like very much so, right? That's the primary, actual reason those things work. Very little change in the muscle system. It's almost exclusively explained by the central or peripheral nervous system, right? On that same token, are you going to expect many cardiovascular adaptation from speed? And the answer is no, because although we didn't cover it, speed is very low intensity, very low rep range, very high rest. Well, as you go to like strength and then you go to hypertrophy, you start seeing more and more increases in cardiovascular adaptations because you're doing exactly that, right? You're starting to reduce rest, and you're starting to increase volume. But you're going to lose things like bone mineral adaptations, because the load starts to go down. So you can look at this matrix and kind of understand if I'm a person who wants to kind of maximize the adaptations I get across my entire physiology for the least amount of work, you can choose these different adaptations to go after that are going to kind of land on these things, right? And exactly as you mentioned, if you're going to take five minutes rest between each rep. So let's say the extreme, you're going to do three sets of one repetition for strength at 95%, you're going to take probably five, maybe seven minutes between each attempt. Like you better not expect many like changes in your resting blood pressure. That there's no cardiovascular strain there. You're going to put it together in a circuit where you're going to lose some potential strength adaptation, but you're going to gain something there. So all these things are, it's not about good or bad or right or wrong. It's always about what advantage do you want and what disadvantage do you want? And I can cut like really in to the chase here on one of these things, 'cause we'll get to this eventually. If you want to know the ones that are going to generally give you the most physiological adaptations across the most categories, you're almost always looking for hypertrophy type of training. And then this anaerobic conditioning piece that we'll get into. That's going to hit the most systems at once. - That's great to know, and we should definitely go a little bit deeper on those types of what the modifiable variables are for those categories. 'Cause I think that, I'm guessing the vast majority of people want to be a bit stronger, maybe add some, a little bit of muscle, or more, make sure their heart is healthy and et cetera. This is wonderful, and I think is clarifying certainly a lot for me. So for strength, let's, I guess training frequency. - Frequency, cool. - So what should determine training frequency? And I had the great benefit of a long time ago when I was in high school actually, I paid for a session over the phone with Mike Mentzer. - Oh, lovely! - Yeah, the Mike Mentzer. - Sure. - And we got to be friends, over time. - High intensity training! - At the time I was pretty young and my mother kept saying like, why is this like grown man calling the house? And then we would talk all the time about training, but he tried to convince me to train once every five to seven days, very few sets, very high intensity. And I must say, it worked incredibly well. - Sure. - It was, I think with my recovery quotient, which was not very good, I think has improved over time but was not very good, it was remarkable. But of course this was a time when I was, you know. - Full of the most animalism - I was 14. - you've ever had. - On my own version of anabolics, right. I had a long arc of puberty, so. - And you were untrained. - And I was mostly untrained. I'd been running cross country and skateboarding, and playing soccer. So. - And doing all the things that are like the antithesis of growing muscle. - Yeah, it was literally, and people would probably say impossible. It was something like 40 pounds of muscle inside of 12 months. It was crazy. - [Andy] I would believe that. - And so, then of course that stopped working over time. - Sure. - And then you start going down the odyssey of trying to find the thing that's going to work that well. And you eventually realize that it was because you were untrained, right? So training frequency is crucial. Let's say that people are doing these whole body workouts as you've described them, not alternating upper body, lower body, 'cause there's so many different splits that we talk, probably doesn't make sense to go into splits right now. But how often can and should one train a muscle? And how do you know if a muscle is recovered locally? And how do you know if your nervous system is recovered systemically? - Okay, this is a bunch of really interesting questions. I'm not sure exactly what route you want to go, so I'll start here. As I mentioned earlier, soreness is not a good barometer of exercise quality, because some types of training are going to induce more soreness and some are going to induce less. That's important to this conversation because when you ask about how do you know if a muscle is ready to train again, one of the question is, well what are you training for? If you're training for hypertrophy, right, muscle size, muscle growth, we need to hedge towards recovery. Because what you're trying to do is cause a massive insult there, allow then protein synthesis to occur, building of new tissue which takes time, 48 to 72 hours, like kind of at a minimum, that process needs to occur. If you're doing actually more strength, and this is a differentiation between hypertrophy and strength, then you didn't induce actually much damage. In fact, you're generally not going to get very sore from true strength training. Very little, unless you get really heavy, you did it a lot. The primary driver of hypertrophy is not the same primary driver of strength. We talked about that already. That's intensity driven. For hypertrophy it's not intensity. So because we have different mechanisms, we have different outcomes, even though they're closely aligned, strength is not going to cause a lot of soreness. Therefore intensity is the driver. Therefore frequency can be as high as you want. So you can train every single day the same exact muscle, if speed or power or strength are the primary training tools, because you need stimulus, there's skill as well, right? Practice. You know that as much as anybody. Developing a new motor pattern requires a lot of repetitions, right? You don't need a tremendous amount of rest. That's not, it's not a damage thing, right, it's a re-patterning issue. So strength training, in fact, if you look at again, true strength professional athletes, they're going to train the same muscles basically every day. - Wow. - [Andy] They're going to squat every day. - And is that because the primary mode of adaptation is recruitment of these high threshold motor units? So it's mainly neural. - No. So everyone's going to say that. And this is where I get all feisty. - Well, I'm not saying that. That was actually, there was a question mark there. - [Andy] Okay, okay. - If we were online putting comments, there'd be a question mark. - We would've fought. I would've blocked you. I'm just kidding. - You already blocked me. No. - Probably twice! Okay. The early adaptations to exercise, especially strength training, are hedged towards the nervous system. No question about it. People always say central nervous system, but it's probably more peripheral, right? Whatever, semantics probably, but pedantic. It's nerve, if you train today, tomorrow morning you're not going to wake up with a actually increase in contractile proteins and muscle. Your muscle might be a little bit bigger due to some acute swelling, but you could have a pretty acute that persists, change in the nervous system we'll call it, that allows you to be stronger, like within a couple of days. Sustained hypertrophy is probably more along the lines of four weeks. We can see that right? We can actually see changes like in the ultrasound. Now you're making changes immediately, that protein synthesis process is happening like very fast and it's going to last. It just takes us time to measure it in terms of a noticeable change in your whole muscle size. So that being said, the first four weeks we typically say are primarily nervous system. After that, now we're starting to see most of the changes coming from the muscle side of the equation. So with strength development, it's a combination of three areas. In fact, all muscle contraction has these same three things. It starts off with some signal, right, from somewhere in the body, whether it's all the way up the top or at the level of the spine, depending on if this is a reaction or an actual conscious control. From there, some signal has to tell the muscle to contract. Okay. So signal is one. Two it's muscular contraction. And there's a lot of variables inside the muscle tissue itself that determine its functionality. And so if we took an individual biopsy and took a muscle fiber from you and took one from me and we took those muscles out and put them in a Petri dish, and I tied one end to a force transducer and the other end to a thing that pulls it, and we soaked it in a bath of calcium and a bunch of other stuff, even if they were the same size, your fibers might contract a lot faster than mine, even relative to size. Or not, or slower, or there's various properties. So the intrinsic fibers themselves determine a lot of functionality. From there, muscle fibers don't cause movements. Muscle fibers simply contract. They're all surrounded with connective tissue. And that's all surrounded with a bunch of more connective tissue. That all surrounds into a muscle. That muscle is then surrounded with more connective tissue. That all comes together into a giant tendon. That tendon attaches to the bone. It's the pulling on those tendon that actually move the bone that cause human movement. So that's area three. Area one, the nervous system, area two, the muscle contraction, area three, some sort of connective tissue thing. Changes happen at all three of those levels. And we're not even now talking, when you entered the discussion of biomechanics, and you changed say the pennation angle of the muscle, which is the angle at which the muscle fibers lay relative to the bone, right? So this is basic mechanics. Is it pulling perpendicular to the bone? Is it pulling horizontal to the bone, or some sort of angle? All of these things determine human performance. So when you're talking about again, that strength development, you can see tremendous improvements in total force production by manipulating all of those areas, and you have not touched changes in muscle size. If you change muscle size in a true sustained fashion, whether this is sarcoplasmic or contractile proteins, you have given yourself more opportunity to produce more force. It doesn't guarantee you produce more force. Bodybuilders are not stronger than power lifters, even though they have more muscle. But bodybuilders are probably stronger than most people. So there is a relationship between muscle size and strength. It's just not a one-to-one guaranteed ratio. And that's generally because the, although the muscle has been aided, they may have not changed the biomechanical considerations. They may have not changed the connected tissue nor the nervous system stuff. And so that's why we see this giant relationship that our value is pretty high between strength and hypertrophy, but if you really want to get to the ends of it, it's not. And that matters to your actual question 10 minutes ago, because again, you can train strength daily on the same muscle, but if you want to allow for that process of contractile proteins to add and grow, then you're going to have to allow some recovery. Because if you go back into that muscle too soon, you're going to blunt the response. You're going to stop it. You're going to cut it off. You have all kinds of problems going on in the cell that are going to just attenuate that growth response. So I gave you the answer for strength training. The answer for hypertrophy is probably less than three out of 10, on level of soreness, so you can go again. In general, you're probably looking at 72 hours is the optimal window. So if you trained your shoulders on Monday, you probably don't want to train 'em again on Tuesday. If hypertrophy's the goal. Maybe Wednesday, maybe Thursday's best. So something like an every two to three day window is probably, and we know a little bit more now about why that is. The gene cascade, the signaling and response happens, well the signaling happens instantaneously, right, within seconds. The gene cascade is probably in the, peaked in the four hour window, like depending on which gene you want to look at. But it's just kind of a snapshot. But the protein synthesis process is 24 to 48 hour thing, and so it tends to kind of look like let that thing finish and let that signal go back to baseline, and then hit it again. And then hit it again. And now as long as you're providing the nutrients, the recovery should happen and you should be able to sustain the same work output in the training session. So the stimulus stays high and the recovery's there, and you can now continue to grow muscle. - You mentioned 48 to 72 hours for hypertrophy. What if, for whatever reasons, the training split, lifestyle factors, et cetera, somebody say, let's use your example, trains shoulders on Monday, ideally they would train them again on Thursday, in their particular instance. Wednesday or Thursday. But they don't. They wait until Saturday or Sunday, for whatever reason. Maybe it's more compatible with their work and other exercise schedule. Whatever the reason. Are they actually losing hypertrophy that they gained, or they've missed a window to induce further hypertrophy? - It's probably better to think about it as the latter. It's not that you've lost, it's just, you've just kind of lost an opportunity to make more progress. I will save you a little bit, kind of going back to your HIIT program. This is the original high intensity training, the Mentzer thing, right? Which is not. - The HIT with one I not the high intensity interval training, but high intensity training. - Correct. - Like one set to absolute failure. - Totally. - Maybe two. For each muscle group. - 20 minute workouts. - [Andrew] Dividing your body into a three-way split, and then literally training like - Smashing. - six times a month. Which most people think that is absolutely crazy. - Yeah. - There's no way that's going to work. And I can tell you this. - It does. - If you are untrained, you grow like a weed. If you train hard enough. - Even if you're trained, look at the people Mike trained. He put a lot of bodybuilders on really high levels. Now they had the same similar help you had at that timeframe. - Wait, to be very clear, I was not taking exogenous anabolics. In fact I- - But your endogenous was just as good. - It probably was. I wasn't measuring my levels there, but I probably would. I grew easy and, in general, I tend to grow pretty easily from weight training. And I should say that, to Mike's credit, and I think this is an important message, that he was the one who really said look, unless you're going to make a professional career out of it, do not run the health hazards of exogenous hormones. And certainly not at your age. So he deterred me from that, which was great because it never entered my mind. It just was one of those things where Mike Mentzer said don't do it. And he had clearly done it, right? And so he's speaking from an informed place. It never entered my mind. But also what was really wild is I was continuing to run cross country. And so there was a trade-off there at some point. - A bit of an interference. - But when you're young, you can get, many people can get away with, - Totally. - with what at this age would surely place me into a state of over-training, even at low volume. We'll see. - Yeah, well I mean like, the whole field on interference effect has changed quite a bit recently, which we could come back to if you want. But just to finish out the idea here with that last question. If you want to take five days or six days in between each muscle group, you can do that. In fact, if you look at the research, it's going to show that frequency is not that important. It's not that it's unimportant, but it can handle changes, as long as you get to the same total volume. So you can do that. You just have to do a lot more work in that one workout. If you care about the six week, eight week thing, if you're like I'm in this for the next 60 years, like it's probably okay, right? But it can be there, the challenge with splitting up your training sessions for hypertrophy into smaller numbers, like once or twice a week, it's just difficult to get that number. It's difficult to get that volume done. Volume-wise, the more recent meta analyses are going to say that you're probably looking at around 10 working sets per muscle group per week. Seems to be kind of the minimum threshold that you're going to want to hit. So if you did three sets of 10 at your shoulders on Monday, three sets of 10 shoulders Wednesday, and three on Friday, that's nine working sets. If you wanted to do three different shoulder work exercises on Monday and hit your nine sets, it's not really actually going to be that much different. The problem is 10 is kind of the minimum. You probably want to look for more like 15 to 20, and in fact, well-trained folks, 20, 25. That becomes very challenging in one workout. In fact de functo, you're not going to be able to do it, right? And so that is where, it's not the frequency that looks like it kills you, it's just the fact you have got to get, because the total driver of strength is intensity, but the total driver of hypertrophy is volume. Assume you're taking it to fatigue, right, or muscular failure. So it's just tough to get enough done. If you can, and if you want to set your schedule up that way, like you probably remember, if you do those types of training sessions where you're just going to completely exhaust a muscle, it's going to be sore for a while. You're probably not going to come back, and that's sort of the logic behind that was let's take this thing to tremendous failure and give it six days to recover. It can work, it's just not the best, I think is one way to think about it. For most people. - It's also hard to do those workouts without a training partner, if you really want to do them correctly. - And stimulants and headphones and all kinds of other things, right? - Well, anyway, yeah stimulants are not, I certainly don't recommend those. It may be a cup of coffee or two, if that's your thing, but, and maybe some of the safer supplements, but certainly not the sorts of stimulants that the guys in the '70s and '80s were famous for taking. - No way, or still use. - Or still use. You talked about repetition ranges, broadly for strength training, so five or less. You said frequency could be as often as every day. Rest two to four minutes, maybe even longer if you're going for one repetition maximum. - Yep. - [Andrew] For hypertrophy. - Sure. - What are the repetition ranges that are effective, and what are the ones that are most effective, if one is trying to maximize some of the other variables? Like people don't want to spend more than an hour to 75 minutes - Realistic. - in the gym. Because I think that while the rep ranges might be quite broad, as you alluded to earlier, there's the practical, there are the practical constraints. - [Andy] Yeah. - So what repetition ranges or percent of one repetition maximum should people consider when thinking about hypertrophy? - Right. The quick answer there is anywhere between like five to 30 reps per set. That's going to show across the literature pretty much equal hypertrophy gains. And we can have a really interesting discussion about why that is. But I'm just remembering one thing from a second ago. I want to give a better answer for the frequency. You can do every single week for strength, or every single day for strength. If you want though like what's probably minimally viable, two, twice per week per muscle. So hamstrings strength, twice per week. That's a good number to get most people really strong. - Okay. - You can do every single day. You don't need to though. So I want to make sure that, like I wasn't saying you have to train a muscle 85% every single day to get it strong. Two is a good number, three is great, but probably even two is really effective. - Got it. And this explains the high frequency of training for strength athletes that's always mystified me. - Yeah. - And the very long workouts make sense, because very long- - They're going to even train twice a day. Even they'll just squat, in the morning squat and the afternoon, every day. - With their eating and their sleeping, they probably don't have time for anything else. - Well, that's why they're pros. So it's their job, right? That's what they do. So yeah, your hypertrophy. Strength training programming is somewhat complicated, right, because of, it's not the danger, but you're going to have to pay, one way or the other, right? The risk is a little bit higher 'cause the load's higher and you have to be a little bit more technically proficient. When it comes to hypertrophy training, the way I like to explain it is it's kind of idiot-proof. The programming is idiot-proof, the work is hard though. So here's your range. Anywhere between five reps and 30. Can you hit somewhere in there, perfect, it's all equally effective, you can't screw that up. The only caveat for hypertrophy is you have to take it to muscular failure. - And you need enough rest for the adaptation and protein synthesis to occur. - Yep. - Yeah. - And if you recover faster, you can maybe do it more frequently. And if you don't, maybe less frequently. - By that logic, should people perhaps experiment and figure out what repetition range allows them to recover, in concert with the training frequency that they can do consistently. - My recommendation is I think you should actually set your, use the repetition range as a way to have some variation, because most people don't want to go in the gym to do three sets of 10. They're going to get very bored very quickly. And so I think you should actually intentionally change the rep schemes for simple sake of having more fun. It is a very different challenge. The mechanisms that are inducing hypertrophy are different, but there's only a maximum amount of growth that one can get, right? And so you have, as best we think it now, and some people actually will espouse that we know really clearly about the mechanisms of muscle hypertrophy, which we don't. It's still very much a guessing game, but the three most likely drivers are one, metabolic stress, two, mechanical tension, and then three, muscular damage. You don't have to have all three. One is sufficient. You can have a little bit of one or two, and you can cut it, so you get it to play here. We've already talked about the muscular damage. Again, it's very clear, more damage is not better. But it is somewhat a decent proxy, right? Like again, a little bit of soreness is good. Just don't get so sore it's compromising your total volume, right? Mechanical tension is kind of like strength. And this is why if you do even sets of five or eight, and you're kind of close to that strength range, you will gain a little bit of muscle. It's not optimal muscle gain, but you're going to gain some because everything in these, like physiology didn't cut off at four reps and then five reps is a different thing, right? It's always a blend, so think of it as like a fading curve. As you get closer to the end, it fades less effective. As you get closer to the middle, it's more effective. Anywhere between eight reps per set to 30, it's equally effective. Past 30, it's going to blend out. Past eight to five to four to three, it's going to blend, you know, lesser there. So metabolic stress is one, the damage is the other, or sorry, mechanical tension is the one that's heavy. Muscle damage is the other one. The third one is metabolic stress. And this is, again, a bit of an area of scientific contention, but something's there. I know something's there. We're just kind of fumbling to figure out what exactly it is. And this is, metabolic stress is the burn, right? It's there. It's why blood flow restriction training probably works. That's done very light, so there's no mechanical tension, there's very little damage, but somehow it induces a good amount of hypertrophy. - [Andrew] Very painful. - Oh boy. - I tried this. I have a friend, former special operator who lives out on the East Coast and took me through a blood flow restriction training protocol in a park. And I don't think I actually cried, but. - You probably did. - But I might've cried out once or twice. It was unbelievable, especially the lower body movements. Now it was a humid day, I'll claim a little bit of jet lag, but - No, no. - it was brutal. It was really brutal. And I also- - Do it on the best day of your life, and it's still brutal. - Okay, well, - Still brutal. - that makes me feel a little bit better. It was intense, and people should know that it is important to use the proper cuffs for these things. I don't have any relationship to any of the companies that sell these cuffs. But the reason is that you actually need to block particular avenues of blood flow. You can't simply cinch off a muscle. You can't tourniquet a muscle and train. - Not a good idea. - You can actually kill yourself that way. - Yeah, you can get a blood clot. - Yeah. And so if you're interested in blood flow restriction training, I imagine you have some content about this, or will at some point, but also there are resources online that people can look up. A question about hypertrophy training I think. Many people are wondering about train to failure, or don't train to failure. Assuming good form. - Yeah, okay, assuming good form, great. The answer is both. So you want to train to failure, but you don't need to go to extreme failure. So you don't need to necessarily go to that like, a partner has to lift the barbell off my chest. But you have to get close. You have to drive either heavy, stress damage, right, or pump. And so a really easy practical way to think about this. I heard Mike Israetel, who runs a company called Renaissance Periodization, years ago, outlined this at a NSCA talk. And it was beautiful, and I thought this is the most eloquent way to explain the context about training for hypertrophy. So I want you to look for three things in your workout, and let's say that you want a particular muscle to grow. Let's say you want your glutes to get larger. Okay. When you're doing your glute exercises, number one, are you feeling the glute contract? Okay, it doesn't have to be there, but that's a good sign if it is. Okay, let's say I didn't really feel my glute contract. I felt it more in my quads or my back. Okay. Did you feel a big pump afterwards? No, I didn't really feel a pump there either wards or during. Okay, great. Number three. Next day, did you feel a little bit of soreness there at all? No, I didn't. Well, that's a very good indicator, you didn't feel it during the workout, you felt no sort of pump, and it didn't get sore. Don't expect much growth. Didn't happen. - You distributed the work across a bunch of muscle groups. - Most likely other muscle groups were too involved, right, especially if you're like, no, but man, my back got really. Well that's a really good indication of telling you what the hell was moving. And so in terms of targets, if you were to put, again, a one to 10 scale, how much should I feel it burning during? Anything less than a three, okay, it's probably not doing much, right? But it doesn't, like seven is not, a 10 is not better than seven. You need to feel it, but it doesn't have to be like, oh my gosh, I'm dying here. Soreness, same barometer, right? So if you can get like three, three and three, you're probably in a pretty good spot. Five, five, and five is maybe better, but you don't need to go much past that. So I want you to feel the muscle group either working, or if you're like I didn't feel it much, I didn't really get a pump but the next day it got really sore, well then you're still on a good path. Again, really sore isn't like ooh, a little tender, but next day it's okay. Day after that, I could train, no problem. That's really what you want to go after. And in terms of understanding, is this likely to produce some growth or not? - Excellent, excellent. Very clear parameters and recommendations I know are benefiting me, and will benefit a lot of people. If you'd be willing to throw out a few sort of sets and rep parameters that could act as broad guidelines for people who want to explore further. I realize that with all these modifiable variables, that there's no one size fits all for strength. I love this five to 30 for hypertrophy, that's a pretty vital thing. I don't think I've ever done a 30 rep set of anything. But now that you've thrown that out there, I see it as a bit of a challenge. - You want to know what's awesome about 30? You're going to get an insane pump. You're going to burn like crazy. But you won't get super sore. Because the mechanical tension's so low. It's so light. So you can get away with those things and you, it's hard because your mind is going to wander. You're going to get it like rep 20, and you're going to be like I'm done, and you're like no, there's a lot left here to get to 30. Where like a set of 10 is much easier, you're just like, okay, two more, two more. Set of 30's like, I got 16 more. It's awful, but you're not- - Just the counting is work. - It's terrible, right, and people tend to just kind of like check out. So 30 is possible, but a little bit extreme. But I would recommend all of 'em. Like it's a really fun play, you can do different, in the same workout too, by the way. Like you could do one set of 10 pushups and then take a little break and then do a set of 25. You can mix and match these things. There's no magic recipe that has to happen for all those, or do it different. So Mondays are my sets of 10 days. Wednesdays are my set of 20 days. And Fridays are my set of 30 days. And you can have all kinds of fun there, and it's hard to screw up. - Great. I love, that phrase is always reassuring. So for strength, is there a sets and reps protocol that is pretty surefire? - So a way to just think about a really fast answer for power, well speed, power and strength, is what I just call the three to five concept. All right? So pick three to five exercises. If you're feeling better that day, choose on the higher end. If you're feeling less that day, or you have a shorter timeframe to train, go less. So this would be three sets, or three exercises rather, or five exercises the most. So three to five exercises. Do three to five reps, three to five sets, take three to five minutes rest in between, and do it three to five times a week. So that can be as little as three sets of three, for three exercises, three times a week. That's a 20 minute workout, three times a week. It can be as high as five sets of five for five exercises, five days a week. So it's very broad and allows people to still stay within the domains of strength and power, while still being able to move and contour towards their lifestyle and soreness and time and all those things. The only differentiator to pay attention to between power and strength, is intensity. So if you want strength, this is now 85% plus of your max, right? And if you want power, it needs to be a lot lighter, 'cause you need to move more towards the velocity end of the spectrum, because power is strength multiplied by speed. So while getting stronger by definition can help power, you probably want to spend more of your time in the 40% to 70% range, like plus or minus. So that's it. Both of them, conceptually they'll work, everything else, the exercise, the reps, the frequency, all that can be still in the three to five range. Just change the intensity, depending on which outcome you want. - The nervous system obviously plays an important role at the level of nerves controlling the contraction of muscle fibers. But of course, we have these upper motor neurons, which are the ones that reside in our brain, that control the lower motor neurons, that control muscle. And this takes us into the realm of where the mind is at during a particular movement. And to me, this is not an abstract thing. I can imagine doing workouts that are mainly focused on strength, or mainly focused on hypertrophy, and in the case of strength, am I trying to move weights, and when I'm trying to generate hypertrophy, am I trying to, quote unquote, challenge muscles? In other words, if I'm just trying to move a weight away from my body, you know, pushing a bench press or an overhead press, I don't know that I want my mind thinking about the contraction of my medial delts. I think I want my mind in getting the weight overhead with the best proper form. Best, excuse me, and proper form. And certainly with hypertrophy training, best and proper form is going to be the target as well. But that simple, or I should say subtle mental shift, changes the patterns of nerve fiber recruitment. So can we say to get stronger focus on moving weights, still with proper form and safely, and to get hypertrophy focused on challenging muscles, still with proper form and safely. - It's very fair. Yeah, as a snapshot answer, it is a very fair thing to think about. Intentionality matters for both. In other words, if you look at some interesting science that's been done on power development and speed development, the intent to move is actually more important than the actual movement velocity. So if you're doing say something for power or strength, and you're doing just enough to get the bar up, that will result in less improvements in strength than even if you're moving at the exact same speed, but you're intending to move faster. And this is one of the reasons why good coaching matters. So if you're coaching an athlete through a power workout especially, and they're doing enough to just lift 50% of their one rep at max, it's not going to generate as much speed development as them trying to move that bar as fast as they can, even if the net result is the same barbell velocity. Turns out nerves matter. - That's a, I mean I was about to say amazing, but as a neuroscientist, if I say amazing that nerves matter. What's amazing to me is, if I understand correctly, what you're saying is that even if the bar is moving at the same speed, same weight, if my internal representation, my thoughts are, I'm trying to move this as fast as possible, versus I'm just trying to get the bar away from me, and get the weight up, I'm going to get different outcomes. - Yep, this is quality of work, right? This is, did you do enough to just check off a box or did you actually strive for adaptation, right? Similar concept actually works for hypertrophy, in terms of there is a handful of very recent studies that have looked at what we'll call the mind muscle connection. And this is doing things like imagine a bicep curl, and you're simply looking at and watching your biceps, and you're thinking about contracting it harder. Even though you execute the same repetitions at the same exact intensity, initial indications are the mind body connection are going to result in more growth than not. - You just gave authorization for people to look at their muscles - Please do. - contracting in the gym. - Please do. - Oh my. - Yeah, of course, right? - But the selfie is still ruled out. - I'd rather you look at your muscles in your phone. So I'm fine with it. Those are initial. We don't have a large depth of research to support that. And maybe some stuff will come and counter it. But it does, it matches what folks in that community have been saying for a very long time, right? There's actually some stuff on simply flexing in between. So if you've ever seen a body builder, they'll do their set of bicep curls and then they'll get out and they'll flex and they'll check. And they're literally, this is what Arnold did, right? This is, if you go back to pumping in iron. - Or college weight rooms, I should say. - Right. - And for some reason there's something about that age group. - Yeah. - That there's a lot of checking of biceps in college weight rooms, for reasons that escape me. - If you ever interact with my wife, like she will be the first to tell you, I cannot walk past the mirror without like, I'm checking something out. - That you can't, - I can't. - or that she can't? - I can't. - Okay. - Not her me. - Got it. - [Andy] Like I'm the one that cannot walk past. - All right, well then I'll be careful not to disparage- - It has nothing to do with the hypertrophy, but I just like I'm a muscle guy, so I'm always like thinking and tinkering, or whatever. But yeah, it is, I think it's very much worth your time to do a higher quality training session. Be more intentional, be present, than just executing the same exact workout. I think that's globally very clear to be to your advantage. So if you're thinking like, I'm going to, like, I don't want to work out today. I got all this going on, or I'm tired or whatever, I'm just going to do the workout I know and get through it. Okay. If you can go, you know what though, like, I'm going to cut 15 minutes out of this thing. I'm going to get my head right. I'm going to go get two 20 minutes of quality work done, that's your best option by far. - You alluded to the fact that even just looking at a particular muscle might benefit in terms of the number of fibers you can recruit, or its potential for hypertrophy. I've heard before, and I certainly have experienced that muscles that for whatever reason, genetics or sports that one played, et cetera, muscles that we find that we can contract to the point of almost a slightly painful contraction, seem to grow more readily than muscles that we can't recruit very easily. - [Andy] Yeah. - And the reason I mentioned sports that we played earlier is, I mean, you just have to watch the Olympics to see that, swimmers obviously are very good at engaging their lats. You look at the gymnasts, they seem to be very good at engaging everything. - Yeah. - And they go through a huge number of different dynamic movements, so that explains that. So I find that, you know, if people say, oh I can't get stronger in this, or my whatever body part is weak, in terms of its inability to engage hypertrophy. - Yeah, I see where you're going. - That oftentimes that can be because of an inability to engage those upper motor neurons, to deliberately isolate those muscles. Are there ways that people can learn to engage particular muscle groups more effectively over time, for sake of hypertrophy or strength, or for cases of trying to overcome injury potential or injury, because imbalances are bad across the board. - Yeah, this is actually very common, and I think everyone has probably gone through this. There's some part that you just can't get going, for me, that was the lats. That was the rhomboids. So my back muscles. For years, I couldn't activate my lats or my rhomboids. These are the muscle groups that connect your shoulder blades. So if you try to squeeze your shoulder blades together, that set of muscles there are called your rhomboids. Your lats of course are more vertical and pull you kind of up and down. And no matter how many lat pull downs I did, bent rows, pull ups, I could never see any development there. No increase in strength. And it took me probably a decade to figure out how the hell do I actually get these things on. In fact, if you'd have asked me, even in my college years as a college football player, hey flex your lats, like show me your lats, you would've seen no movement there. When I was doing a pull up, in that particular case, the only way I could get the bar to move was by using my biceps, right? So it's a synergist muscle, it's supposed to be a secondary or tertiary muscle in that movement, but for me it was primer, because of my over strength in my biceps coupled with my lack of activation in the lats. So you're compensating the same movement. Actually kind of an easy way to think about this is imagine doing a bent row. So imagine you're bent over kind of at a 45 degree or a horizontal angle, and you're going to pull a barbell to your belly button, right? Now you can actually do that exact same movement with very little back muscle activation, by simply flexing your elbows more. And so you think the barbell's going all the way down, it's coming all the way up to touching my belly. And you think you're doing a great back development exercise. When in fact, because of the way that you're executing the movement, you're getting very little back development. And this is a really good example of why someone has done a specific exercise many, many, many times, but yet failed to see development in a muscle group. Which goes back to earlier part of our conversation, which is why exercises themselves do not determine the adaptation. It's the execution that matters, right? It's the technique, it's the rep range, all of those are going to determine your actual result. So if anytime you're banging your head against the wall and thinking like why am I not getting movement here, growth or strength or whatever, it's almost one of those, it's guaranteed to be one of those areas, right? You're probably not getting the muscle groups to activate. In that particular example, just because we're here, try imagine doing that bent row. Instead of pulling the barbell to your belly, squeeze your shoulder blades together first, as far as they can possibly go, and then bring your elbows up without changing the angle of your elbow. So in other words, without bringing your hand closer to your shoulder. So keep that same angle and come up as high as you possibly can, and then finish out the movement. That's going to guarantee a utilization first of the back muscles and a finishing with the biceps at the end, which is how that movement is supposed to go. So how do you coach into that? Well, it can be a number of things. Whenever I'm diagnosing movement quality, I look for a handful of things, but very first one is awareness. You'd be surprised how many folks, when you just simply tell them that muscle group right there, and maybe you give 'em a tactical prompt, so you touch it, or you put something against it. This is actually why, sorry I'm jumping all over the place, but this is why things like a belt work very well for actually increasing abdominal strength. So a misconception out there is if you wear like a belt when you're lifting, then the belt kind of does all the work for you and your abs get weaker. That can happen, but the exact opposite can happen as well. So if you take a belt, for example, and you cinch it down really tight, and then you just completely disregard your midsection, you will see a loss of strength in your midsection because now the belt is doing the work. But if you put the belt on just a little bit, kind of tight, to where you get some sensory feedback, and you think about using that belt as a way to activate the core musculature, you will actually see a higher, if we look at like EMG activation, the core muscles would be activated higher, to a greater extent, than when the belt is off. - [Andrew] Because of proprioceptive feedback. - Hundred percent. - And for those that are wondering what proprioceptive feedback is. Proprioceptive feedback is that there are nerves that extend out to the muscles that control muscle contractions, but then there are sensory inputs from the skin and muscle that go back into the nervous system, and those work in concert, and that feedback is proprioceptive. I think it literally translates to a knowledge of where one's limbs are, and what's happening on those limbs. - In space, yeah. - I've seen, I don't have a training partner, but I've seen in gyms where someone will be training and someone will tap the muscle of the person who's doing the work, in order, this is consensual tapping of other people's muscles, not walking around - Please. - touching people's muscles, please. That to provide that proprioceptive feedback, so that the person doing the exercises becomes more aware of the muscle that they're supposed to be training. And it seems that that's probably an effective practice. - Yeah. I'll give you two examples. I'll go to the back with that pulling movement, but then I'll stay in the belt really quickly. So a very easy example that you can do right now, listening, and I learned this from Brian McKenzie, our mutual friend, right? So if you take your hands and open 'em up, like you make an L with both your hands, and now take those and put 'em around your waist, just above your hip bones. Now what I want you to do is press out as hard as you can on your hands with your core. And you can feel a lot of core activation. And most people think core activation is the front of your stomach, right? Your six pack. What you need to do is create a cylinder around your back. So it's the front, it's the side, and it's the back. So if you take your two fingers, point them. Now put them just outside your belly button. Can you move your fingers by just moving your ab muscles? 90% of people can do yes. Same exact thing. Now go to that same position, just above what's called your ASIS, so your anterior superior iliac spine, right up that front of your hip bone, right in the front. Can you now move? Great, 50% of people are not going to get any movement there. - Really? - Take your thumb and go right above your PSIS. - My what? - PSIS. Posterior superior iliac spine. - Okay. - Right, now can you move? Most likely no. - Sort of if I do a mini low back extension. - Don't. Just with your core musculature. - Barely. - [Andy] Yeah. - Maybe- - 90% of people can't. If you can't perform that contraction, you can't stabilize your spine. So only way to get stabilization in your spine is then to go through hyper-extension. And now that's a compression strategy you're putting on your spine. It's better than rounding your back, like in going forward, but over-extension is not great either. So you want to be able to flex the musculature in a cylindric fashion, so you have control. So if you go back to our very first thing, and with your hands open, and you put 'em right here, and if you're like I can't get activation, if you pay attention to your thumb, right? Now, just move your thumb. And now you see activation back there, fight? - Mm-hmm. - Boom. Now if you can imagine turning that on just a little bit, and now notice how I can do this, by the way, at the same time I'm talking. If you have to go [gasping] we don't have control, right? So you have to be able to separate breath from brace. So now, if I can put myself in a position, and Kelly Starrett has always said 20%. Give me 20% activation here, and now I can squat, I can hinge, I can jump. I don't need to be locked down to a hundred percent scream to be able to brace my spine. It's going to be ineffective and wasteful. I want to be here. Well, a belt provides that proprioceptive feedback where I can put it on 20%, and it just is a reminder, if I don't press against the belt, the belt slides and falls down a little bit, 'cause it's not on super tight. If it's on so dang tight, it's doing the work, and I forget. So we just want a little bit of feedback there. Same thing with your upper back. If you're having a difficult time activating those rhomboids or those lats, someone can do a simple thing where they take their finger, put it right between your shoulder blades, and you just tell them things like hey, squeeze my finger. Squeeze my finger. As you're doing your bent row, or your pull down, you can touch the lat. You can do just visualization stuff. So just imagine like a 3D rendering of that muscle group, and you're watching that muscle group contract. It's very powerful, and very effective to do it. So a touch, a visual, all this stuff can help, get people to activate. Outside of simple awareness, typically eccentric overload is a very effective way for activation of a difficult to target muscle. - So the lowering of the bar, or the lowering of the weight. - The movement of the weight away from the body. It's not necessarily was lowering. 'Cause that kind of depends on what muscle group - Right, sure. - you're doing, right? - [Andrew] I misspoke, yeah. - Things like a pull up. Okay, so if I'm going to do a pull up and I have poor lat activation, I can still get the pull up muscle movement executed by contraction of the biceps and things like that. However, to make the movement simpler, I'm going to go all the way to the top. So imagine stepping on a box or something going all the way to that top of that pull up position. And starting from there, and I want you to simply lower it under control. And so you're just simply breaking the movement down into smaller pieces, that allow you to focus on the execution more. It's going to be great, eccentrics are great for strength development, very good for hypertrophy, and allow you to focus on control. I'm willing to bet a huge percentage of you out there who're like I've never had a sore lat, you know, I've done a lot of pull ups and things like that, if you do that eccentric only you'll probably wake up the next day going, oh gosh, I feel it there. And that's a sign, even if you didn't feel it in the workout, but it got a little sore the next day, keep down that path. And then eventually you'd be able to do a concentric, maybe take a break. Maybe do an isometric, where you just hold that position. And eventually work that into a progression where you can do the concentric, eccentric, and isometric portions, and get activation. So that might take you six weeks. May take you six months. But that's generally a pretty good strategy for learning how to activate a muscle group. - Terrific suggestions. Is it true that eccentric emphasized movements might require a little bit longer recovery, or they lead to more soreness than - They can. - concentric movements? - Yeah, they typically can, but they're also higher force output. So very good for strength development. But they're going to lead on average to more soreness. So more potential for intracellular disruption that is going to be associated with pain. There's not as much, people like to explain muscle soreness as a result of microtrauma and micro tears in the muscle. And that can happen, but that's not the norm. Most of the time, it is things like disruption of calcium that's going to lead to excessive swelling, excessive pressure, and that's going to be then translated as extreme pain. So that's probably explaining more muscle soreness than actually microtrauma. - Terrific. I was going to get to breathing later, but maybe just for now, if we can do a brief little foray into breathing, as it relates to weight training. Is there a prescriptive for how to breathe during resistance training? Here I'm thinking with weights, not necessarily body weight, only movements, although I suppose it could be, that applies 75% of the time to 75% of the people. What I was taught, and I'm hoping you're going to tell me this was wrong, 'cause then there might be more benefits awaiting me, is that I should exhale on the effort and inhale on the lesser effort portion of an exercise. Is that true? Is there a better way to breathe? - There is a better way to think about it. So number one, if you can breathe and brace, then this conversation goes away. So if you can maintain intramuscular, intra-abdominal pressure while breathing, then I don't really care when you breathe. Very challenging to do at very heavy weights. If we flag this on two areas of a paradigm. Paradigm one over here, you're going to do a set of 30, and you're going to do front squats where a barbell is sitting on your throat. If you don't take a breath, like this is going to end one way and one way only. You passing out. Clearly has to be some breathing strategy. The other end of the spectrum is let's say you're going to do a vertical jump. You don't need any amount of breath there, it's never going to happen, right? The question is, what about in the middle? Right? So I'm doing some sort of strength training there. Well, number one, make sure you're braced and then you can get away with less need to worry about it. In general, a decent strategy is to maintain a breath hold during the lowering, or eccentric, or most dangerous part of the movement, and then you can exhale on the concentric portion. So if the bench presses are example, if you held in, braced, lowered it under control, and now started the concentric pushing away force, and then you wanted to take an expiration, during the last half of the concentric portion, that's an okay strategy. If you're going to do a single rep, you don't need to worry about it. You can just avoid or omit breathing entirely. You're going to be just fine. If you're doing more than that, especially three to four to five to seven, eight, you're going to have to have some breathing strategy. A very common one is probably every third breath I'm going to do like [gasping], exhale on the third. Reset and re-breathe. Something like that. If you feel like you need to breathe after every one, that's okay, but it's going to get wasteful, 'cause you have to take time in between reps of sitting there. If it's a squat, that's different, versus a deadlift, if you're resting at the bottom. So there is a little bit of game here. So in general though, is that 75, 75 kind of really thrown out, you threw out. Breathe in, do the lowering, and exhale on the out. If you have to less reps, don't worry about it. More reps, then you need to come up with some sort of breathing strategy. - How about breathing in between sets, and maybe even after the workout? - Yeah. - This is something I think a lot of people overlook, like and because the, it is the case that recovery has to do both with the specific activation and to muscles, and the nervous system, but also the attacks on the nervous system can also take place between sets. I mean, if you're really geared up between sets and you get adrenaline, you know, as high in between sets or close to it as you are during your sets, you can imagine that the recovery would take longer. Or at least that you're not spending adrenaline in the most efficient way, if there is such a thing. - Yeah, fair. You're not going to see any athlete that I work with just breathe in between. Whether it's in between innings or in between rounds, every single one of them's going to go back, sit in the stool, and they're going to immediately be into a breathing routine. A very intentional one. They're a little bit different for every athlete, depending on the sport. Even a PGA golfer, there's going to be a, we just hit our ball, we're moving to the next one, we're going to go into our breathing strategy. Every one of 'em. It's a huge area of potential benefit and consequence, if you're just ignoring it. In general, we want to do any sort of calming breath, we want to restore. It depends on what we're combating. Are we combating low oxygen or high CO2? So that strategy is going to be a little bit different. But in general, that is a huge time opportunity to get better. In fact, people can go back and listen to some of your earlier episodes where you talked about, well you have spoken about, I think, on this show, when neuroplasticity works, and if you're losing that opportunity, post-exercise, you're leaving gains on the table if you will. So not only are you going to see the athletes that I work with mostly have a breathing strategy in competition. We're not going to just finish a workout, high five, drink water, and walk out of the gym. There will be a down regulation strategy that is heavily involved with some sort of light control, as well as breath control. The individual prescription on that, there's a ton of variation with what you can do. The easiest thing is do something that calms you down. Most likely that's going to be moved towards as much nasal breathing as you can possibly do. And a really easy rule of thumb is a double exhale length relative to inhale. So if you need to take a like four second inhale, double that time and breathe out for eight seconds. Box breathing is fine. So equal inhale, equal hold, equal exhale, equal hold. So four second inhale, four second hold, et cetera, et cetera. A triangle is fine too. There's a lot of ways, you can get really complicated, like what Brian McKenzie will do, and Rob, and those guys have, you can get all kinds of systems for inhale exhale control and it can be optimized. But some strategy of calm. We're going to almost always put you on your back or close, and then we're going to cover light. We can do some, like we've done actually a number of musical interventions as well, but you can just as simple as sit down in a locker room if you have to, and just breathe for five minutes. That alone is going to be productive. - That's great. If you're breathing in the locker room for five minutes, I suggest closing your eyes, or you get some funny looks, and if, you'll still get funny looks, but you won't see people looking at you. - Yeah, exactly. - I love this, and I started doing this because you and Brian McKenzie informed me about this, and it completely changed the rate of recovery for me. I realized that I was leaving workouts, both endurance workouts and strength hypertrophy workouts feeling great, but looking at my phone, getting right into email and meetings. - Ooh, ooh, rough, - Not concentrating on my breathing. And all I did was to introduce a, on your recommendation, a five minute down regulation. So exhale emphasized breathing, a bunch of different varieties, physiological size, box breathing, exhale emphasized, twice as long as the inhale component for five minutes. And I noticed two things. One, I recovered more quickly, workout to workout, no question about it. - [Andy] Yeah. - The numbers told me that. And the other is that I used to have this dip in energy that would occur three or four hours after a hard workout. And I always thought that had to do with the fact that I'd generally eaten a meal at some point post-workout. Turns out it wasn't the meal at all. - Yeah. - It's that adrenaline ramp up during the workouts, I wasn't clamping that at the end. And so I think eventually it's crashed, and then three or four hours later I'm having a hard time even reading what's on the screen on my computer, thinking maybe it's the screen. Maybe it was what I ate for lunch. Turns out, the down regulations allowed me to work through the afternoon with no issues whatsoever. It's really been quite powerful, and so I'm grateful to you for that. And I think this is something that I think 98% of people are not doing, and it's only five minutes. - You don't even have to do five. Give me three. If you really have to push it, give me three. And you can even do this, you can save time. You can do this in the shower if you have to. So you're done, you're finished. Drink of water, whatever has to be, and you're getting in a shower, you're getting ready. Just give me three minutes in the shower. It's not ideal, but as little as that, it can pay huge dividends. You need some sort of internal signal that we're safe. Like throttle down here, we're going to move on. That has to happen. I could go on and on here, but I think we're making the same point kind of over and over again. It's a big deal and do it. - Yeah, and you're saving energy. I mean, the energy here is neural energy. I think fighters do this, good fighters learn to do this between rounds. Sprinters learn to do this between events. I think humans should learn how to do this between any, you know, sort of interval type activity, including work, social engagement. - Yeah, I was going to say- - I mean, this is such a powerful tool. - Do this for one minute, after every important, whether it's an individual high volatile interaction, or if it's a, you just did a nice 45 minute sprint to work and you're deep into it or whatever, fine. Just gimme one minute. Set your alarm, just one minute, and that also will pay dividends. - I love it, and as I said, it's made a outsize different, positive difference on my training, but also activities outside my training. Which is, for me, I'm not a professional athlete, I train for health and 'cause I enjoy it, but when a really hard workout starts to interfere with the ability to do the other things in life, - Of course. - that's not a good situation. So this is really terrific. There's a lot more in each of those categories of strength and hypertrophy, but you've given us a tremendous amount of valuable information there. Maybe now would be a good time to shift to endurance, and of the four types of endurance, and maybe you could remind us what those are, what do you think are the two that most people are seeking or pursuing in terms of health and aesthetics, right? I realize that we probably have athletes out there as well, but when I think health and aesthetics, I think, okay, the ability to do sustained endurance, 30 plus minutes of some ongoing activity, how does one maximize that work? What are the modifiable variables? And then maybe you could tell us what the other major category is, that people ought to have in their kit. - Okay. So starting off with exercise choice. One thing, as soon as we cross into the endurance world, and this is true for all four of those categories, exercise choice needs to be very concerned with eccentric landing, right? So you don't need to avoid it, but you need to recognize it, relative or compare it against those other strength and speed ones. The volume is low on those ones. So if you have some eccentric absorption it's okay. But as we sort of talked about five minutes ago, more eccentric means greater chance of muscle damage soreness. So if you take something and magnify it across 30 minutes, or even five minutes, but of maximum exertion, you have a recipe for blowing up. You can imagine I haven't run in forever, and I've just, I've listened to this "Huberman Lab Podcast" and I'm okay, I'm going to get into my zone two training, whatever. And I start jogging, I'm going to do, you know, I remember when I was, I used to be able to do 25, and you just do a 25 minute jog. The amount of eccentric landing that just occurred on every single step, because you're never, with running, even slow running, you never have two feet on the ground at the same time. So it is a one foot land, one foot land, your entire body mass plus gravity onto one leg at a time, repeated now hundreds of times. That eccentric landing is going to cause tremendous soreness. Your quads are going to go. You're probably going to get shin splints, which is what, this isn't, those are entirely caused by eccentric landing, and when the tissue is not ready to tolerate that. If you're not landing correctly, this is when knee pain happens, back pain, shoulder, neck pain, 'cause of movement compensation. So anytime we start pressing to fatigue, let's be very concerned with there. So my initial recommendation is, start with activities exercise choice-wise that are mostly concentric based. So think about a cycle. So when you're riding on a bike, you're pushing the pedal, but you're never landing and absorbing it. So you could go out and do a 45 minute bike ride, and you're not going to get that sore because there's not a lot of eccentric load. Swimming, similar thing here, right? There's some eccentrics when your hand hits the water, but fairly minimal. It's mostly a push push, push, push, push, no load. Rowing, similar thing. Mostly concentric. Pushing a sled is fantastic. Going uphill, running or even walking hard uphill, all good, 'cause they're very minimal landing relative to like running downhill, which would be a very, very bad idea to start. So if you're first jumping into these things, progress your volume for endurance very slowly, if it involves eccentric landing. A really bad strategy would be to jump in and do say circuit training class that involves a bunch of box jumps, right? This is not a good way to do your first foray into conditioning. You're going to get incredibly sore because you're jumping and landing. You're now looking at three to 10 X body weight in terms of absorption, with a single land, even if you're just jumping. So be careful of that, in any of those endurance areas of exercise choice. So what to pick. Pick the one that you are most technically proficient in, because you're going to do it a lot. It's going to be a lot of repetitions. Whatever one you feel the most joy in. If that's rowing, great. If that's pushing a sled, it doesn't really matter. You can do this actually with weights. This is our preferred way, by the way, with our athletes. So we might do a 30 minute circuit where we do a five minute farmer's carry with a pretty light weight. So you're just going to carry some weights in your hand, and you're just going to walk up and down the street for five minutes. You're going to set that down and then you're going to do say a three minute plank, and then you're going to pick that up and you're going to do body weight squats. Like slowly and just tempo. And you're going to do a handful of different exercises, so the athletes don't get super bored. Or a very simple one, if a 30 minute workout, 10 minutes on a treadmill, 10 minutes on a bike, 10 minutes on a rower. But for those of you that are like oh my God, I can't do 30 straight minutes running, cool, break it up into three or four different exercises that are all fairly safe. So that's how I would do that long duration piece. - Got it. - For exercise choice. - And then in terms of heart rate during that period, I mean how much attention should we pay to this? The kind of very broad prescriptive I've thrown out on this podcast a few times, based on my read of the literature, is for most people that are oriented toward health, including people that are working on size and strength gains, hypertrophy and strength of course, that getting 150 to 180 minutes of so-called zone two cardio, - Yeah. - can just barely have a conversation, but if one were to push any harder, you wouldn't be able to, that kind of thing. It's just as a kind of a generic recommendation that almost everybody should follow, in order to just keep their cardiovascular system healthy. But I know there's a lot of nuance there, and some people would like to be able to run continuously for an hour at speed, right? - Yeah. - Obviously not sprinting. But what are some of the finer points on long distance endurance? And how often should one do it? - Okay. Frequency, you could do it as daily, right? - [Andrew] Even when doing strength and hypertrophy? - No question. - Well that, I think, is an important point for people to hear, 'cause a lot of people think that they are going to greatly diminish their strength and hypertrophy gains, as it's often called, by doing zone two cardio. - Zone two, you have almost no ability to block your hypertrophy. Zone two, truly, if it's really within that category, if you're talking about conversational pace, there is very, in fact there is strong reason to think that is not going to influence hypertrophy for the overwhelming majority of people. - It might even help it by increasing blood flow to the various- - Absolutely. - Does it matter? Let's say someone's doing primarily strength and hypertrophy. Their primary goals are strength and hypertrophy. And then they're going to do, they're going to hit that 150 to 180 minutes of zone two cardio per week. Assuming they're breaking that up into three or four sessions. Does it matter if they do it in the same workout before or after? Does that matter? I tend to do, just by way of example for people, certainly I'm just one example. I tend to do resistance training one day, then I'll do zone two cardio the next day, I jog 'cause that's the thing I prefer. Then I'll do strength hypertrophy training the next day, and then, and jog for my zone two cardio. And then I take one full day off a week. I've never actually done the zone two cardio on the same day, but were I to do it on the same day, would it matter if I did it before or after my strength hypertrophy training? - Not really. - Okay. - You're going to be just fine. The interference effect is what this is called. So this is all the way back to 1980, Bob Hickman's stuff, right, and he was actually working in a lab with John Holloszy, who's one of the fathers of exercise biochemistry. And sort of the story goes that Hickman came in, he was the strength training guy, and Holloszy and almost all of those initial exercise physiologists were conditioning folks, right? So it's almost always swimmers and runners. And that's why a bulk of the exercise physiology, historically, is shaped in that direction. That's what those scientists were interested in. So Hickman was there in the lab, and then how much of this is myth or not who really knows, but so the story goes, that this is sort of chipping back and forth, and you know how from a PI to a postdoc, and kind of that razzing works a little bit. And eventually he was like you got to start running with us, and he was like you got to start lifting with me, and kind of goes back and forth. Well, you know who wins in that equation? It's not the postdoc, right? So it's, the PI gets in and says, Hickman says, okay fine. So he starts running with Holloszy and then eventually starts to realize I'm getting weak. I'm losing strength and like, I just can't. I think it was his bench press specifically was going down, or maybe his squat. I can't remember. Who knows if it's even real. But point is, so he's going along and so eventually that starts to create a little bit of animosity, and he's like actually I don't think this is good for me, and then blah, blah, blah. And so they did what any good scientists would do and said, well, let's find out, right? And so he run a really famous experiment where he took a group, three groups. One group did a endurance piece, right, the steady state cardio. One group did a strength training piece. And then the third group did both of those workouts combined. Not like a reduction, so both volumes stacked on top of each other. And the results are fairly predictable. In terms of the endurance group only had the greatest increases in VO2 max and endurance markers. The strength training group had the greatest increases in muscle hypertrophy. But where the interesting part was, and where this whole field started, was the combined group. So this is concurrent training is what it's generally called. So you're doing concurrent things. And typically that means hypertrophy and strength stacked on top of some steady state endurance. - In the same timeframe. - Same workout. - Same two hour block. - [Andy] Or same like week. It doesn't really, it can be, - Got it. - kind of all these. Well, the concurrent group saw the same improvements in VO2 max as the endurance group. And he is like, well, okay. So the strength training did not compromise the endurance adaptations. However, they saw much lower increases in strength than hypertrophy. And so it was, the conclusion was, the addition of endurance work compromised muscle growth and strength development. However, the addition of strength training to your endurance work will not compromise your endurance gains. Now that second piece has been shown countless more times, right? So if you're an endurance athlete, adding strength training is almost always going to be massively beneficial. Very little chance of detriment. This is why every endurance athlete is going to have some sort of strength and power component to their training. The controversy though came in the interference effect. So how much endurance training really blocks muscular development. And for years, myself included, was we preached hard. Don't do these two things at the same time. My friend, my colleague, Kevin Murach has a really nice review article with Jimmy Bagley. Those two guys put this thing out, you can go read that, where they cover all these things, and they've got some nice figures in there. But the general answer here is interference effect is sort of real, but it's probably greatly overblown. It matters, so are you talking about a 20 minute jog at conversation pace? That's probably doing very little. With the assumption that are you doing an eccentric-based exercise like running? Well, then you're going to have more of an interference effect than cycling. That makes a ton of sense, if you think about it, right? What's your total energy intake? If you're eating sufficient calories, you can still be in an anabolic state. If the addition of extra energy expenditure, it's all it really is, the cardio, put you in a negative energy state, it's going to become very difficult to go through anabolism. So those things matter. If you're talking about doing like running a few laps around the track as a warmup, like that's not interference effect. What we're really talking about is a big volume performed consistently. Now after Hickman came out with this paper in 1980, people followed it up in the '90s and 2000s with mechanism. And we started to look and see, and we started to see, hey, there's this cell-signaling pathway that goes down called mTOR, and that's what leads to muscle growth. And then on the other side of that equation, there's a thing called AMPK, which is more associated with mitochondrial biogenesis and endurance. And there's this little molecule in between at the time, most people would point to TSC2. Well, turns out AMPK activation is fine. If you activate mTOR, has no bearing on AMPK, but if you activate AMPK, it's going to activate TSC2, which inhibit mTOR. And so it was like we had practical outcome, i.e. Hickman. You're going to get weaker. Now we had mechanism. So that story became very, very strong that this interference effect, and this is how science should work, right. When you see mechanism match up with practical human outcome. It's a strong- - That's what you want. Yeah. - It was still wrong though. It just took more science, right? And this is why we always have to give science a bit of time, and you have to be willing to follow, right. And again, even me in the field who has a practitioner background and science, I felt very strongly, this is a big problem. It just didn't turn out to be the case. Enough studies came out where I'm like, okay, it's probably not that big a deal. Unless the movement is heavily eccentric-based, the volume is very high. You're trying to maximize muscle growth, and energy's not controlled. If that's not all the case, interference effect is probably not something most people should worry about. Especially when you compare that against the well-roundedness that you need for total physiological health. Probably not a big deal. - Very reassuring for me to hear, because I do enjoy lifting weights and I really enjoy running. And I love running outside. I believe I used to experience the interference effect when I used to do a very long run on Sundays. I would just go out for two hours or something like that. I don't know that I ate enough, or who knows. I always feel like I eat enough or more. I love to eat. But that long Sunday run always made it hard for me to make progressive gains in strength and hypertrophy in the gym. Whereas when I cut that to 30 minutes, three or four times a week, I don't see any interference effect at all. - Probably very real. - And I haven't trained specifically for endurance in a very long time, so I don't, I haven't experienced the non-interference effect, which as you said before, most, if not all endurance athletes probably are, or at least should be doing some sort of strength work, just to keep the undercarriage strong as I think- - Yeah, there's a bunch of reasons, but yeah. - So what are some protocols that people could explore for continuous endurance training? I mean, I've thrown out this 150 to 180 minute zone two cardio, but that's really the kind of kindergarten of endurance. - Yeah. - And there, I'm probably being generous. It's probably the nursery school of endurance that everyone should do. What sorts of other protocols, I realize that can be very goal-directed, but is it unreasonable, for instance, for somebody to do four hours of continuous endurance training with intervals in there as well, to get it kind of all around heart health and the ability to go long distances? - Yeah, I'll answer this two ways. The very first one. To tackle the long duration endurance is, how I refer to it. You asked earlier about heart rate zones. To me, that's almost totally irrelevant. It doesn't matter, right? If you're moving, you're moving. That's the functional piece here. If you want to push it and go at a non-conversational pace, that has tremendous health benefits. If you want to do it a little bit slower, fine. If you're at the pace where you can have a conversation to me, I don't even count that as exercise. That's not a pejorative, by the way. That is just general physical movement. And it is extraordinarily clear, you need a lot of that. You need a lot more of that than we get. You can do this in a couple of efficient ways. Just taking your phone calls moving. If you've got a 30 minute call every day, or most days of the week, and you can do that while moving, you've checked not that whole box, but a pretty good chunk of it. - And that could even be done inside, - 100%. - if you're pacing back and forth. I'm a big pacer. - The, yeah, me too. Like you probably saw me, like I'm going to walk up and down all over the place. Most of the time, when I'm in my office working, like I'm shadow boxing, like I'm doing air squats, not even intentionally, I'm just like. - Do you have one of those treadmills under the desk? - I don't. But like every lab I ever came through, somebody did. - We did an episode on workspace optimization, and the data on those treadmills are pretty interesting. They definitely increase alertness, which for obvious reasons, even a little bit of movement is going to generate - No doubt. - a little bit of adrenaline. So pacing around, moving, taking calls moving, getting walks when you can. And then in terms of building endurance, let's say somebody wants to quote unquote, get into better shape. - Yeah. - They already, may or may not already have some size and strength that they're happy with. And they just want to get, they want to improve their health. - Yeah. So I can- - When does that 150, 180 thing tick over into a different protocol? - Yeah, okay, so I think the way that I can outline a weekly schedule, just as a conceptual model here. That long duration stuff is not even counting, as I mentioned, right? It's just a, this is what you need to do as a human, moving forward. We haven't improved. If you're extremely unfit, you may see some changes in cardiovascular health there, but for the most part, this is just knocking out the general physical practice, you need to be higher functioning. So whatever that time domain is, I don't really care. It's not a huge concern of mine. What I think you need to hit are these nodes. You need to do something once a week, that gets you to a maximum heart rate. Now I don't have to literally mean max but close. - So this means really sucking for air. - Really, like as high as you can possibly get. You can wear a heart rate monitor if you want. But maximum heart rate, the rough equation we say is 220 minus your age. So if you're 40 years old, your maximum heart rate is probably about 180 beats per minute. Now I can tell you flat out right now, my max heart rate is close to 210, which means I'm 10-years-old. So take that number with a grain of salt. I have had a bunch of professional athletes who are in their 20s, and their max heart rate's 175. And they are in way better shape than I am. So maximum heart rate is not a good proxy for physical fitness. It's a rough number. An easy way to do it is if you have a heart rate monitor or anything like that, do the hardest workout you can possibly do, see what the highest number you get is, and assume that's close. If you want to just start at 220 minus your age, that's fine too. Do something though where you're like, yep, this is death. Like this is really, really challenging. - For how long? - However long that takes you. That can be a 30 second go on an Airdyne or Air Assault bike. That could be a, do one of those things where you kind of like sprint, run as hard as you can during the straightaway on a track, and then walk the corners. Kind of an old classic, when you and I were kids, interval training. - They don't do that anymore. - I guess, I don't know, I don't hear anybody talk about it. - In PE class we had to change, and if you didn't bring running shoes, you had to do it barefoot. - Oh, I love it! I love your teacher. - Yeah, it wasn't a, our football, basketball, baseball teams weren't that good, but anything like running cross country, just 'cause of where I grew up. - Oh yeah. - We had brutal coaches. So yeah, they'd make all kids do these runs. - Yeah, so it can be in the 30 probably seconds at a minimum. It's hard to get you to a true heart rate max in shorter than 30 seconds. You can get to total suck in under 20 seconds, but getting to a true heart rate max is probably going to take more than 30 seconds. So it doesn't really matter what you want to do. It can be, again, a sprint uphill. It could be, we were talking, it could be burpees to death. You know like, whatever you want to do, just- - Although those have an eccentric component, right? - Yeah, they do. No question about it. But if you did- - Not to actual death, by the way. - If you just did I'm going to do as many burpees as I can for 90 seconds, it probably won't take you much longer than that to get close to max workout. - And is that the whole workout? - [Andy] Could be. - So once a week, get to max heart rate. - Touch it. - I love it. - Touch it. It's not the best, but it'll work. - And what are the specific benefits that that provides? - Okay, so earlier in our chat, we outlined the rule of specificity. Specific adaptation to impose to man. If you're never getting to that high of a pace, you're never, it would be like trying to get stronger, but only going to 60% So every cardiovascular adaptation that occurs with cardiovascular training, is just simply going to get to the top end by doing this. So if you just start at the heart itself. Stroke volume increases. So this is the amount of blood that's kicked out per contraction. Cardiac output. Resting heart rate. If you go to the endothelial function, you're talking about nitric oxide release. Endothelial health in general. Capillary, mitochondria, all the way down. Like you just walk through the whole system. Pulmonary exchange to the lungs. All of those are going to benefit by being challenged to their maximum. - They also teach you where your vomit reflex is. - Yeah, there you go. Right. - Let's hope not. - Stress is what causes adaptation, right? So if you push your, okay, here's the difference. If you did 25 minutes of steady state, you're not challenging the same thing as what we just talked about. The way that I explain this is if you understand the point of physiological failure, then you understand the place of adaptation. That's it. So if you and I both go run on a, we both did a VO2 max test. So a classic VO2 max test is going to take eight to 12 minutes, and it's going to look something like this. We're going to get on a treadmill, and we're going to run. And every minute I'm going to just slightly increase that treadmill, either the speed or the grade. Most of the time, it's the speed, right? So we get to a high grade, say 10% grade or something, and then we go five miles per hour, 5.2, 5.4, 5., and we just go until you can't go any longer. Now let's say you and I did that, and we had the same exact timeframe, and so we both went eight minutes. The time that you last is not the thing that we care about, right? It's the volume of oxygen that you breathe out is what determines it. So let's say we had the same time domain and we had the same VO2 max. Let's say they were both 50 milliliters per kilogram per minute, which is like a okay number, but that's nothing to be extremely proud about. Just because we have the same number does not mean we have the same point of physiological failure. And this matters because it's going to answer the what do I do about it then question, right? So if you got off and I started asking you a series of questions, and you're like, and I basically said why'd you quit? Why did you jump off the treadmill, why'd you stop? And you were like my chest, like I couldn't catch my breath. I thought my heart was going to explode. Okay, great. If you ask me and I said my legs were on fire, like I was breathing hard but I couldn't take another step, this is a very rough indicator of different places of physiological disruption. Now what I've seen a lot with my professional athletes, especially like fighters. They're going to generally fail on their legs, because they don't often do a lot of strength training in their legs. They don't do a lot of leg work. They're fighting on their back, literally, a lot, or on top, or on their knees. So their legs tend to give out before there. Someone who fails in the cardiovascular system, like say you did a lot of leg training, typically like an endurance athlete who's, that's not going to be their issue. It's just going to be they're going to reach a heart rate and ventilation threshold that they can no longer handle. If I put you on the exact same training protocols, it's not going to be as effective because you're going to always fail at your legs and they're going to always fail at their cardiovascular system. I need to flip that, right? I need to put you in a position to where you can reach a true heart rate or ventilation challenge, while your legs are still hanging in there. Or the opposite. So the training protocol is based on that point of failure. The adaptation is in the same thing. So if you are failing because of your legs, then you might see a greater increase in capillarization in your legs, relative to somebody else who's failing in their cardiovascular system. They may see a greater change in something on that side of the equation. So it matters how you're failing, at all times. - What I love about this is that it's, it sounds like it's like a thermometer for where one is weak and needs work, but also provides a stimulus to improve the very thing that you need. - That's the trick, right? - That you need support in. So to just get real brass tacks about it, it would be once a week. - Okay, yeah. - 90 seconds near maximum heart rate. - I'll make it easier. - Could I do more? Could I, you know? - Oh yeah. - Could I do five or six of those 90 second bouts? - No question. You can do, as long as you touch that max heart rate, I'm good, right? Ideal world, probably four to eight. - In that single session. - Ideal. - Okay. - Right. If that takes you 20 seconds or 90 seconds, it's fine. If you want to do 30 on, 30 off. You want to do 20 on 40 off, 40 on 20 off, those numbers don't matter. - And is there an interference effect of this on the other sorts of training that we've talked about? - It actually tends to be complementary. The evidence available suggests that this high interval stuff is more likely to be complementary to hypertrophy training, probably because of lactate, and some other cool things, which are very beneficial molecules that people don't understand. They think it's bad, it's actually a hugely beneficial thing. It can be interference. It can provide an interference if calories are not accounted for, if rest is not accounted for, and other things. But in general, it's probably okay. I wouldn't add it to your equation if you don't need it, for maximizing hypertrophy. But for the person who wants to just get well rounded physiology, yeah I wouldn't hesitate to do these, even in the same session or different sessions. - Terrific. And if that's done once a week, and the 150 to 180 minutes or so of zone two cardio is done, you know, in the rest of the week, person's doing their strength and hypertrophy training we would hope, what other sorts of endurance practices could one incorporate. You mentioned muscular endurance, like the ability, would like a wall sit or the ability to do a plank. Is that something, is that useful for anything? - Yes. - Be doing planks and wall sitting? - No no, it's extraordinarily useful. Let's hold on muscular endurance. I want to finish one more thing on this side. So if we're building this week of endurance, once a week hit that number, if you can do repeated bouts, we talked four to eight, that's fantastic. If you can't manage the mental energy every week, do it every other week. It's still very good, right? 'Cause I get it. Like I'm a working person too, and sometimes you're just like, I cannot. Those workouts feel incredible afterwards, but man, they are daunting. If you love this stuff, you could do it four times a week. If you hate it though, it's not realistic to think you're going to be able to knock this out. You're going to end up doing 70, 80%, which is not going to get you the benefit. So just don't do it. - You really have to hit that ceiling. - [Andy] You've got to get up there. Close. - Have someone chase, I always say, you know, when doing this kind of work, in my mind I'm thinking that I'm basically being chased by somebody with a syringe full of poison. - Yep. - And while there are other ways out of the situation, and for the benefit of what we're talking about, the one I'm referring to is to just run. - Yep. - Yeah. - My motivation is typically, if you just get this done, we're done in a couple of minutes. Just get it done. Like don't go here if you're not going to do it, but when you show up, check in, and it's over really quickly. - Breathing down regulation afterwards. - Hundred percent. You have to, right. It's a huge key. So if you absolutely can't do it, do it every other week. That's twice a month. Give me twice a month. Can be done on the road, can be done in 20 minutes. Like do a really good thorough warmup. Don't just jump into those, by the way, right away. It's not going to be as beneficial. Really nice, good sweat broke. A really good warmup. And then give me four minutes of hard work and we're done, right? Get out of there. If you want to use like a bath or hot thermal stress to kind of like aid in that warmup process, fine. Get in the sauna, get in a hot bath, get really hot, get up there, warm up, knock it out. Whole thing is 20 minutes, plus five minutes breathing. You're out of there. - I'm going to start doing this. - It's so better, you got a bike right there. - Yeah, I've got all, every room in this studio has a different piece of equipment, it seems. - So, I want that once a week, realistically every other week if I have to. I want that physical activity piece, call it whatever you want, long duration thing. Ideally you'll do as much of that through your nose only. You're not going to be able to do the interval stuff at nose only. Don't even try. But if you can go that whole 30 minute time, or 20 or 40 minutes or whatever it's going to be, that's actually a good way to regulate intensity. So go as hard as you can, while still being able to breathe through your nose only. If you have to open up your mouth a little bit, fine, but try to stay there. What you'll see is very quickly, you'll be able to increase your work output while just breathing through your nose, which has a bunch of other beyond benefits. The other piece I want is this middle ground, which is, can you sustain hard work for eight to 12, maybe as little as four minutes? I'll give you four to 12 minutes. This doesn't have to be quite as high as the first one. You don't have to get to a heart end max, but can you get somewhere in the 80% range, and can you hold that for four minutes? Maybe gimme two minutes, two minutes of rest, and do that twice. Something like that. Ideal situation is what a runner would do is like what we'll call mile repeats, 'cause they're running four or five minute miles. Whatever time it takes them to finish, they're going to rest that. So it's a one-to-one work to rest ratio. So a five minute mile, rest five minutes, and go again. That's probably pretty unrealistic for a lot of folks. - Well the five minute part is unrealistic for most folks. For me it would be eight minutes, eight minutes. - Fine. - [Andrew] Probably something like that now. - Well in your particular case, just do the 800 meter. So do 800 meters. Do something that takes two to six minutes of work. It is a lower intensity than the max stuff, but is a much higher workload. That is probably going to give you, you might even argue the most cardiovascular benefit, because it is sustained work output. And that's very critical. The downside of kind of like that conversational pace. It's physical activity, it's movement, it's blood flow, it's lymphatic drainage, it's not very cardiovascularly challenging though. You're just not going to get an optimal health from just walking actively. - So two to six minutes of- - Hard work. - of hard work, with then an equivalent amount of rest in between, and then repeat how many times. - Once, if you have to. If it needs to be one rep, if it needs to be a six minute thing, and then down regulate breathe. Twice, if you can do that, six times, eight times, like whatever you can really do. And you can just take that as long of the training session as you want, or short. Exercise choice could be whatever you want. So again, you can do sled pushes, or it could be a kettlebell circuit, or any combination of things where you're just, you're working and you're not giving yourself a break. You have got to be able to hold on at a very high waste product production level, as well as a high demand for energy, and then bring it down. - And breathing during this two to six minutes of hard output is mainly through the nose, or combination nose and mouth, or is that getting too technical? - Well, it's probably, like I like it, but you tell me if it's too technical. You're going to try to maintain nasal only as much as you can, but you're going to lose it at some point. You can go through their, Brian and Rob's gear system, and learn more, and then you can kind of see what gear to be in, if you have to go nose in mouth out, or something like that. But I don't really care too much, honestly, in that range. I'm getting most of my nasal only stuff at night, and training and everything. So if you have to open up the throttle there to get the work done, that's okay. Oh, then we'll actually go to your, answer your question, which was muscular endurance. Let's go back to that piece. Muscular endurance is incredibly important for general maintenance of joint health. In other words, you have got, form follows function, right? That's a very classic science-y physiology saying, meaning you've got a couple of different, there's a bunch, but to make it easy, two different types of muscle fibers, fast twitch and slow twitch. Fast twitch fibers tend to be, but they're not always, bigger. They contract with a higher velocity, that's why they are called fast twitch. But they tend to be more glycolytic and less fatigable. Slow twitch tend to be smaller, though not always. They are more packed with mitochondria, they are generally better at burning fat as fuel, but contract at lower velocity. Well we have these two types so that we can regulate function more. You have some muscle groups that were going, oh, sorry, let me go back up a quick second. Each individual muscle in a human body has a combination of some amount of fast and some amount of slow. That percentage of fast versus slow differs from muscle to muscle. So it also differs from person to person. Easy example is your calf muscle. There's three, but there's two primary muscles in your calf. One's called the soleus and one's the gastroc. The gastroc is the one where if you take your toe and point it towards your face, and then flex, that's the one that pops out on the medial side, the inside. The soleus is what we call an anti-gravity muscle. And it is generally about 80% to even 90% slow twitch. And that's because it's supposed to be contracted lightly, all time though. It's supposed to be on permanently. It's meant to keep, we call it anti-gravity, 'cause it's meant to keep you erect, up and moving. Your spinal erectors are supposed to do this, various muscles for postural are generally slow twitch muscles. So they're supposed to be on at all times, not produce fast, not produce force, but don't get tired. The gastroc is the opposite. It's not activated very often, but when it's activated, it's meant for extreme propulsion. So this gives us the ability to reach up and scratch our eyeball, and also punch somebody, right? We have to be able to regulate force output, which is going back to Henneman right? Controlling what we use, what we don't use, while also not wasting energy, which is the downside of activating a big threshold motor neuron is it requires a ton of energy. So a more efficient mode of energy, but the total amount is really, really high. So muscular endurance is going to help those slow twitch muscle fibers and slow twitch predominant muscles maintain their working job. So if you lose your muscular endurance ability in your spinal erectors or your calf, you're going to start slumping into bad positions. You're going to be getting, putting joints in a movement pattern that they're not going to be the most happy with. So it's more than about then being able to just maintain a two minute wall squat. It's about maintaining joint integrity, and allowing that musculature to not fatigue when you ask it to do heavy and fast. So what I mean by that is, you've got a whole combination of muscles in your shoulder, and we will generally call these like the rotator cuff muscles. Well, let's imagine those slow twitch postural muscles get fatigued, and they start to lose contractile tension. And then you go to do something heavy or fast, or in an emergency situation. Those are already pretty fatigued. You're going to rely more upon the fast twitch muscle fibers, which are there less for postural integrity. You're likely to get out of position. And this is a whole recipe of like, God, why is my shoulder just hurting? God, my back. That's very often a case of the slow twitch fibers and the slow twitch muscle groups losing muscular endurance. So you need to build that back up, so that they can control and hold the joint in the position, so the fast twitch fibers can then contract with force. - I'm hoping that what I'm going to say next meets what you said accurately. My experience is that getting injured lifting weights, or even doing house work or yard work, almost always happens when I'm not paying attention, fatigued, that's kind of obvious, but also getting in position to initiate a movement. Setting down a weight or lifting weights off the rack, or picking up dumbbells. That's almost always when I seem to activate this lower back thing that happens every six or eight months. And what you're saying, if I understand correctly, is that this muscular endurance from wall sits or planks, or things of that sort, maybe you could give us a few other examples of these, can help us because they actually prepare the system to do what we normally think of as the more intense work. So it's really the, it sounds like it's really the architecture of the body, includes nerves and muscles and everything else of course, that lets the limbs and other kind of action end of the body do its best work. Is that a good way- - Yeah, let it express its own power and force. Yep. We've actually landed on one of my final laws of strength and conditioning, which is, similar to what I said earlier, right? So I said, exercises do not determine adaptations. Application determines adaptation. This one sounds similar, but it's quite different. There are no good or bad exercises. There's only good or bad application. Here's a great example of that, right? So you do not get hurt dead-lifting because deadlifts are dangerous. You only get hurt dead-lifting because you either got in a bad position. You got in a bad position because you either started in a bad position, which is one of the things you just said, or you ended up in a bad position. You did too much volume. You did too much intensity. Or you did too much complexity. Those last three things all hurt you because they result in the first one, which is out of position. Or another way to think about this is if it's not a visible change in position, is stress got put into a part of the system that should not absorb that much stress. So you did too much of it. You did it too heavy. You got fatigued. And so you broke position. You got too heavy, so you broke position. You made the exercise too complex, you put too many moving parts in it, you put too many joints in it, and you got out of position. You did that too many times, over time. Now we've led to either an acute injury, bam, back pops and you fall on the floor. Or just like, man, this thing is hurting over time. All these are result of the same thing. So you cannot ever blame the exercise for causing the problem. It's always either the user or the coach. You programmed way too much here, and I can't handle that position. Or you yourself went into it too much. So if you're getting these little tweaks and problems going on, you've made an error in one of those things. So simply back off. Reduce the complexity, right? Give yourself more stability, less moving parts. Do less volume. Do less intensity. In fact, if you look at the people from the physical therapy world, in terms of the pain literature, it's very clear that just stopping a movement is very rarely going to work. What you want to do is back off all the way down to just below that threshold of that's what aggravates it, and you want to train right there. That's going to allow you to do two things. Number one, tissue tolerance. And then number two, desensitization. A lot of pain stuff, and you can probably speak a lot about this, is, especially with things like low back pain, is there's not necessarily often much damage there. It's a lot of hypersensitization of just pain signal, pain signal. Omitting the movement entirely does not get that signal to go away. You need to train just below that signal and desensitize it. So you want to make sure that the muscular endurance allows you, you're just putting volume right below where you start to get a tweak. And it is beautifully effective for that. - Yeah, I've experienced this right side lower back pain for years, sometimes shooting down the hip. The two things that really helped were doing anterior tib work. So hats off to Knees Over Toes Guy, Ben Patrick, who has created a lot of popularity around tib work. But- - Turns out joints, full range of motion, you're in a better spot. - Yeah, something about stabilizing the stuff from the knee down helped my back. And then also some neck work. And friends of mine are always teasing me that my gym is filled with the most bizarre equipment. It doesn't look like any other gym. A lot of it's just designed to keep me healthy and still training, but. I love this idea of getting right at the, below the threshold of pain activation, and not simply going into complete non-action, or just taking complete rest, 'cause that actually can be detrimental. I'd love to talk about a few items that support training of all kinds, and where there's a lot of confusion and indeed misconception and mystery. And just get your take on these. And I just want to acknowledge at the outset that for some of these, there's a lot of science, for some of them there's less science, but there certainly is a lot of experience in your camp. And those categories are cold, heat and hydration. - Ah! - Because obviously whether or not you're a runner, whether or not you're strength training, if you're a human being, you need to hydrate. But in terms of work output and physical work output, maybe even cognitive work output, maybe tackle hydration first, There is what I call, and what I think has now come to be known as the Galpin Equation, which you really do deserve credit for. Because I think that people realize that there are a range of solutions out there, but there is a really, a desperate need for straightforward solutions that work for 75% of people 75% of the time. So hydration is key. Maybe you could underscore just how key it is for us. And then what is the Galpin Equation, as I call it, and I think others are now referring to it. - Yeah, okay. Benefits of hydration slash consequences of mis-hydration. So whether that's dehydration or overload. Physiology has hormetic curves. Right, now typically we think about this in terms of toxicology. So what this means is at some point giving you a dose of something, testosterone's a very easy example. If you're clinically deficient or low in testosterone, and I give you a little bit, and it brings you back into a normal range, you generally see an improvement in health and functionality. Taking you though from normal to super high, doesn't always necessarily provide additional benefit. In fact, if you continue to go, it's going to provide detriment, right? So everything has this curve. And then some things are hormetic stressors, which means like a small, short, fast insult is actually beneficial because then you come back bigger, faster, stronger. That's how adaptation works. Basic hormesis, okay. Hydration's the same way. So at the end of the curve here, if you are under-hydrated, we all know you could die, right? You have to have things, in fact water is the only thing that is ubiquitous across biologies, in terms of every living thing has to have it. There's no other vitamin, mineral, nutrient that is required among all living things, with the exception of water. So that should give you a pretty good indication of it's [speaking in foreign language], right? Like you got to have this thing. Down here at the bottom, if you're dehydrated and I give you more, it's beneficial effects. However, if you are up the top already and I continue to give you more water past that, now we run into actual problems, and we can get what's called hyponatremia, which is more common than people realize. Nitremia being, actually not referring to the water, but the sodium concentration being too low. And you've probably talked about that at length of why that's an issue. If sodium potassium balances inside, outside of cell, come off, heart stops, right? Muscle contraction ends, and all these things. So you don't want to be over or under-hydrated. So understanding this rough equation I sort of loosely calculated one day, is helpful for that. I think the most context is talking about how much water to drink throughout the day, and then how much water to drink during exercise. So the very easy answer is half your body weight in ounces per day, is a very loose guideline for total amount of fluid consumption. So if you weigh 200 pounds, aim for a hundred ounces of water. It's like a very easy number. If you hit that, you're probably, I'd say, 90% of you are good. 90% of the time alone. If you then go to exercise, you need to then account for that fluid loss with exercise. And in general, you want to consume 125% to 150% of the amount of weight you lost in fluid. In other words, if you worked out and you were 200 pounds naked, and you went and did your workout, and then you dried off, and you weighed yourself again, and now you're 198 pounds, you lost two pounds of water. That's 32 ounces. You want to drink back about 125% of that. So instead of drinking 32 ounces, I want you to drink 40, 42, 45, like something like this. 'Cause one of the reasons why is, unless you're drinking something that is isotonic, meaning the same exact concentration in your blood, and that you're in your fluid, you're just going to go closer to that hyponatremia. You're going to get a bunch of baroreflextor responses, and you're going to actually think you have too much fluid and you're going to urinate it out. - What if I'm not weighing myself before and after workouts? And is there a shorthand version of this that, after training for an hour, I should drink at least X number of ounces. - Yeah that- - Assuming it's at kind of, I'm not sweating super heavily. - Yeah. In that particular case, you could probably go something like, if everyone in the world did, I don't know, 12 to 20 ounces, that's probably like pretty decent. - And they're probably doing that, right? - Yeah. - Yeah. And what about electrolytes, consuming salt, potassium, and magnesium? - But that thing only works though, if you're coming in at optimal hydration. And this is the problem, this is why you have to, you have to flag this starting with a good total daily amount of water. Because if you're coming in and you're like oh I drank two or three glasses of water a day, then you might need to drink 50 or 60 ounces post-workout, 'cause you are way behind. So that like oh 12 ounces or so works, if you're already generally very well hydrated. - And if people are drinking four to six glasses of water a day, but they're also drinking a lot of caffeine in any form, then they're going to be excreting more water, in most cases, right? - Well- - because caffeine's a diuretic. - Okay. It kind of is, but it kind of isn't either. It's not the diuretic that we used to think about it as. It is still fluid consumption. So it's only a diuretic if it causes you to excrete more fluid than actually was being intake. So if caffeine intake is in a normal range, I don't have to worry about the diuretic effects. If someone is drinking 12 cups of coffee a day, we're going to, or they're taking caffeine pills or something, now the excretion is going to out-kick the coverage. So now we're going to have problems, right? 'Cause there's no fluid consumption with the caffeine pill. So in general, things like tea consumption, like I'm not super worried about those things. You can count those towards your total fluid intake if you want. So if you're like, I drink 60 ounces of water plus 20 ounces of coffee, and then this, like you're going to add that all up and you're going to be totally okay. So natural, you also have problems with synthetic forms of caffeine versus natural forms of caffeine. Natural forms are pretty okay. They'll be just fine. - So coffee, tea, et cetera. - Yeah. All that stuff. - Pill form is where it gets tricky. - Always. Like always, right. So general, just eat real food and things. You're going to be just fine. The last piece to consider is your diet quality matters. Because the fluid content in your food can vary wildly. So something like a bagel might be five to 10% water, or something like a watermelon is 98%, 95%, something in a huge range. Even meat is very high percentage of fluid intake. Like it's really high. Even after you cook it, there's still a lot of fluid in there. So if you're eating a wholefood, mostly wholefood-based diet, your endogenous hydration is actually pretty high already just from your fluid. If you're eating a very highly processed, dehydrated, over-salted diet, you're way low on hydration, just in your food. So you have to factor all these things in, in fact, one of the things that happens to us constantly with folks that go from a like highly processed, low quality diet, to a high quality one, is they're just peeing nonstop. Like what the hell's going on. I'm like, well you actually have brought in 60 additional ounces of water in your diet, relative to what you used to have. And you've gone from 10 grams of sodium there to four, to two, sometimes one. Sometimes it gets very low 'cause you're not like salt, are you salting your food? No. Okay. Well we don't have sodium intake then. Like we're way down. So everything that we're considering is based on that. So let's assume someone's eating a pretty well balanced diet. They're drinking 16 ounces of water and maybe some caffeine in coffee and tea, things like that. We don't exactly know the optimal amount of sodium one should intake. It is very clear, high sodium concentrations are still associated with a lot of negative health outcomes, especially in combination with poor physical activity, in combination with low food quality and other comorbidities. That's a very bad thing. You need to be very careful about those things. If everything else is okay, we're okay playing with a little bit of higher salt. In fact, you're probably going to feel better. You're going to feel generally pretty good. You just, it needs to be very clear. If you are overweight, highly stressed, and you don't have a lot of these things ticked off and you have known comorbidities, you really need to pay attention to salt intake. It can be very nasty. So that being said, what we're generally going to look at in folks is, are you at least, can we categorize you as a low sodium or high sodium sweater? If so, there's a whole list of electrolytes you can look, that are going to have something like 200 to 400 milligrams per serving. And there's a whole list of these things. If you're a low sodium sweater, I'm probably going to send you after one of those. If you're a high sodium sweater, there's a lot of electrolytes supplements that are closer to six or 800, even a whole gram per single serving size. So you want to play with that. A very- - How do you know if you're a low sodium or high sodium sweater? We actually have an episode on salt we put out that, or is coming out soon if it hasn't come out already, which is when you look at the hazard ratios for salt intake, basically your probability of really bad things happen to you goes way up as you get towards a lot of sodium intake, 10, 12 grams per day. - Totally. - And this is translated to teaspoons of salt, et cetera. But also very low sodium intake is a problem. - No question about it. - So it's a, it's not a perfect U shape. It's kind of a J shaped curve, or a kind of hockey stick shape more or less. But how would I know if I'm a low sodium or a high sodium sweater? - Yeah, so you can get- - Would I just kind of lick my sweat or have someone else do it? - Well you can. Find a super friend who'll lick your sweat for you. Same how- - No willing volunteers that I'm aware of, but would I be able to tell? - Yep. You can get sweat testing done. Actually you have a number of options. The kind of, the original one that most of us used in the background for many years is called Levelen. They'll send you out a little patch, you can wear that, send it in the lab, and they'll measure it directly in the lab and send it back. It's 150 bucks or- - Did they bin you into low, medium, and high sodium? - They're going to do that, but they're going to give you very, they're going to tell you exactly the milligrams. And they're going to actually tell you like what products and stuff that are exactly matched. - Do you do this with professional athletes? - [Andy] We have many times. Yeah. - Interesting. - You can do a more consumer grade version. Gatorade has a patch. For 25 bucks you can get two of them. You can put that patch on your left forearm and download the Gatorade app, and you can do a workout, measure it right there and click it over, and they'll tell you exactly, not only high or low, but again, they'll tell you the milligrams of sodium that are in your sweat, and then you can figure out, again, kind of high, medium, or low. - Interesting. I do much better on a slightly higher sodium intake. - [Andy] Most do. - But in my carbohydrate, I do eat carbohydrates, I'm one of those that it is pretty moderate, but I try and eat clean foods. So I'd notice, and I tend to be slightly low blood pressure. So again, to reiterate the warning there that if somebody is pre-hypertension or has hypertension or obese, you really do need to be careful with your sodium intake. But many people seem to find that they feel better when they increase their sodium intake, and they're still in that healthy portion of the hazard ratio. - Most of the athletes, I would say in general, are going to go higher in salt. When they come, we're going to run their stuff and we're going to add salt. Almost always. Very few times have I gone ow, we need to cut this back. One of the exceptions are the ones that come in that eat like 14-year-olds. And I'm like, okay, you're at 15 milligrams, or 15 grams a day, 'cause you're eating nothing but. - Garbage. - So we're like, we're going to come down, you're going to feel way better. All this bloating and everything else that's going to happen. Go down. You can do that, there are actually more, there are biosensors that are coming out that are not available yet, but they're coming very soon in this space, that are going to give you real-time metrics on salt. So you can pay attention to those. I haven't seen one and used one personally, so I don't want to espouse about how good or bad it is, but I know that those are coming from a handful of companies. An easy way to do is just look at, wear a hat, or wear some sort of headband or something and do your workout. Take it off. If you see a just huge white band, or if it's completely clear, then that's going to tell you. Big white band, you're probably a high salt sweater. Completely clear, very little coming out. - That's great, and I can see the posts on Instagram now, people showing their salt band from sweating. - Yeah. - And obviously salt is so essential for so many physiological functions. You don't want too high or too low, but if you're losing more, it makes sense you would need to take in more. - Yep. - So half of my body weight in ounces, as a just foundation of a fluid intake. Coffee and tea could be included in that, but that should probably be mostly water or things similar to it. And then during exercise the, how do I want to think about this again? Let's say I'm a high salt output, then I'd want to drink maybe 40 ounces water with or more. - Yeah, okay. I'll do this easier. Let's talk about pre and mid and post, right? So what to drink pre, if you come in having hit these rules, you're okay. And pre workout can be as little as like five or six ounces. Basically a couple sips of water. Fine. If you come in poorly hydrated, then you maybe need to go more like 12, but here's the deal. If you start off a session in a bad spot, you're not going to catch back up. Like you just, you're in trouble. Let's say you come and you follow direction. 500 milligrams salt before, 500 milligrams after. A very easy rule. Pick whatever source you want, that's a couple of sprinkles of table salt. If you want Himalayan, that's fine, you don't have to. Himalayan's actually a fairly low sodium salt, so it's not the best for this purposes. If you're a higher salt sweater, a little bit more. If you want to go choose an electrolyte, of which there are infinite, you can look on the packet and it'll tell you, 250 milligrams per serving, or 400, or 600, or whatever happens, but around 500, pre 500, post is a very general rule. And then during is, thanks to you, my famous Galpin Equation now, that is all over the world. All I did is I took the literature and I said, okay, in general, the research shows pretty clearly two milligrams per kilogram body weight over 15 minutes seems to put you in a pretty good spot. Most people don't think about kilograms or milliliters. So can I just run that over, and then turns out it's about your body weight divided by 30 in ounces. Like that's all you have- - Body weight in pounds divided by 30. - Yeah, exactly, right. So you weigh 200 pounds, divided by 30, and that's the number of ounces. You're going to want to go every 15 or 20 minutes or so. - So I'm getting that amount every 15 to 20 minutes throughout the training. And now in the weight room, that's pretty easy to do. 'Cause there are rest intervals. But people will need to do this while running or cycling, and that can cause a little bit of gastric distress, if you're not used to it, is that right? You can learn to run with some water in your belly. - A hundred percent. The gut is very trainable in a lot of directions, but in terms of fluid, as well as carbohydrate, which is another thing that is going to get people, but that's yeah, very trainable. It'll be uncomfortable initially, but you'll quickly get into it. The better solution for those folks, just come in hydrated. And you might not even need any water. You could probably perform just fine. So the ones that don't have as much of an opportunity, you really have to emphasize walking in. We have this problem with like professional golfers. They have plenty of time to drink water, but they're so focused on the shot and there's a lot of variables coming up, once they hit their shot and they're moving on to the next one, they're thinking about, I mean, they're going over a scorecard of 185 yards away. Can I go 184 1/2 yards, can I go 186 yard, what's the slope of that, what's the wind up here, what's the wind up there? Like they're just thinking, and they just forget, even though they have 4 1/2 hours, so we have to make sure that they immediately get off the course. We go right into recovery, as hard as we possibly can. They wake up the next morning, they're in a good spot, we crush recovery. And now it's like, hey, if you can remember to drink this, great. If not, we're still fine. If it's not a big deal, and you have time like in a lifter, because I deal with that problem with fighters too. Like we can only drink so much in the middle of a fight. A couple sips over there. But we can't go mix and. Two mills. It's like, can you get a couple sips in, yeah, oh shit, forgot like, it's not going to happen. So we have to take more of an emphasis before and after. So start your recovery process immediately, and then come in the next day, that's your window. And then whatever you can get in during the workout, that's fine too. If you're a higher salt sweater, instead of going 500, 500, maybe go 750, 750. If you have a longer about of exercise, especially if it's hot or humid, then you might want to consider some salt in the workout as well. And 300 milligrams during the workout, totally fine. It's enough. If it is a really long workout, and it's really hot, and you're going to lose pounds during it, you need a specific strategy. If you're going to lose less than a pound, you don't need to worry about it. It's not going to be enough of a detriment for you to really care. So that's kind of a rough rule. Now, if you're 200 plus pounds, maybe that number moves from one pound to two pounds. But really the number we're looking at is 1% of your body weight. If you're losing more than 1% of your body weight, we need to start caring. If it's less than 1%, it's not going to really pay that much of a difference. - Okay, so for myself, because I don't get super technical, I don't wear any devices besides a wristwatch. - It's a nice watch too. - Thanks. Yeah I do, very attached to this watch, or it's attached to me, I suppose. My body weight in pounds divided by two, that's what I'm going to try and get across the entire day as a kind of baseline. And then my body weight- - Oh yeah. - in pounds divided by 30 during the workout, every 15 or 20 minutes, that I'm going to try and consume that amount. And then I definitely do better when I increase the amount of salt that I'm taking in anywhere from 500 to, 500 milligrams to a gram of salt, several times a day, actually. But I'm not eating that often, which leads me to my other question, which is, I prefer to train fasted or semi-fasted, meaning first thing in the morning or within an hour or two of waking. Obviously I've been fasting while I'm asleep. Or having not eaten anything for three or four hours before. I just feel lighter and like more energetic. If that works for me, is that okay, or should I try, is it better to eat something before one trains? - Personal preference. Easy, easy answer there. - Great. - It depends on of course how hard you trained, what the training was like, what sport you're involved with, how many total calories, et cetera, but in general, personal preference for the average person. - Yeah, that probably handles 90% of the questions about that. Cold. Cold showers, ice baths, and cold immersion up to the neck. I always preface this by saying there are not a lot of studies. There are some, but not a lot of controlled studies looking at cold showers, 'cause it's harder to control the variables of where people stand. So I would say if you have access to a cold immersion of some sort, ice bath or cold immersion, great, but if you don't, cold showers would be the next best thing. The lore goes that if you do an ice bath or cold water immersion after strength or hypertrophy training, that you are short circuiting some of that. The lore also goes that cold showers might be okay. And my interpretation of those data and that discussion is that all that is probably true, but I have a hard time imagining that the effects are so robust that it can completely prevent strength gains and hypertrophy, such that my stance for myself is try and do the cold exposure training away from the strength and hypertrophy training. But if you can't do it any other time, right afterward probably isn't going to throw my whole system out of whack and prevent the improvements. Am I deluding myself? - A couple of caveats here. Number one, obviously I have a personal vested interest in cold. I've been around this stuff for a long time, being involved and being an advisor for XPT, and being in this space a long time, I'm a big believer in cold. Especially cold water. - Deliberate cold exposure. - Hundred percent, right? So that being said, I do think getting into an ice bath immediately after a hypertrophy session is getting pretty close to you just shouldn't have done the session. It is detrimental. - [Andrew] Good to know. - I wouldn't do it, I guess is the most blunt way to put it. If you're like hey, like I'm not super concerned with growing muscle, and I want these other things that come with cold water immersion, fine. It's not zero, it's not taking you backwards. How much does it cut you down? I don't know. We don't know, like that'd be a difficult number to come up with. Is it 1% reduction? No, it's more than that. Is it a hundred? Not even close. I don't know where it lands though. It's enough though for me to go in general, best practices, don't get in the ice immediately after a workout. - How long should I wait? - Well, in theory, the best answer we could give you would be four hours, because of what we talked about earlier today of going okay. Immediately, you've got the signaling cascade that takes seconds. You've got gene expression that's happening in this rough four hour window. After the genes have gone off and now you're just going through the protein synthesis process, the signal's already there and it's gone back down to baseline. So then reintroducing, or introducing cold here is not going to disrupt that signal. That's a very non-scientifically founded because we don't know, at this point at all. What is very clear though is if you get off your workout, go right into the ice, it's probably 10% attenuation of growth. I don't know, maybe more, depends on the person. Some people, if you look at the individual data, it's pretty bad. It's enough to where it's like that's a really big deal. The benefits of the ice, I don't think now outweigh the benefits of the hypertrophy training. - What about cold showers? - I don't think cold showers are going to do much. if you've been in both, you know that this is like, we're not playing the same game here. - Right, an ice bath or true cold water immersion up to the neck with limbs in, for one to five minutes, is a completely different stimulus than in the cold shower. - Especially also compared to a similar like cryo, right? It is not even the same thing here. So in general, I would say, don't do those cold shower, I don't really care. Can you work it out so that you don't do them the same time? That would be my hope, right? I would actually prefer you do the cold before. If you really had to do it. - Certainly will wake you up. - Oh yeah. - Get that adrenaline burst. - No we've played with that actually years ago, doing that. There's actually some fun stuff you can do with the endurance piece, with cold stuff. But it's totally not feasible for most people, 'cause you're getting water everywhere, then you're going to jump on your bike and just get shit, and it's just a giant mess. It's fun, but yeah, I would say walk away from it if you can. That's actually, that's where I stand based on the data. Based on my intuition and experience, I don't think it's a good thing to do. Now having said that, that's mostly concerned with maximizing hypertrophy. Strength, it's not as clear. There are some data to show what actual block strength adaptations, but because of what we talked about earlier, the mechanisms and the drivers are different. And so I don't think it's as big a concern for strength development, though I would still generally say, if you can get away with staying out of the ice immediately after the workout, and you can at least wait a few hours, that's the better approach. Less concerned with strength, more concerned with hypertrophy, in terms of interference effect. If you can do it on off days, or before, any other time, that's the place to land. - That's generally when I try to do it. - Yeah. - I was just kind of throwing out an extreme case, 'cause I get asked that question a lot. What about the use of ice bath or cold water immersion, or cold shower after endurance training? - Okay, so a couple of interesting things here. You mentioned we don't have a tremendous amount of data on cold water immersion overall. So a lot of this is moving. There have been some papers to show that cold water immersion can actually enhance mitochondrial biogenesis. And actually, even for endurance stuff it's been shown to cause improvement in endurance adaptations, relative to not. It's not enough for me to be truly confident in that statement yet. I would like to see that repeated, not that I have a problem with the paper, the methodology that they use in that particular study, but it's just, like this is a weird thing. So I want to see this repeated more often. So I have less concern with doing it immediately post-endurance, 'cause you could even argue that there may be some benefit. I don't think you need to go out of your way to try to make sure you get into ice immediately afterwards and thinking you're going to get some massive adaptation. We use ice a decent amount, when I can get athletes to do it. But this context is different. Number one, when we're in camp and we've got a world title fight coming up, or something else, we've just pitched in a major league baseball game, I am not concerned about hypertrophy. I am not even concerned with strength development. I am now pushing towards recovery. There's a paradigm that I think is important with all of these things to understand, which is, are you pushing for optimization or adaptation? When you're pushing for adaptation, you don't want to block the signal for adaptation. This means less recovery. You're not going to feel as good. And you probably should be hedging towards stress. When you're pushing for optimization, it's the opposite. So if I'm in season and I had a pitcher just throw 125 pitches, I'm not trying to cause adaptation. I'm trying to recover as quickly as possible because four days from now we got to do this again. And I got to do this across 162 games. You're going to play five days in a PGA golf tournament, and you're going to have to do it again every week for a bunch of weeks in a row. I need recovery as fast as I possibly can. So if I'm blunting adaptation fine, I'm not actually trying to do something, I'm trying to optimize. If you spend all of your time in one of those two areas, you're going to have problems. So you need to be judicious about thinking is this a point in my life, or a training cycle, that I want to cause adaptations? Or am I trying to optimize? You spend too much time in one of the other ones, again, you're going to have problems. So that's in generally how I will treat the ice for all those adaptations. - What about heat? - [Andy] Yeah. - When, and I'll frame this question differently because I'm sure there are a number of ways in which heat can short circuit all sorts of things. I mean, heat in excess can kill you. It can shut down fertility. It can, in excess, right? It can do all sorts of things, but it can also increase growth hormone, increase vasodilation, improve one's ability to sweat, which can be very beneficial in a number of contexts. - Yep. - For the typical, for 75% of people, 75% of the time, when do you think heat is most useful? And here I'm referring to dry sauna or wet sauna. I'm not specifically talking about infrared sauna because the data there are a little unclear to me. And I don't even know that, my sense with infrared saunas is they don't go hot enough for my particular taste. - You and I have a similar taste there. - Okay, yeah. - If we're not crushing 200 past I'm not interested. - Right, and my sense about infrared sauna is that, maybe I haven't seen the data, is that, but that a lot of people like it 'cause they like the way they look in the infrared sauna. It feels cool, it feels like you're doing something unusual. Now infrared lights are beneficial for other reasons, actually for mitochondrial health and the retinas, the good data, but infrared sauna to me it never goes hot enough. So I'm talking about 200 or hotter, maybe 180 to 220. Obviously do what's safe folks, and heed all the warnings about pregnant people not going in saunas, et cetera. - I assume you're lumping in hot water immersion- - Hot water immersion, so hot baths, hot sauna. When do you think most people could leverage sauna or hot baths to benefit their training and fitness and health? - Yeah, okay, I have a handful of things to say about this topic. One of 'em is, you never have a hard time convincing people to get hot. Everyone feels good. Like yeah, get in a hot bath, like, can you take more hot showers? Sure. Like no problem there, right. There are a handful of studies that have looked at this immediately post, and it seems to even augment hypertrophy. - So after hypertrophy training, getting in the sauna for 20 minutes. - Yeah, whatever, whatever it needs to be. We don't have a good titration. What's the number minutes wise. We don't have a temperature titration. - Hot shower would be a second, would be a weak second best. - I would say it's a very weak- - [Andrew] To the hot bath. - I think a hot bath is probably a lot closer to what you're looking for. It actually kind of goes back to our initial conversations. Theoretically, you're just going to aiding blood flow. So you're going to put more nutrients in, more waste product out, metabolic stress, all that stuff is going through. So that's the thought anyways, we're far from knowing, - Makes sense. - Plausible, right. Absolutely plausible. Something people will do. Feels good. Let's say, with cold and hot, I want to caution you against a couple of things. This is true across all physiology, but you need to be really careful about moving percentages from molecular to outcome. Very careful. So for example, it's easy to see a paper that says, okay, we put you in a hot bath or something, and we saw a growth hormone increase 300%. That is not going to result in 300% increase in muscle size, right? In fact, 300% might result in absolutely no change in a physical size, right? And the reason I'm saying this is because there's a lot of people in this space that will misapply the mechanisms. And they'll grossly overestimate what these things can do and what they do do, because they'll find something like that. I mean you know this, you've done enough cellular work too. In the lab, if I see mTOR doubled, I think shit, it didn't work. I need to see a 10 X increase before I know it's even physiologically relevant. So reading that paper, reading someone's social media post, you're like wow, it increased mTOR 38%. I'm like, well, that didn't work. And you're like, wow, that's huge. I'm like, that's not 38% increase in muscle size. So that's a very important point I want to make, because I'm going to talk about the benefits here in a second. But I don't want people to be fooled into thinking that this is some crazy miracle. The same thing with the sauna. In terms of general health outcomes, it is clearly a beneficial thing. This is a really good idea to get hot a lot. It is not a substitute for exercise though. It's a very important distinction. If the options are nothing or sauna, get in the sauna. Really, really good idea. If the exchange is though, I don't need to work out because I did the sauna, bad. This is not a winning solution. - You and I know some maniacs that actually work out in the sauna. - Oh, we do. Yeah, kind of not far away. - I don't necessarily recommend that. That actually would probably kill a large number of people. But it can be worked- - Yeah, if they die, they die. - It can be worked up to. - [Andy] Yeah. - Certainly. - Yeah. So I want, like every time I talk about that I flag that, because it's just too easy to hear that and go, oh, well I think Dr. Huberman said, if I just get in the sauna, I don't have to work out. Like no, no, those words have never come out of his mouth. - He definitely didn't say that. And I'm definitely not working out in the sauna. If I'm in the sauna, I'm either sitting or I'm lying down, and I'm trying to make it through. I tend to do three 20 minute bouts, across the entire week. So I aim for 60 minutes per week of heat exposure. - I would be lying, - Which is not a ton. - if I said I've never worked out in the sauna. - Oh, so you're one of those. Yeah, people will do air squats, they'll bring the Airdyne bike in there. I look at the sauna as kind of a time to get lazy and sweat. - Totally fine. Going back to your original question. So potential the plausible aid, we need to see more research on that to really get a, do I need to put this in practice. I think if you try it, very little harm. I struggle to see a downside. If you make sure your hydration's on point, right, 'cause now you got to factor in the fact you just kicked out two or three pounds. If you at 200 plus pounds, I assume, or roughly, if you're in the sauna for 20 minutes, I would imagine you can do two or three pounds. - Yeah, I usually, I hover somewhere around like 225. And I drink a 32 ounce, it's water with a electrolyte solution that's pretty high salt afterwards. And sometimes during. And sometimes after that, if I do it late in the evening, I'll go to sleep and I'll wake up in the middle of the night just feeling so parched. It's amazing how much water one loses in the sauna. - Like a normal sweat rate for someone 225, especially in 20 minutes in a sauna, I would absolutely expect you to do three pounds easy, without like- - So I should be drinking more? - Probably. - Even more water. - Yeah, you're probably half the water that you need to get. - And you mentioned the possible benefits of doing it after strength hypertrophy training, which makes sense for plausible mechanistic reasons, no official data there yet. What about after endurance training? Assuming somebody hydrates well enough and they're not overheated from their endurance work. - Yeah. - [Andrew] Could also be of benefit. - Yeah. - Wow, so more and more what I'm thinking the framework here is in an ideal world, one would train and then do sauna, or heat exposure of some kind. Endurance training or strength hypertrophy training, and then do sauna, and then do cold exposure on off days, or at least four hours away from any kind of training, or if you had to do it close to training, doing it before training. - Yeah, I love cold in the morning. We've actually run this experiment on professional athletes, where we do enough tracking with things like HRV, which is a global metric of like overall fatigue, okay. And you've probably talked about that before but, problems with it, but roughly idea of overall fatigue. HRV in general, higher the score the better, right? So a low HRV is fatigue, right? Well, if you wake up and take your HRV in the morning, and then you get into ice, what's going to happen is you're going to see that number plummet. The second you get out, that's going to fall off the Earth, which means roughly you've moved into a sympathetic place. Surprising, you get in 30 degree water, you're going to go very sympathetic very quickly. However, if you continue to watch your HRV for 30, 60, 90, and up to two to three hours post, you will generally see an improved HRV score relative to where you started. So it's back to this hormetic stressor, right? A really cold, shocking exposure will be a net result of you being more relaxed throughout the day. In general. And we've seen that now like very consistently across years, with athletes. So I think it's a great way to start your day. You won't need nearly as much coffee after spending three minutes in 30 degree water. - 30 degrees is pretty darn cold. I was in the ocean this morning for about three minutes. It felt, I didn't bring a thermometer, but it felt like somewhere in the low 50s. - But 50 and moving is really cold. - Yeah. - Water's moving. - Yeah. - Right. That's really cold - That's right. The thermal layer that surrounds you when you sit still in cold water immersion, I'm encouraging people now, if they really, I was, joked that people like to look real stoic and tough when they're in there. Like they're just grinding through it with no pain at all. But the stillness is actually reducing the stimulus. If they sift around a little bit, you break up that thermal layer. That's where the real action is. - We've joked about this for years. Like do 50 degrees with a whirlpool jet on, now I'm impressed. 'Cause that is hard. You sit in 35 degree for three minutes, I guess. But with XPT I've seen, I can't even tell you how many hundreds of people from all walks of life, on all age, that we've been able to get in 30-something degree water for three minutes. 50 degrees with a whirlpool going, that number gets very small. - Yeah, and if you don't have access to a whirlpool, this should be reassuring to you, you can, some people say oh, you know, I don't have access to ice, and ice can actually get pretty expensive, if you're doing a $50 ice bath - Yeah, it's- - every day. So you can fill your bathtub with cool to cold water, get in, but just make sure that you keep sifting your limbs and it's chilly. - Yeah. - And the studies on the very well, now well established increases in dopamine and epinephrine that occur in cold water exposure, were actually done at an hour in 60 degrees Fahrenheit. - Yeah. - And so it, you don't necessarily need it ice cold or an ice bath. But immersion is really better than the cold shower. The cold shower is kind of a, it's the, it's kind of the espresso shot version. - Yep, no it's sort of funny, 'cause if you look at most of those initial studies and you think, man, how do they get people to sign up to spend 45 minutes in 55 degree water. 55 degrees is cold. Even if it's not moving and then they're going to not spend five minutes in 'em, they're going to go an hour. And if you've ever done ice baths at that temperature, you know like all right after a few minutes, it's not that bad. But man, that's a protocol. - Yeah, it's kind of a cold endurance protocol. 'Cause it's one thing to get in for one minute to three minutes, and you know you're getting out. You could sing a song, you could do anything to distract yourself. But 45 minutes to an hour is intense. Maybe they, I don't know. I don't think they paid the subjects. But anyway, that study was done - Yeah, you think- - in Europe, I forget where it was done. But anyway, they were hardy subjects. I want to talk a bit about over-training and gauging recovery. So there are a couple methods that I've heard about, and that I use, based on some data that I've seen, but mainly discussions with really informed people like yourself, Brian McKenzie, Kelly Starrett and others. The two that I'm aware of for gauging recovery of the nervous system and kind of systemic recovery, are grip strength, especially grip strength on waking in the morning. And the so-called carbon dioxide tolerance test. The ability to do a long controlled exhale after a few rhythmic deep breaths. Which I'm assuming taps into both one's ability to mechanically control the diaphragm, but also how well one is regulating carbon dioxide. First question is, is this stuff fiction, fact, or a combination of kind of anecdata, as I call it. Are there any peer-reviewed published data? Is your lab working on these things? And am I deluding myself, using these tools, or are they useful? - It's not fiction at all. There are, with like CO2 tolerance, there's less published data. We've run a study in our lab, looking at the associations between the CO2 tolerance and what we call trait and state anxiety. And those are in the publication process, is what I'll say. - [Andrew] Great. - So you can't really talk about that stuff as you know, until it's out. But in general I'd say like there's a reason I'm still doing it. - Great. - I'll just leave it at that. - Yeah, well assuming it's not a clinical trial, I mean, I think sharing preliminary findings is fine, as long as we highlight them as preliminary. - Yeah. - I'm not a reviewer, but I look forward to reading the paper. - Yeah, but, as you know, scientific ethically, like you need to be careful about telling people results before you've gone through that process. - Right, which is why I'm flagging this as these results are not yet passed through the peer review process. So you're hearing about it prior to peer review. - Yep. Having said that, there's enough in that field, I'm not the first one into that field. And so I'm very confident that that's a real thing. In terms of actual tracking recovery, the big picture is this. When we run through a full analysis, when we have an athlete go through our biomolecular athlete program, we're going to run and we're going to look at three major categories, okay. Category one are what we call visible stressors. And then we have hidden stressors. And then we have recovery capacity. Any time the total stress load outpaces recovery capacity, you're either going backwards in your physical ability, or you're reducing adaptability. Now you have levers to pull here. You can reduce stress intake, or you can increase recovery capacity. Right? What we want in an ideal situation is to be able to implement the most stress possible 'cause that's the driver of adaptation. Recover from that. Now we get the most adaptation, and adaptation being simply a change. Whatever change you want it to be. That's our gold standard, right? It's pie in the eye. Some people have endogenous differences, they just recover better. They don't. There are genetic factors. But let's talk about the ones that are manipulatable. If we go to the stress side of it, you want the throttle to be pushed as far down on the ones you want stress from, and as far off of the ones you don't want stress, so that the adaptation comes in the exact area you want. And you're not burning gas in something you don't care about. Because you're just, you're taking that total stress bucket too high. Recovery capacity over there. So here's how you can do that. You can run some analytics and measure what we do with everyone, through these very comprehensive breakdowns, to figure out what's that physiology look like hidden and visible, and then what's the recovery capacity. Once we have that blueprint, we can now figure out what are the two or three things we need to track, that are these indicators of what we call performance anchors. So an anchor is something that kind of drags behind you or below you, that slows you down. The analogy being, let's say we're going down one of these amazing canyon roads, and I won't say which canyon we're in, so you can stay hidden here. And your car's going down at a certain velocity and you want to go faster. Most people's first impulse is to hit the gas, the accelerator. We want to push. Well, that's fine, but if your foot is on the brake and you push the accelerator, you might go a little bit faster. But number one, you're wasting a lot of literal gas to go a little bit faster. And two, you're burning your engine. You might, you're going to blow. The easier solution is just take your foot off the brake. You're going to go faster by just stopping yourself. Then if that's not fast enough, we can hit the accelerator. Everyone wants to just push down, right? More stimulus, more optimization. Bing, bing, bing, bing, here. Our first analytics are, where are these performance anchors? What's dragging you back? What's putting down the brake? I want to move those two or three things out of the way, and now let's see how far you get. Oh, look at that. Your recovery capacity has gone way up. Your adaptations are happening faster now. And we can do more work because you're recovering quicker. So we're trying to figure out in those buckets, and we have a whole host of things that we measure, biomarkers and surveys, and everything else that we go through, to find out what's there. So after we've done that, now we're just going to track a few of these recovery markers along the way to figure out what's globally happening. So that could mean grip strength. I have some folks who are going to test grip strength daily. Others, we're going to look at HRV or combinations. We may look at performance metrics like a force plate. So you're going to do a vertical jump every single day. And we're going to see where that's at. We've used the tap test before, which is how many times you can tap your finger as fast as possible. It's a rough indicator of central nervous system. - In a say one minute interval. - Exactly. And this is apps you can do on, this is like you tap this finger as fast as you can. It's going to say hey, you did 60 taps today and your average is 75. - I like that 'cause it taps into, ha, no pun intended, into upper motor neuron capacity. - Hundred percent. - Because a lot of things like, like grip strength obviously, I have to send the deliberate signal to my hand to grip. But at some point the lower motor neurons are going to be taking over the majority of the work. Like the signal is probably one and done. Whereas the tapping is going to be repetitive sending of signals from upper motor neurons. - Yep. So some of the athletes I work with, we track blood every day, we track urine every day, we track ideally a combination of subjective and objective measures. Everything from how did you feel last night to environmental sensors of their bedroom. Full PSGs going on, running like actual sleep diagnostics, not an Oura ring, nothing against Oura, but like full analytics, and some of 'em it's as simple as how'd you feel today and what was your vertical jump, right? So we're going to put people in a position to succeed. We're going to figure out what's the lever that they need to pull, as well as what's their aptitude? What sport are they in? What can we realistically get away with? And some of them will take machines with them and will do blood every day and urine and all kinds of stuff, and some of them it's a lot lower. - For myself, I'm not, as I mentioned before, I'm not a big fan of devices. I'm trying to wear the wristwatch. I tend to go off feel, which is not, it's not the ideal objective way to gauge things. But part of my reasoning for this is my colleague from the psychology department, Dr. Alia Crum, has done some studies where they've given, deliberately given people false feedback about their sleep. So told people you didn't sleep very well, or they've told people you slept really well, and performance can be driven in the expected direction, based on feedback, independent of how well people slept or didn't sleep. Now that doesn't mean you can take someone that only slept two hours, or was up every 30 seconds 'cause of apnea, and tell them they slept great, and they're going to perform great cognitive tasks. But you can take someone who slept very well, tell them that their recovery quotient wasn't very good, and their output is going to be worse. And that's my concern about a lot of devices out there, not to name specific devices. But it's still unclear to the general public, what the specific algorithms are to generate these recovery scores, right? And so many of the things that reportedly track sleep, aren't tracking sleep, - Not even close. - they're tracking heart rate and breathing, which are correlates of sleep depth, but that's different. And again, I'm not knocking those, I think the sleep trackers, if nothing else, have provided a forum whereby people are very conscious of getting good sleep. It's sort of like knowing the total chloric intake of your food, people go wow, I'm actually eating a lot more than I thought. - It's calibration. - Or less, in some cases. But often the case is that it's more. So I think for the typical person, I'm wondering whether or not, like myself, 'cause I'm not a competitive athlete or certainly not a professional athlete, competitive with myself I suppose, but no one else. Morning pulse rate I tend to take on waking. If I wake out of a really stressful dream, I might relax a little bit and then just take my pulse rate, kind of get a range, and see if it's spiking for whatever reason. I don't tend to measure grip strength, although I've heard you can just use a classic scale. - Yeah. - [Andrew] Old fashioned scale with the- - Sure. - Old fashioned. Or some other more technical device is probably good, if there's a low cost one. - Yeah, they're all low cost. - And then the carbon dioxide tolerance test. - Yeah. - So we haven't really talked about that in specific ways. My understanding of it is it's four deep slow breaths, in through the nose, out through the nose, and then a big inhale, that's max exhale, and then time duration of exhale through the nose, and then stopping the stopwatch at the point where lungs are empty. Not necessarily as long as one could hold their breath. Did I get that right? - Pretty much. - Okay, and I guess we should credit you and Brian McKenzie. - Yeah, those guys. - Yeah. - For sure. - And the folks under Brian's umbrella for really establishing this as a really good metric. When and how can I use the carbon dioxide tolerance test to gauge recovery upon waking, post-training session? - Yeah. - Would that be a good time? - Number one answer is, whatever you do be consistent. So do it under the, like any good science experiment, do it under the exact same conditions as you can. That generally means somewhere in the morning, 'cause that's when you're probably going to have the most control, most stability. So yeah, like you would take any HRV or other metric, wake up, get under control, get stabilized, take your metric. - [Andrew] Got it. - Going to be pretty good. - Got it. Sodium bicarb. - Yeah. - Baking soda. Rumor has it, and data has it, that it can actually be a pretty effective training tool. - Very effective. - Could you explain a little bit of about how it works, and how one might explore using sodium bicarb to enhance training output, in a couple of different contexts? - Yeah. So there's a handful of these ubiquitously effective supplements for performance. Sodium bicarbonate's one of them, and it's a very ingenious idea 'cause it's so simple. Effectively, muscle contraction happens because enzymatic function occurs within a fairly specific pH range, right? So if it gets extremely acidic, it doesn't like it. And so whether you're running through aerobic glycolysis or anaerobic, or anything else, all these things require, even ATP hydrolysis requires ATPases. Enzymes don't function well outside of this fairly special range. So what happens is generally fatigue, the sensations of fatigue are actually caused by some signal that hey, we're starting to run out of pH. Or we're getting in the wrong range. You're not out of gas usually, you're not too low on oxygen. You're not running low on muscle glycogen yet. You're typically going to see signs, or feel signals of fatigue way prior to that, mostly being pH issues. That being said, what if we could regulate pH better? Enter bicarbonate, right? So without going too far into metabolism, effectively what happens is you take an inhale, and you're mostly breathing in oxygen, O2. When you exhale your breathing out CO2. So the difference is you've gained a carbon somehow. Well, all of your carbohydrates in your body come in the form of long carbon chains. In fact, that's what a carbohydrate means. It is a one carbon molecule that has one water molecule attached. It's a carbon that has been hydrated. In the case of like glucose, blood sugar, let's say six carbon molecule, right? In terms of fat, which are the only two places you're going to get most of your cellular energy carbohydrates into fat, that is also a big long block in chain of carbons. So whether you're getting your energy from fat or carbohydrate, you're going to split those atoms. So in other words, you've got six carbons attached to each other, and in this part of chemistry it's exergonic. So when you break that carbon bond, so break one of those carbons off from the other, that's going to release energy. Just like if you had a pencil in here, and I snapped it and it'd go bang, and pop. I broke the bonds that were connecting that graphite to the next piece of graphite, and that released energy. 'Cause I put energy into the system, et cetera. Okay. As a result though, we've now had say five or six carbons chained together. We broke one off the end, which is not how it works, but making the point. And now you have one free-floating carbon used that energy release to then go make ATP, to then go make your muscles contract. But now you've got carbon floating around. You can associate free-floating carbon with being at a higher acidic level. It's not going to happen. The only way that you're going to go through this process is if your body says do we have an oxygen molecule available that we can bind this to immediately? Yes we do. That carbon attaches to that oxygen molecule. You can't just put CO2 in the blood because of what we just talked about. So you're going to bind it through this bicarbonate process. It's going to go through your blood. It's going to go into the lungs. It's going to go back into its carbon dioxide molecule. It's going to trans, go through the alveoli into the lungs and you're going to exhale. So you went from carbon to this bicarbonate system, back into carbon, exhale. So inhaled, O2 plants go the opposite by the way. So they're going to breathe in the CO2, they're going to cleave off that carbon, stack those carbons together, and that's how they get larger. In your blood, those six carbon chains are called glucose. If we store that in your muscle, we call it glycogen. So we take a bunch of glucose and stack it together. In a plant, we call that starch. That's effectively what it is, right? So you take a bunch of carbon from the atmosphere, stuck it all together, and that's a starch. If you want to do it in the form of fruit, we take that starch like from the ground, you put it up through the tree, go all the way up to the top, put it into the flower, break it up into these big huge chunks of starch, into little forms called fructose or glucose. That's why fruit has fructose in it, and that's why tubers and stuff have starch in them. Basically starch in an animal is glycogenesis. Okay. All that to say, if that's happening and we know that a byproduct specifically of anaerobic glycolysis meaning the breakdown of carbohydrates for fuel, typically in a very fast pace with low oxygen availability, the downside of that equation is acid production. We know that that's a problem, 'cause I started the conversation off there intentionally. So what if we could reduce the acid buildup? Now you know how pH kind of works, I went and kind of double negatives there, right? You don't want too much acid buildup. Then could we prolong and sustain energy in a more effective pace, especially in this anaerobic interval kind of environment? And again, that's important because in those things, failure is not a result of running out of fuel or oxygen. It's a result of fatigue building up way too quickly. - Is that also true for resistance training? - Uh, depends. - There's maybe more of the creatine phosphate system. - That can be an issue. It could simply be an issue of force production. You just don't have enough force, least you're not out of energy. You just can't muster enough force. You do enough reps, then it's going to be an issue there. Creatine phosphate though would be the big winner, depending. So to come back a little bit to the beginning, and then I'll, I'm circling this all together intentionally. All right. Well, the way that we produce energy is going to be in two primary categories, anaerobic and aerobic. Aerobic meaning with oxygen, anaerobic meaning without. In terms of muscle contraction, you're pretty much talking about carbohydrates or fat. Now fat is going to be exclusively aerobic, meaning I'm going to use fat from the entire body, roughly equally. So you're doing a sprint up a hill, and your hamstrings or your glutes or your quads are on fire. You're not just going to use the fat that's directly in those hamstrings. You're going to lose it from the entire body. It has to go through lipolysis, so it's in this stored form in adipose tissue. It's got to get broken down, put into blood. Blood's going to have to go through your body, get taken up into muscle, taken up through muscle into the mitochondria. Then we're going to have to go through this process called beta-oxidation. So remember, carbohydrates and glucose especially is a six carbon molecule. Fat, if it's in the form of a triglyceride, it is a three carbon glycerol backbone, and three, tri, one, two, three, fatty acids. Three carbon backbone, and those fatty acids are just big, long chains of carbon. That's all it is, right? So we're going to break that thing down, put it in the blood, move it up, move it into our mitochondria. You can't walk those things across the mitochondria wall. They're too big. So what you have to do is cleave them off into little chunks, and it turns out we break 'em off into two carbon chunks, so we call it beta, as in two, move those into mitochondria. That can go through this little thing called Krebs cycle, or tricyclic acid cycle, and you kick out a bunch of energy out of that. You add two carbons, so as a result of that process, you're going to generate two carbon dioxides. But remember, you can only go through that process if oxygen is available, because you have to be able to place those carbons onto something. Or acid gets up way too high, too fast. This is one of the reasons why fat is a nice fuel source, but it's very slow. It takes physical time to move from the back of your shoulder, into your blood, down your hamstring uptake, uptake, uptake. In addition, it's required oxygen availability. If you need energy faster, you simply don't have the time to bring in the oxygen, transport it through, go through capillaries, exchange through a tissue, et cetera. Carbohydrate, on the other hand, is going to be stored locally in the exercising muscle cell, and specifically in the cytoplasm. - As glycogen. - As glycogen in the store there. So what's going to happen initially, your initial demands for exercise, or for fuel, are going to come from the glycogen stored within the muscle fiber itself. It's just going to break right there, and you're going to be off the races. So you have the six carbon molecules, you're going to break it into two separate three carbon molecules. Okay, boom, that breaking provides you a tiny bit of energy, very small but some. Now you're going to take those two three carbon molecules, and you want to be able to oxidize them, 'cause that's your only next step. But in order to do that, you got to go those into mitochondria. So you got to break one of those molecules off. So then you'll be back to your two carbon molecule, just like you did with fat. That's going to go into mitochondria, and then it's going to go through the exact same Krebs cycle, two carbons, et cetera. But hold on. If you don't have sufficient oxygen, or sufficient mitochondria availability, and you're stuck at that two three carbon place, what the do you do? You have problems, right? Now we have to say, okay, wait a minute. We have three carbon molecule, and we have a bunch of this acid buildup. Now acid functionally is hydrogen. That's what pH, potential hydrogen is what pH stands for, right? So if hydrogen is building up as a byproduct of muscular contraction, and then you're having this three carbon molecule, what it can actually do is grab one of those hydrogens. And those three carbon molecules, by the way, are called pyruvic, pyruvic acid, right? If you take a pyruvic acid and you grab a hydrogen, put it on top of it, we now have a different name for it. It's called? - [Andrew] Hydrogen peroxide. - Lactate. Bingo, right? That's what lactate, or lactic acid is, right? So we've now built that up. So number one reason why lactate's not causing your fatigue, it's actually preventing it and that it does a bunch of other really cool stuff. But the point is, that system can only last so long. That gets overwhelmed very quickly. What are you going to do with the rest of this hydrogen? Well, if you started off in a normal pH range, you don't have very far to go before you've now gone into that level of too much acidity. If you start off in a more basic, and basic I don't mean simple, I mean chemistry, right, and more alkaline, then that same amount of increase in pH is no longer, now it just puts you back in your physiological range. So sodium bicarbonate, whether taken as a cream, or a powder, or baking soda, or anything else, can simply put you in a more alkaline state, even acutely. So this is something you can take right now, before your workout. You're going to delay, what we call delay the progression of fatigue. - And how would people start to approach this practice? My understanding is you can do this with common store bought baking soda. - [Andy] No question. - There's always a concern about gastric distress. - Oh boy. - That it's a very effective laxative, sometimes an unwanted laxative effect. But how would one approach this before? Let's say I'm going to, I'm doing the mile repeats exercise. Mile repeats protocol that we talked about earlier. I'm doing that for a few months, and now I want to try the sodium bicarb approach. I'm well hydrated, hopefully I'm well rested. I'm ready to go. When am I going to drink this sodium bicarb solution? How would I make the solution? Let's say I take 10 ounces of water. - [Andy] Yeah. - How much bicarb do I want to, sodium bicarb should I put in there? Can we come up with a, is it half a teaspoon? Is it a teaspoon? - Here's how I'm going to tell you. You will thank me by starting lower. You can always go more later. - So a little pinch. - [Andy] You cannot go backwards. - How about I start with a quarter teaspoon? - Fine. Half, honestly, half is fine. - Half a teaspoon. - It's totally fine. - Dissolve that. Slug that down. I read a study recently that showed that people will hit the peak benefits of this at different times, but it's somewhere, if memory serves me correctly, somewhere between 60 and 90 minutes later. So I might want to drink it on the way to the track. - It can, it can be as low as 20. - Okay. So maybe as I get to the tracks, and so I'm going to do some warmup with some walk and jogging. - I say 45 minutes. - [Andrew] Okay. - That's just a very rough standard. But yeah, you're right, it is individualized. And you probably want to play with that a little bit. If not, just somewhere in the neighborhood of 20 to an hour. - Okay. And then the perceived and real fatigue, if done correctly, the perceived and real fatigue ought to be reduced. - Yes. - I can do more work without feeling exhausted. Will I feel less of a lactate burn? - Yep. - Done in air quotes for those listening, I realize that's a very crude way to describe a complex physiological process. Fantastic. Can sodium bicarb be used repeatedly for longer duration training? - Yep. - And if I were going to use it with weight training, for whatever reason, maybe I'm doing circuit type training or I'm doing the super set type strength training that you talked about before, push, pull, push, pull, where it's a little bit more cardiovascularly demanding. Then maybe I'd sip that throughout the workout, make sure there's a bathroom nearby, it sounds like, 'cause I do, I am aware that many people get pretty serious gastric distress. - It can happen very quickly. - Okay. Great, well it sounds like an amazing training tool. I really appreciate you sharing it 'cause I think it's, it's one that doesn't get a lot of air time these days 'cause it's been around, but sounds like it has some pretty impressive effects. - Yeah, you know what's sort of funny about that is, I mean, I get it, pop culture is what it is. But still to this day, if you want to talk about sort of your most effective general health slash performance supplementation, it's the same three to four to five. And it's because they work really well. - Without going into the chemistry of each one in the practice, each one, 'cause I definitely want to get you back to talk about nutrition and supplementation. - Oh yeah. - At some point. But I think we need a full couple of hours to get that, right. - Yep. - At least. If, as a teaser, would you mind just listing off the other supplements that you have found are very effective for many people? So sodium bicarb, or baking soda is one. What are some of the other ones? - Yep, we'll go kind of in reverse order. Beta alanine is another very classically effective one. Similar idea to sodium bicarbonate, so it's going to, beta alanine's going to come in, it's going to be converted and stored as what's called carnosine in the muscle. And carnosine is an intracellular buffer. So in other words, it's just going to delay the buildup of acid. So fatigue blocker, if you will. So very effective, very cheap, very safe. Well studied. The top one though, of all of them by far that has an incredibly strong safety profile. It has, it is a cheap, it is a simple form to get, has a important magnitude of effect, and is effective across multiple domains of physical health and performance. And it is because of that it is my crown jewel. It is in my opinion, without question, the Michael Jordan of all supplementation. And that's creatine monohydrate. It affects so many things. We typically think about it as it's muscle stuff, right? You've talked kind of, you quickly were talking about the creatine phosphate system. But we have to realize the vast majority of research on creatine phosphate is not in sport performance, and has not been for 20 years. It's in clinical. And it has everything from effects on the neurological system, to there have been associations to mental health and depression. And to be very clear, I am certainly not saying you can take creatine and cure anything. And I'm not saying it's going to stop you from depression or anything. But I'm saying there's a lot of research in these areas and there's a reason people are doing it. - Yeah, I completely agree. And if you're willing, I'd love to have you back for us to do a discussion on creatine in the brain, or creatine in the nervous system. - Yeah. - That would be a lot of fun, and maybe we can do a kind of a journal club in advance of that. - Yeah. - For those that don't know, a journal club is where scientists read a bunch of papers and then argue about them, discuss them, and try and extract the kind of agreed upon center of mass, if you will. I think, I've long been taking five grams of creatine monohydrate per day, mainly for the cognitive effects. - [Andy] Yeah. - I sense an effect, that's obviously anecdata, but I think there are a lot of data out there, as you alluded to. - There's enough. You're not crazy. There's enough there. And in fact, there's enough mechanism now to understand the metabolic needs. People think, I'm a muscle guy, right, so I'm going to think about the metabolism needed to fuel muscle. But we forget cells, immune cells, red blood cells, nerve cells, astrocytes, brain, all this stuff requires energy, and it's all going through metabolism. - Super interesting. We'll do the deep dive on that soon. I have a final question for you. You're involved in a really interesting, I think really cutting edge project, that I first learned about from you. I don't know of anyone else doing anything as forward thinking, and frankly as relevant to the general population, because of my interest in people getting better sleep and learning how to do that, avoiding stress and learning how to do that. Tell us a little bit about what I believe is called absolute rest. - Right. So this is something that we've been playing with behind the scenes for a long time. And this is typically how high performance stuff works, right? People want exclusivity and so this has been built. Effectively, what happened is a friend of mine, Cody Burkhart, I don't know if you know Cody, but a- - Down in Texas. - Yeah. - Yeah. - NASA. - NASA guy. Yeah I do know Cody. - Wonderful, just down the road thinker. Everyone's interested in sleep, right? And for forever I would say, we're using with athletes, but everything available tells you how you're sleeping. Nothing can tell you why you're sleeping that way. And so we got together in Boulder and then I met some of his former colleagues, computer science folks, Harvard MD, and some really impressive tech folks. And we were just thinking about an idea. And we came up with, and we started to realize the problems, right? We used first principle thinking, it's one of my favorite approaches. If you're not familiar with that, go Google that. Like that's just a recipe to solve problems, is first principle thinking. And we just started to think about like, man, all the sleep tech is there, it's real, I don't need to convince people that they need sleep. Everyone's done that. You need high quality sleep, but how can I provide solutions? And with the people I work with, I can't just tell them your testosterone's down or your sleep's down, or recovery. I need to be able to be like, this is down, and here's why, and here's our solution. That's how our high performance world works. So enter absolute rest. This is saying, okay, what are the actual nodes that go into high effective, high quality sleep? Number one is psychology. So there has to be some sort of screening diagnostic for, are you not sleeping because of simply you can't control yourself? And you've done a wonderful job of giving people tools. Or if you can't quiet your mind before sleep do this, if you wake up and you can't go back to sleep, here are a bunch of things, right? So we have some screens that we can do, and there's some other stuff we can do to analyze. This is a psychological issue. Let's say it's not, right? You're under control. And we have different tricks we use and stuff, which I'm happy to talk about. But it's not that. Okay, is it physiology? Which is node number two. Do we know what your dopamine levels are like? Do we know what your serotonin levels are like? What's melatonin look like? What's adrenaline, what's cortisol, cortisol being the primary driver? What is this relationship DHEA, where are these things at? So we're going to measure all that and track that. We're going to measure that during the day, prior to sleep, we're going to measure that next morning, and even sometimes throughout sleep. And we're going to figure out, is this a physiology problem? If it is, then we have clear corrections. If not, we're going to go on the next step, which is, is this possibly a pathology? So you have some sort of sleep disorder. We're going to run full P, what's called PSG. So polysomnography. The exact same stuff you would get in a sleep clinic. It's a sensor that's going to go on there measuring EEG and EOG, and we're going to have muscle activation sensor to see if your legs are moving, and everything else is going on. And we're going to get a full diagnostic. And if anyone's ever done this, the amount of sleep issues that are happening in people that they don't even realize is extraordinarily high. So we're going to figure this out. One very quick example, we just did this with a professional athlete, and he was having like 280 roughly of these episodes per night. And to be categorized as an episode, you have to meet these four specific criteria. Oxygen saturation, ventilation changes, brain changes, et cetera, and he hit that over 280 times a night. And what this technology allowed us to do is figure out what position did all these things occur in. Well, in his particular case, most of them were happening, he was on his back. And so he bought a very simple like pillow basically that went on his back, that kept him from sleeping on his back. And we saw an 85% reduction in sleep awakeness issues, the very first night. Now we did that. Testosterone eventually tripled after three months by just improving sleep. And all we did is move him onto his left or right side. So huge improvements, just by understanding where the problem occurred, and why it occurred there. We didn't have to change hardly anything else. He had the basic hygiene stuff down and temperature and all that stuff. And he had his ChiliPad and all that to keep the thing cool. We couldn't fix it. Years, by the way, this took us two years of just trying everything. We're like, man. And it was just like, I wish, I wish we could get you to sleep better. And we, I pulled out every trick I knew, and it just was, as soon as we built this [indistinct] I'm like oh my God, it's all. He's not overweight by the way, he doesn't have any, he's not iron deficient, doesn't have any of these other classical symptoms that are associated with bad sleep. Supplementation, everything we've done, a thousand protocols. That fixed it overnight. So if it's not psychology, and it's not physiology, and it's not pathology, then the last one that people don't have any idea about is environment. And so what you don't realize is we have a box. We can sit right next to your bed. You just plug it in, you don't have to do anything. And it's going to run full environmental scans. So it's going to look at the temperature in your room. It's going to look at the humidity in your room. It's going to look at the volatile organic acid. These are things that are seeping out from your mattress. It's going to look at particulates in the air, and possible allergens and things that are floating around that are closing your nose off, so you can't sleep at night and now you're mouth breathing, and you've talked a lot, I'm sure, on the previous episodes about why that's bad. It's going to look at your CO2 cloud. So we've talked, we've already set this point up, right? You're inhaling O2, but then you're exhaling CO2. Well during the day, and when we're conversing, you have quite a bit of force with that exhalation, right? But at night, it's just barely seeping out of your mouth. So what happens is, CO2 tends to cloud up and build around your face, and then you end up re-breathing that CO2. And this can cause a large number of sleep problems because you're simply re-breathing in the panic. Whether you're fully awake or just kick out of a sleep stage, the CO2 around your face is a big issue. This stuff has all been known, by the way, with the astronauts for a very long time. It just hasn't translated into the, to the commercial spaces. Of course, gone to our high performer space. So we can measure that as well. And then we can figure out like for the most extreme, we can actually come into a bedroom and build an entire sleep optimization set up, and control the entire thing. But for most folks, the minimum we can do is run full diagnostics and check off is this environmental related, is it pathology, is there something else? - So is this a commercial device that people can eventually access? - It is now. - So where can people learn more about absolute rest? - Absoluterest.com. - Very cool. And just for our full disclosure, I wasn't aware that you had done this prior to today, what you'd mentioned. I always like to ask people, scientists or otherwise, I always love to ask what are you most excited about lately? And this sounds like an amazing technology. - And just to be really clear, that's not like something we're working on. That's landed. - That's landed. - We're ready to go. - Great. Well, and that's one of the things I appreciate about you is that you're willing to sometimes speculate, but you always say it's speculation. But in general, you seem like the kind of guy where if you're going to be public facing about something, if you're going to make a statement, there's got to be quite a bit behind it. You're not going to allude to the, in 10 years, we might be able to do this. Or in five years. You're a very data-driven kind of guy. - Yeah, well, the people I work with, we need answers, right? We don't have that timeframe. And we typically have like, hey, we start the season in four weeks. - Yeah. - So that's just where I'm at. - Well, as I said, I appreciate that about you, but it is but one of the many things I appreciate. I think the listeners and I can well appreciate on the basis of today's discussion, what a enormous wealth of information you are. How clear and potently you communicate that information. And also how you can take a huge cloud of information and still distill it into protocols that ought to work for 75% of people, 75% of the time, which is an immensely valuable thing to do. So for me and from the listeners, I just want to say, thank you so much for taking the, several now hours, I lose track of time, which reflects all good things. Several hours to take a break from teaching, take a break from research, take a break from the other important commitments of your life, and really share with us all this incredible information. I'm so, so grateful. - My pleasure, man. I'm glad we finally got to connect. This has been a long time in the making. - It has, and I'm going to bring the breathing protocols to my training. I'm going to start doing more of the endurance type and interval type training. I'm going to start moving when I do heat, I'm going to start moving when I do cold. I might even start throwing some sodium bicarb into, very small amount of sodium bicarb into some water before I train. And listen, Andy, Professor Andy Galpin, thank you ever so much. - My pleasure. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin. If you'd like to learn more about his work, and learn further information about exercise science from Dr. Galpin, please find him on Instagram at Dr. Andy Galpin. You can also find him on Twitter at the same handle, Dr. Andy Galpin, spelled with one L. And if you're learning from, and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple, and on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions or comments about the podcast, or you have suggestions about future topics or guests that you'd like to see me interview, please put that in the comment section on YouTube. We do read all the comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's conversation, and on many previous episodes of the "Huberman Lab Podcast", we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like sleep, and focus, and energy, and many other features of our physiology, and mental functioning. There are some important issues to consider when considering supplements. One of those issues is the quality of the ingredients. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements have the highest possible standards with respect to the quality of the ingredients they include. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E dot com, slash the letter U slash Huberman, and there you'll see the supplements that I take, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. If you navigate further into the Thorne site through that website, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I discuss science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of the "Huberman Lab Podcast", but much of which is distinct from the information covered on this podcast. Thank you once again for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Andy Galpin, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 283 ---
Video ID: VAEzZeaV5zM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAEzZeaV5zM
Title: Controlling Sugar Cravings & Metabolism with Science-Based Tools | Huberman Lab Podcast #64
Published: 2022-03-21 12:00:12 UTC
Description:
I explain how to blunt sugar cravings through fundamental knowledge of how sugar is sensed, metabolized, and utilized within the body. I explain how sugar is processed through the digestive tract and nervous system and how both the taste and nutritive components of sugar can lead to specific appetite changes and cravings. I discuss the connection between sugar, dopamine, and cravings and outline many tools to curb sugar cravings, specifically craving highly processed refined sugars.

#HubermanLab #Sugar #FatLoss

Thank you to our sponsors
Thesis - https://takethesis.com/huberman
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
Tuesday, May 17th: Seattle, WA
Wednesday, May 18th: Portland, OR  
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast:
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3DbFdlv
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/34Xod5H
Google Podcasts: https://bit.ly/3wo01EJ
Other platforms: https://hubermanlab.com/follow

Article Links
"Neocortex saves energy by reducing coding precision during food scarcity": https://bit.ly/3ugqaCK
"Impact of sugar on the body, brain, and behavior": https://bit.ly/3wk4HLN
"Sugar consumption, sugar sweetened beverages and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis": https://bit.ly/3IqT08s
"The preference for sugar over sweetener depends on a gut sensor cell": https://go.nature.com/3ilWIpl

Book Links
"Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence": https://amzn.to/3ipnI7o

Timestamps
00:00:00 Sugar & Physiology   
00:02:25 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:03:13 Thesis, AG1 (Athletic Greens), InsideTracker 
00:07:40 Sugar & the Brain 
00:10:06 Appetite & Hormones: Ghrelin & Insulin 
00:14:17 Glucose & Brain Function
00:24:19 Glucose & Physical Activity 
00:26:16 Fructose vs. Glucose 
00:32:41 When to Eat High-Sugar Foods?  
00:35:01 Sugar’s Taste vs. Nutritive Pathways, Sugar Cravings  
00:41:46 Tool: Sugar & the Dopamine, Pleasure – Pain Dichotomy  
00:48:43 Subconscious Sugar Circuits, Hidden Sugars in Food 
00:58:03 Glucose Metabolism in the Brain 
01:03:00 Tool: Glycemic Index, Blunting Sugar Cravings   
01:12:08 Sugary Drinks, Highly Refined Sugars 
01:14:33 Artificial Sweeteners
01:22:36 ADHD, Omega-3s 
01:30:18 Tools: Reduce Sugar Cravings with EPA Omega-3s & Glutamine
01:35:15 Tool: Blunt Sugar Peaks & Craving with Lemon Juice
01:43:09 Tool: Reduce Sugar Cravings & Spikes with Cinnamon  
01:45:10 Berberine, Sustained Low Blood Glucose Levels
01:51:24 Tool: Sleep & Sugar Cravings
01:56:33 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne, Neural Network Newsletter

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss sugar, in particular, how our nervous system regulates our sugar intake and our are seeking of sugar. We're also going to discuss how sugar regulates our nervous system. And as you'll soon learn, sugar really impacts our brain and body by two main mechanisms. One of those mechanisms is based on the sweet taste of sugar, which itself is rewarding. Even if you're not much of a sweet tooth, I confess I'm not, most people enjoy sweet tastes more than bitter tastes. And the sweet taste of sugar and its various forms, is strongly reinforcing, meaning it triggers the activation of neurons, nerve cells in the brain and body, that make us want to consume more of that sweet substance. Incidentally, sweet tastes also make us want to eat more of other substances as well. You may be familiar with that phenomenon. Now sugar also triggers mechanisms in the brain and body based on its nutritive content, independent of its sweetness. What that means is that the actual caloric content and the way that sugar interacts with your nervous system at a subconscious level, without your awareness, also impacts your craving and seeking of sugar and other foods. Today, we are going to discuss what happens when you ingest sugar in terms of your body's reaction and your brain's reaction. We are also going to talk about what happens when you don't ingest enough sugar. 'Cause it turns out sugar is such a powerful fuel for the brain that under conditions where people don't ingest enough sugar, or where their so-called blood glucose, which is basically blood sugar of a particular form gets too low, their neurons don't function as well. That said, there are conditions of very low blood sugar in which neurons can function even better. So today we are going to talk about the ins and outs, the ups and downs of sugar as it relates to your nervous system. And by the end of this episode, I'm confident that you have a much clearer picture as to how much sugar you should be ingesting, whether or not you should avoid sugars that you're currently eating, and you will certainly understand much, much more about the energy and fuel sources that your brain relies on, which I'm certain will allow you to make better informed choices about the foods you eat and avoid toward mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events this May. The first live event will be hosted in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second live event will be hosted in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a lecture series entitled The Brain-Body Contract, during which I will discuss science and science based tools for mental health, physical health and performance. And I should point out that while some of the material I'll cover will overlap with information covered here on the Huberman Lab Podcast, and on various social media posts. Most of the information I will cover is going to be distinct from information covered on the podcast or elsewhere. So once again, it's Seattle on May 17th, Portland on May 18th, you can access tickets by going to Hubermanlab.com/tour. And I hope to see you there. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes what are called nootropics, which means smart drugs. Now, to be honest, I am not a fan of the term nootropics, I don't believe in smart drugs in the sense that I don't believe that there's any one substance or collection of substances that can make us smarter. I do believe, based on science, however, that there are particular neural circuits and brain functions that allow us to be more focused, more alert, access creativity, be more motivated, et cetera. That's just the way that the brain works, different neural circuits for different brain states. And so the idea of a nootropic that's to make us smarter all around, fails to acknowledge that smarter is many things. If you're an artist, you're a musician, you're doing math, you're doing accounting, at different parts of the day, you need to be creative. These are all different brain processes. Thesis understands this. And as far as I know they're the first nootropics company to create targeted nootropics for specific outcomes. They only use the highest quality ingredients, which of course is essential. Some of those I've talked about on the podcast, things like DHA, Ginkgo biloba, phosphatidylserine. They give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month, discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics and goals. And with that personalization, design a kit of nootropics that's ideal for the different brain and body states you want to access. I've been using Thesis for more than six months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game changer. My go-to formula is the Clarity Formula, or sometimes I'll use their Energy Formula, before training. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to take thesis.com/huberman. Take a three minute quiz and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman checkout for 10% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens, now called AG1. Athletic Greens is an all in one vitamin, mineral and probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it helps me cover all of my basic nutritional needs. It makes up for any deficiencies that I might have. In addition, it has probiotics, which are vital for microbiome health. I've done a couple of episodes now on the so-called gut microbiome and in the ways in which the microbiome interacts with your immune system, with your brain to regulate mood, and essentially with every biological system relevant to health throughout your brain and body. With Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins I need, the minerals I need, and the probiotics to support my microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. Plus a years supply of Vitamin D3+K2. There are ton of data now showing that vitamin D3 is essential for various aspects of our brain and body health. Even if we're getting a lot of sunshine, many of us are still deficient in vitamin D3. And K2 is also important because it regulates things like cardiovascular function, calcium in the body, and so on. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. What's unique about InsideTracker is that while there are a lot of different tests out there for hormones and metabolic factors, et cetera, with InsideTracker, you get the numbers back in terms of your levels, but they also give you very clear directives in terms of lifestyle, nutrition, and supplementation, that can help you bring those values into the ranges that are best for you and your health goals. And that's very different than a lot of the other programs where you get a lot of information, but you don't really know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that all very easy to understand and very actionable based on the very easy to use dashboard at InsideTracker. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit inside tracker.com/huberman, to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Okay, let's talk about sugar, let's talk about how sugar impacts your brain, and how your brain impacts your pursuit or your avoidance of sugar. Let's get a few things out of the way first. The first thing is that there's nothing inherently bad about sugar. I know the word sugar gets a bad rap nowadays, and indeed, you're going to hear over and over again, during this podcast, that consuming a lot of refined sugars, in particular high fructose corn syrup, is known to have a very large number of bad effects on the brain and body. I don't know that there's anyone that really debates that anymore. Even if we just agree, and I think we should all agree, on the so-called calories in, calories out principle, right? It's a principle thermodynamics that if we ingest more energy than we burn, we are going to gain weight. If we ingest less energy than we burn, we are generally going to lose weight. And if the two things are in balance, ingestion and burning of energy, well, then we're going to maintain weight. So everyone agrees on that, I agree on that. But beyond, there are a number of ways in which particular nutrients, in the case of today's episode, sugar, impact the way that the brain works, such that we tend to seek out more of particular nutrients. For instance, if we eat sugar, there are two, or at least two mechanisms, by which we will crave more sugar. I think most people are aware of that experience, but today I'm going to explain exactly how that works. But also that when we ingest sugar it has a bunch of different effects on the way that our neural circuits work that can allow us to be more or less focused, more or less agitated, a more or less happy, more or less depressed in some cases. So today, as we explore this thing we're calling sugar, we are going to explore that mainly in the context of the nervous system, but also in the context of how the nervous system regulates many, many functions and behaviors that are important to all of you, your ability to think, your ability to extra size, your ability to gain weight, lose weight, whatever your goals might happen to be, sugar plays a critical role in achieving those goals. And in some cases, if you're ingesting too much at the wrong times or the wrong forms, sugar can actually impede those goals. In fact, sugar can prevent all the right behaviors from allowing you to achieve the goals that you want. So today we are going to place sugar into its proper context. The way I want to start off by doing that is to tell you a little bit of what happens when we eat and a little bit of what the brain does to respond to those events. So what happens when we eat? Well, I've done an entire episode on metabolism. So if you're interested in the full cascade of hormonal and neural events that occurs when we eat, please check out that episode. But for the sake of today's discussion, let's just take a, what I call top contour view of the hormonal response to ingesting food. Now, anytime we eat, that is the consequence of a number of things that happened before we ate. There's a own in our brain body called Ghrelin, spelled G-H-R-E-L-I-N. Ghrelin is a hormone that increases depending on how long it's been since we ate last. So the longer it's been since we had a meal, Ghrelin levels are going to be higher and higher and higher, and it essentially makes us hungry by interacting with particular neurons in an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and some other areas as well, like the lateral hypothalamus. You don't need to know the names of those brain areas, but if you'd like to know them, there they are Ghrelin increases, it tends to make us hungry. And then when we eat, typically what happens is Ghrelin levels go down. So it's a very logical system. Now, when we eat, assuming that we eat carbohydrates, but even if we just eat some protein and some fats, we will experience a slight, or in some cases, a large rise in blood glucose, blood glucose is simply blood sugar. And the body and brain, we should say in particular, the nervous system doesn't function well if blood sugar is too high or too low. So as a consequence, we have another hormone, which is released from the pancreas, which is called insulin, which helps regulate the amount of glucose in the bloodstream. So even if you were to ingest an entire cup, an eight ounce cup of pure table sugar, which would send your blood glucose very, very high, assuming that you have a normal insulin response, that you're not diabetic, that insulin response would help clamp that blood glucose level so that it did not cause damage to your brain and body. Because if blood sugar goes too high, it's actually toxic to neurons and other cells of your body, it can kill them off. And neurons of the central nervous system, meaning the brain and spinal cord, once they are dead, they do not come back. So your biological systems understand this at a biological level that is, and prevent that death of cells due to high blood sugar, by keeping insulin around, in order to clamp blood glucose. Diabetics, we call them type one diabetics, who don't make insulin, have to take insulin when they eat in particular, when they eat foods that raise their blood sugar, specifically to avoid that neurotoxicity and the other deleterious effects of high blood sugar. So Ghrelin is a hormone that goes up the longer it's been since we've eaten, it tends to stimulate hunger. When we eat, Ghrelin is suppressed. Blood glucose typically goes up, especially when we eat a carbohydrate containing meal. When blood glucose goes up, it's regulated in the body, meaning its peaks and its valleys are more or less smoothed out, and that glucose is sequestered, it's taken away where it needs to be taken away. And in certain locations, it's delivered to cells so that those cells can use the glucose. Now, one of the chief organs for glucose utilization is the brain, neurons are tremendously metabolically active. And their preferred mode of metabolism is glucose metabolism. In other words, neurons basically run on sugar, which is not to say that you should eat a lot of sugar. As you'll see today, there are states of mind and body, for instance, fasted states, in which people report having immense amounts of mental clarity and their blood glucose is actually quite low. So it is simply not the case that the more sugar that you ingest, the better that your brain will function. But it is the case that for most people, meaning people who are not on a ketogenic or very low carbohydrate diet, they're not adapted to low carbohydrate diets, that neurons in their brain and body are using glucose in order to function. That's what allows those neurons to fire electrical potentials, that's how we refer to it, firing, meaning sending electrical signals down their length to communicate with other neurons. To illustrate just how important glucose is for brain function, I'd like to describe a study that just recently came out, that sits on a long history of similar studies. But the one that just came out is particularly interesting. Now I want to point out that, unless I say otherwise, I'm going to refer to typical diets, meaning I have to believe that most people out there are in ingesting some starch some starch or carbohydrate. I do realize there are people following very low carbohydrate diets or moderately carbohydrate diets. I even know that there's some folks out there who are on the so-called carnivore diet, they only eat meat and organs, maybe a little fruit. But I'm going to assume that the vast majority of people listening ingest proteins and carbohydrates. So unless I say ketogenic, or I emphasize ketosis itself, which I will, I'm referring to a kind of typical diet where people are consuming fats, proteins and carbohydrates. I count myself as one such individual. At some point I might try the carnivore diet, who knows, I might I a pure vegan diet, who knows. But for my entire life up until now, I'm 46 years old, I've been a proud omnivore, meaning I've tried to eat high quality as much as I can, unprocessed foods, I try and really avoid highly processed foods. But I do eat from those three macronutrient groups, proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, and I'm going to assume that most of you do as well. The study I'd like to emphasize, recorded from neurons, nerve cells, in the brain, in particular in the part of the brain `that responds to visual images, the so called visual cortex. And neurons in the visual cortex are beautifully tuned, as we say, to particular features of what we see. The primary example of this, the kind of classic example, is if you put a little electrode next to a neuron in your visual cortex, or if we put you into an FMRI scanner machine, which can detect neural activity, and I were to show you a bunch of just little lines, bars of light, they could be dark bars of light, they could be light bars of light, on a screen in front of you. So some would be vertical, some would be horizontal, some would be at 45 degrees, what we would see is that some neurons respond best, meaning they fire a lot of electrical activity to vertical lines, other ones respond to horizontal lines, and others respond to 45 degree lines. And this so called orientation tuning, meaning because of the orientation of the line, is a cardinal classic feature of the way that your visual system is built. And everything that you see, whether it's a face or a dog or a cat or a landscape, is built up from these very simple neuron responses. In other words, when you look at a face, there are neurons deep in the brain that respond to faces. But the only reason that those neurons can respond to those faces is because they receive signals from neurons in your visual cortex. Some of which respond to vertical lines, some of which respond to horizontal lines, and some which respond to 45 degree lines. And all of those are built up in what we call a hierarchical representation, which just fancy language for those are the building blocks by which you see a face and you recognize a face. And it's really an amazing phenomenon, it happens very, very fast. You never notice that you're doing this, but everything is built up from these fundamental orientation-tuned neurons. Now orientation-tuned neurons are so fundamental that they are the building blocks by which you make up all other things that you see, it's the way you read, it's the way that you recognize faces, as I mentioned, and everything else. Experimentally, it's quite straightforward to measure how sharply tuned one of these neurons is. In other words, if I were to show you a vertical line and find a neuron in your brain that responds to vertical lines, I could also ask whether or not that neuron fires any electrical activity in response to a line that's not quite vertical, maybe just 10 degrees off vertical or 20 degrees or 30 degrees. And what I eventually would find is that that neuron was orientation-tuned over a particular range of angles. It's not only going to respond to vertical lines, it's also going to respond to lines that are about 10 degrees off vertical on either side, but probably not much more, maybe 20, but usually it's going to be anywhere from vertical to just tilted slightly. In the recent experiment that was published in the journal, "Neuron," Cell Press journal, excellent journal, the authors asked a really interesting question, they asked whether or not the sharpness of tuning, the precision of orientation tuning of these neurons is dependent on blood glucose level. So just to cut to the chase, to give you the answer, what they found is that when subjects are well fed, neurons that responded to vertical, responded very strongly to vertical, but not very much at all to other angles, of what we call stimuli, so lines that are 10 degrees or 20 degrees off. If they looked at neurons that were primarily tuned, right, that preferred horizontal lines, they found the same thing. So it wasn't something unique to vertical lines. What they basically found was the sharpness, the precision of tuning of neurons in the brain, was best when subjects were fed. And conversely, when subjects were fasted, the orientation tuning of these neurons became much broader. What it meant was that a neuron that normally would only respond to vertical now responded to other angles of lines as well. You might say, well, that's great, right, these neurons that at one point could only do one thing are now tuned to other things. But it's not so great because what that means is that in the fasted state, your perception of the outside world is actually distorted, it's blurred, it's not as precise as it is when you're fed. And when I say fed, what I really mean is when glucose is available to neurons. Now, for some of you, maybe many of you, and including myself, intermittent fasting, or some variant thereof, is actually a state that I like. It allows me to focus. For instance, as I mentioned before, and even earlier in this podcast, I tend to eat my first meal sometime around 11:00 AM. And then I generally eat my last meal sometime around 8:00 PM, plus or minus an hour on either side, I'm not super strict about it. And occasionally I'll wake up really hungry and I'll eat something before 11:00 AM. I'm not super strict about this intermittent fasting thing. It just seems to be how my appetite works best, given my schedule, et cetera. In the morning, I tend to be most focused. And I always associated that with the fact that I was fasted. I ingest water and some caffeine about 90 minutes after waking up, I drink my caffeine, but I hydrate from the time I get up, et cetera, et cetera. And I know a lot of other people have had the experience of being fasted and feeling like they have a lot of mental clarity. When you are in a fasted state, typically you are going to use fuels that are available to the neurons, based on your intake of food the day before, maybe you're using some glycogen, maybe you're using some fat, maybe you're using some blood sugar, that's derived from other storage sites in the body. You don't actually use fat as a fuel source for neurons under typical conditions. But there are ways in which proteins and fats and glycogen, et cetera, are converted into fuel that neurons can use. What's interesting about this study is that the study says that when well fed, meaning when blood glucose, sugar, is at a properly elevated level in the bloodstream, it can be delivered to the brain in a way that allows neurons to work best, which is really all just to underscore the point that I made earlier, which is that your nervous system is extremely metabolically demanding, and it loves glucose, neurons love glucose. So the takeaway from this study is not that you should avoid fasting, the takeaway from this study is that there are elements of the fasted state in particular the elevations in things like epinephrine and norepinephrine, also called adrenaline and noradrenaline, that can give us this kind of clarity of mind that many people are pursuing when they fast. That's kind of one of the reasons a lot of people fast, they like the way that they feel, mentally and physically. But I think it's only fair to point out that glucose is the preferred source of fuel for the brain. And this study that I mentioned is one of many studies that have explored how nutritional status or blood glucose status in the brain and body influence neuronal tuning and neuronal function. And it really points to the fact that ultimately, your brain as an organ, is a glucose consuming machine. Now, when you eat a food, that food is broken down and if it contains carbohydrates, it's going to be converted into glucose. And that glucose can't get directly into the brain as a fuel source. It actually has to be carried across the so-called blood brain barrier, the BBB, and the actual metabolism of glucose and the delivery of the glucose to the neurons is carried out by a different cell type. And it's a cell type that you should all know about because it's the most abundant cell type in your brain, and maybe even in your entire nervous system, and that's the so-called astrocyte. Astrocytes are one of several types of glia, the word glia means glue. But many people have taken that name, glia, glue, to think that, oh, the only thing that the astrocytes are doing is just kind of holding things together. Actually, the astrocytes are involved in delivering glucose to the neurons, they are critically involved in shaping your neuronal function and brain plasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. So these astrocytes are like the little waiters and waitresses bringing glucose to the neurons and the neurons are going to do the heavy lifting that's involved in perception and behavior and action. So if prior to this episode, you didn't already realize that glucose, blood sugar, is vital to the function of your brain and other neurons of your nervous system, now you know. And for those of you that have experienced the increase in mental clarity that comes after a properly timed, properly composed, meaning it has the right macronutrients in the right ratios, and a properly sized meal, well then now you have justification for eating something as a way to improve the way that your brain works. It turns out that your brain is going to work best when it's got glucose available, whether you like to fast or not, that's just the reality of things. The same thing is also true for the neurons in your body. The way that you are able to move the limbs of your body, the way you are able to perform exercise or movement of any kind for that matter, is because as neurons, called motor neurons, send electrical potentials to the muscle fibers, they release a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine, which causes contraction in the muscle fibers, and allows you to move your limbs. Those neurons are also very metabolically demanding, especially when you're doing demanding types of physical work, and that could be cycling or running or weightlifting or yoga or whatever it may be. Those neurons require a ton of glucose. If you've ever had the experience of having to think very hard about how you're generating a movement or force yourself to continue to endure in a given exercise, you might have thought, oh, you know, I'm running out of fuel, that's why I'm getting tired, it's hard to do. That's actually the case sometimes, but that's not always the case. One of the reasons that it feels like work is because your so called upper motor neurons, the ones that control the lower motor neurons in your spinal cord, which control your muscles, they have to be very metabolically active. It's one thing to engage in a reflexive movement where you're just walking around or if you're running continuously. But when you suddenly have to focus on what you're doing, and you have to generate specific patterns of motor movement, well, that feels demanding because one, it increases the release of adrenaline in your brain and body, which makes you feel a little bit agitated and more alert, but also deliberate thought, deliberately controlling the way that your brain and body is moving, requires more glucose uptake, more energy in those very neurons. And this is also why after doing a long about of exercise, you might be tired, but also if you do a about of skill learning of any kind, or if you've been reading and thinking about what you're reading, or if you had a intense conversation with somebody where you're really forcing yourself to listen, and hopefully they're listening to you too, and you're really trying to parse what they're saying, and maybe you're doing that right now, and you're trying to really track something, that's work, and that work requires glucose uptake by neurons, both in the brain and in your body. Now that we've established that glucose is the preferred source of fuel for the nervous system, I'd like to concentrate on a few of the other types of sugars that we ingest on a common basis, and the impact that those have on brain function and body function. I'd particularly like to focus on fructose. Fructose, of course, is found in fruit, it's also found in the infamous high fructose corn syrup, which we will talk about today. It's worth pointing out that the concentrations of fructose in fruit is quite low compared to the concentrations of fructose in high fructose corn syrup. High fructose corn syrup is approximately 50% fructose, which turns out to be an enormously high percentage of anything, really, especially when we cut contrast that to the concentrations of fructose in fruit. Fruits have other types of sugars in them as well. You know, the sucrose content of most fruit and fruit juices is low. Although there are some fruits like melons, peaches, pineapples, and so forth, that contain a little less than 10% or so of sucrose. Things like mangoES can have a lot of sucrose. But typically the amount of fructose, fructose, I think is the proper pronunciation, people are always correcting me. Fructose is anywhere from 1% to about 10%, right? It's really going to vary quite a bit. And many of you have probably heard of the so-called glycemic index, which is basically a measure of how fast blood sugar rises after eating particular foods, et cetera. We're going to set aside the glycemic index for now, we will come back to it. It has some relationship to the concentrations of fructose in fruit. But the point that I'd like to make is that fructose as a sugar, is handled very differently in the body than is glucose. But I also want to emphasize that because the percentage of fructose in fruit is rather low, especially compared to high fructose corn syrup, many people have demonized fructose saying that fructose makes you fat, or that fruit makes you fat. If you look at the data, that's not really the case. The fact of the matter is that the concentrations of fructose in fruit are so low that unless someone is consuming a lot of fruit, or they're consuming a lot of fruit on the backdrop of a highly processed diet or a diet that has a lot of other stuff that they might not want to be ingesting, you can't really say that fructose is fattening. I don't really think that there's any basis for saying that fructose itself is bad. Now high fructose corn syrup is a different issue, and too much consumption of anything, fructose included, whether or not it comes fruit or otherwise, can be a problem for the ways that it impacts the neural circuits that process sugar, not just glucose, but fructose. And so we'll illustrate those neural circuits in a bit, and it'll become very clear to all of you, regardless of whether or not you have a background in biology or metabolism, nutrition, or otherwise, why ingesting very high concentrations of fructose is not going to be a good thing for the way that your brain functions. One of the key distinctions between glucose and fructose is that fructose most likely cannot directly access the brain. It actually needs to be converted into glucose in the liver. And the way that conversion occurs feeds back to a set of hormones and neural pathways that we talked about earlier, which have a lot to do with appetite. And to just summarize what is now a lot of very solid data, fructose and specifically fructose, has the ability to reduce certain hormones and peptides in our body whose main job is to suppress Ghrelin. As you recall, Ghrelin is a hormone that increases the longer it's been since we've eaten, and Ghrelin makes us hungry by stimulating particular neurons in our hypothalamus, it actually makes us really want to eat. And in particular, really makes us want to eat sugary and fatty foods. Fructose reduces the activity of the hormones that reduce Ghrelin . And so the net consequence of that is that fructose increases Ghrelin. So, although I and I think pretty much everyone out there, say for a few individuals, agrees that calories in and calories out is the fundamental principle of weight loss, weight maintenance or weight gain. Ingesting fructose shifts our hormone system, and as a consequence, our neural pathways within our brain, the hypothalamus, to be hungrier regardless of how many calories we've eaten. Now I also want to be absolutely clear, this does not mean that eating an apple or eating a melon or eating a couple of apricots or something is going to make you hyperphagic, meaning it's going to make you just want to eat, eat, and eat, that's simply not the case. But if you compare fructose and you compare glucose, not only are they metabolized differently in the brain and body, but in addition to that, fructose has this impact of reducing the hormones that reduce hunger hormones in neural circuits. And so fructose does have this kind of twist in its phenotype, right? Or I guess if fructose had a dating profile, this would be a kind of a red flag in that profile, because fructose itself, while it's actually a pretty good fuel source in many ways, and it's often packaged in things like fruits, which bring along fiber and vitamins and minerals, that I think for many of us are things that we should be eating more of and ingesting more of, it can suppress the pathways that suppress hunger. And as a consequence, it can increase hunger. So current recommendations for most people are to eat more fruits and vegetables. But for those of you that are trying to control your hunger, ingesting a lot of fruit to is probably not going to be a good idea. Certainly, ingesting it from high fructose corn syrup is not going to be a good idea because of the enormous percentages of fructose in high fructose corn syrup, 50%, or sometimes even more. But even from fruit, some people will find that fruit really quenches their appetite. Other people will find that fruit stimulates their appetite. And I suppose if you're trying to stimulate your appetite, then ingesting more fruit might actually be advantageous to you. So fructose provides a bridge for us between a particular kind of sugar, hormone function, in this case Ghrelin and the hypothalamus. which leads us to the next question, which is what is it about sugar that makes it such an attractive thing for us? Why do we like it so much? And the obvious answer that most people arrive at is, well, it just tastes really, really good. But that's actually not the way it works. The rewarding property is as we say of sugar, whether or not they come in the form of sucrose or fructose or foods that increase glucose to a very high level, actually is not just related to the taste of the foods that produce that elevation in glucose, sucrose, or fructose. It is in part, but that's only part of the story, and the rest of the story, once you understand it, can actually place you in a position to much better control your sugar intake of all kinds, but also your food intake in ways that can allow you to make much better choices about the foods you ingest. And actually at this point, I should probably give a confession, I've said today, and I'll say it again, and I've said it I'm pretty podcast. I don't have much of a sweet tooth and indeed that's true. And I can kind of pass on chocolate or ice cream or things like that, it seems like with each successive year, sweet things are less and less appealing to me. Of course, savory foods, anything that is really fatty, salty, savory, those don't last long in my presence, but I always say, I don't really like sweet things so much, and I like sweet people, but I don't tend to like sweet foods, which is true. But there's probably one exception and that's mangoes. And it turns out that mangoes have the highest percentage of sugar in them, in particular fructose, as well as other forms of sugars. So what I do, because I love mango so much, is I will have mangoes probably twice a week, but I'll have them after some sort of resistance training or hard run or something like that. Because it is the case that after you exercise hard, in particular exercise that is of the high intensity variety, that your body is more efficient at using circulating sugar. It's able to store that or use that for fuel. And so what I'll typically do is just take the mango, I actually eat the peels too. I know there probably some people are going to cringe when they hear that, I find them delicious. So I'll just bite into those things like apples, I don't eat the pits, however. So now I want to take us on a journey into the nervous system to explain, the pathways in the brain and body that regulate our appetite for sugar. Now, keep in mind what I already told you before, which is that when we ingest foods, they're broken down into various components and glucose is going to be shuttled to the brain, and of course, to other neurons in our spinal cord and elsewhere, and to our muscles, cetera, in order for all of those cells and organs and tissues is to be able to function. The fact that so many cells and organs and tissues require glucose in order to function has led to a situation where you have dedicated neural machinery, pieces of your brain, that are almost entirely, if not entirely devoted, to seeking out of sugar or foods that contain sugars. And to make sure that you not only seek those out, but you know where those foods are and that you ingest more and more and more of them. And there are two main ways that these neural circuits work. In fact, we can see that there are two neural circuits entirely that work in parallel. And this is a common theme throughout the nervous system, and that's parallel pathways. Parallel pathways are the ways that you can distinguish light from dark, parallel pathways are the ways that you can distinguish high pitched sounds from low pitched sounds, parallel pathways are the ways that you can flex your muscles versus extend your muscles. For instance, if you move your wrist closer to your shoulder, you're flexing your bicep and you're actually inhibiting, you're actually preventing the action of your tricep. If you move your wrist away from your shoulder, you are essentially using your extensor, your tricep, and you're inhibiting the activity of your bicep. So for every function in your body that you might think is controlled by one brain area or one neural circuit, almost always there are two or more so called parallel pathways that ensure that that particular behavior happens. Now, in the case of sugar consumption, the two parallel pathways involve one pathway related to the actual taste and the perception of taste that lead, not just you, but every animal that we're aware of, to seek more sweet containing foods. The other parallel pathway is related to the nutritive component of sweet foods. Meaning the degree to which a given food will raise blood glucose. I want to repeat that. One pathway in your brain and body is devoted to getting you to seek out sweet tasting things that you perceive as sweet, and another parallel pathway is devoted to getting you to seek out foods that lead to increases in blood glucose. It just so happens that the foods that lead to big increases in blood glucose typically are associated with that sweet taste. Now, this is distinctly different than the neural pathways that control seeking of savory foods or salty foods or spicy foods, for that matter, or bitter foods. The sweet pathway is what we would call hardwired. It exists, as far as we know, in every mammal, it even exists in fruit flies, hence fruit fly. Basically getting sweet stuff into the body might seem like it has a lot to do with the taste, but it has just as much to do with the nutritive components that sweet tasting foods carry, and the fact that your nervous system and so many cells in your brain and body run on glucose. If you recall earlier, I said, even if you ingest fructose, fructose can be converted into glucose in the liver. And I mentioned, of course, that fructose may actually work directly on the brain, that's still unclear for humans, the jury's still out on that, we will see. But the fundamental thing to understand here is that when you think you want a piece of chocolate or you think you want a piece of cake or you're craving something sweet, you are both craving the taste and your neurons are literally craving the nutritive components that arrive with that taste. And simply by understanding that can allow you to circumvent some of the sugar cravings that you might otherwise be a complete hopeless victim to. Also in this episode, I will talk about ways that you can sort of undermine or short circuit these circuits, if you will, in order to reduce sugar cravings on a regular basis, if that's your goal. Two parallel pathways, one of the parallel pathways has to do with conscious perception. So animals of all kinds of mice, rats and humans, will prefer sugary taste to non-sugary taste. When we eat something that tastes sweet, we register that sweet taste by way of sweet receptors, literally little ports or portals of neurons on our tongue and on our pallet, a lot of people don't realize this, but there are a lot of taste receptors on the soft pallet and around the mouth, on the sides of the mouth. So you're actually tasting things, not just with your tongue, but with your entire mouth and your pallet. So when you ingest something sweet, very quickly there are signals sent from those neurons in your mouth to brain areas that cause you to seek out or at least pay attention to, the source and the abundance of those sweet things. They literally change your perception. In fact, there are beautiful neuroimaging studies that show that when people ingest a sugary drink, their perception of images of foods change very much to make those foods appear more appetizing, and not just foods that contain sugar. Results of those studies do show that there's an increase for instance, in the perception of detail and images of ice cream, after you ingest a sweet drink or even if you put like a hard candy into your mouth, it will make you seek out sugary things more, it will make sugary things look more appetizing, but also other foods, more appetizing. So I think it's important that people recognize that fact, that when you have a sweet taste in your mouth or when you've tasted something sweet within your mouth, I should say, your perception of has immediately shifted. These are fast neural pathways. We'll get into some of the brain structures in a moment, but these are fast neural pathways that shift your entire self toward seeking more sugary stuff and more food generally. Now, does that mean that you should never ingest anything sweet? No, certainly I'm not saying that, everyone has to decide for themselves what the appropriate amount of sugar intake is, but I find it remarkable when people say, oh, you know, I need to get my sugar fix, or I need to have my chocolate, or I need to have a little bit of something to just kind of take care of that sugar appetite. Because in taking care of that sugar appetite, maybe for the very disciplined of you, you can just have that one piece of chocolate and it's great, and you can relish in it, but it does shift the way that you perceive other foods as well. And the way it does that is through our, probably if you're listener this podcast, now old friend, but incredible neuro modulator, dopamine. Dopamine is a molecule that is released from several places in the brain. There's a so-called mesolimbic reward pathway, which is a whole set of places in the brain or circuits, designed to get us motivated and craving and in pursuit of things. And then of course there are areas of the brain that are involved in movement that are linked up with those areas involved in motivation. That makes perfect sense. Why would you have a brain area involved in motivation if you couldn't actually do something with that motivation? So the way that your brain is designed is when there's an increase in dopamine, in the mesolimbic reward pathway, there are signals sent to an area of the brain called the striatum, we're going to spend a little bit of time today in the striatum. It's got a dorsal part, meaning in an upper part and a ventral part, which means a lower part. And the dopamine sent to those area, places us, excuse me, into modes of action, to pursue particular things. Sugar or sweet tastes, I should say, to be more specific, have an incredibly potent ability to activate dopamine release within the mesolimbic reward pathway. This has been shown over and over and over again in animal models and in humans. This is especially true, I should mention, through the ingestion of sweet liquids. Now this becomes a very important point to us a little later on when we talk about the proliferation of sodas and sweet drinks, and dare I even say, non-sugar or diet sodas, we're going to get into that a little bit later. They are perhaps one of the most third rail topics in nutrition. But when we ingest something sweet, the perception of that sweet taste increases dopamine in the mesolimbic reward pathways, which then are conveyed to pathways for motor behavior, and in general, place us into modes of focused action toward getting more of whatever was sweet. Again, for those of you that are very disciplined, you can probably eat that one piece of chocolate and be just fine. But if you understand the way that dopamine works, what you'll realize is that when this dopamine pathway is triggered, it tends to create not the sensation or the perception of satiety, of feeling like something is enough, but rather to produce the sensation of wanting more. As described in the episode that I hosted with my phenomenal colleague from Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Anna Lembke, she's an expert on addiction and dopamine pathways, the dopamine circuits of the brain have what we call a pleasure pain balance. And there I'm paraphrasing what Dr. Anna Lembke has said, and has written about in her beautiful book, "Dopamine Nation." If you haven't read that book, I highly recommend it. Whether or not you have issues with addiction or you know people that do, or you don't, it's an incredibly important read, especially if you're interested in understanding motivated behaviors and ways to channel your behaviors in life toward healthy, motivated behaviors, and make sure that you avoid some of the common pitfalls that people fall into, not just addiction, but things like overuse of social media or wasting time in general, it's a phenomenal book. In that book, and of course, within research articles, you will find evidence of this so-called pleasure pain balance that exists within our dopamine circuits. Nobody has dopamine circuits that allow them to escape this pleasure pain balance. And the way this works is that anytime that we engage in a behavior or we ingest something that increases our levels of dopamine, there is a subsequent increase in the neural circuits that control our sense of frustration, pain, and lack. You can actually notice this phenomenon if, for instance, you're somebody who really likes chocolate, or you really like something else, pay attention to the way that you experience indulging in that thing. If you eat that piece of chocolate and you really focus on savoring its amazing taste, you'll notice that it provides some quenching of your desire for let's say sweet stuff or chocolate or both, but right as you stop experiencing that, right as that chocolate intake tapers off, as you swallow it down your throat, or you just pause for a second afterwards, what you'll notice is that your brain and body actually orient toward wanting more. And that wanting of more is really the action of the neural circuits that underlie pain and are pushing your dopamine levels back down. And when these circuits go awry or I should say, when people fail to who control themselves within the context of that pleasure pain balance, the typical behavior is to reach for yet another chocolate or to then look for something that will quench that desire and get dopamine levels back up. Now the way these pleasure pain circuits work is very diabolical. Because it turns out that were you to take another piece of chocolate, yes, your dopamine levels would go back up, but not to the same extent that they did the first bite of chocolate that you had. In fact, we can say that the longer it's been since you've indulged in something that you really enjoy or would like, the greater the dopamine you will experience when you finally engage in that behavior or indulge to that thing, ingest that thing, and the greater the dopamine increase, the greater the subsequent action of those pain circuits. So this puts you on a very complicated seesaw. It's a very wobbly precarious state to be in. Which is not to say you shouldn't have a piece of chocolate, it's just to say that the sweet taste of sweet things in particular, things that we crave very much and we wait and wait and wait, and then we allow ourselves to indulge. Those trigger changes in our neurochemistry, in our neuro circuits, that place us in a very vulnerable place, to either want more and more of that thing or to seek out other ways to fill that kind of emptiness that we feel or that gap, like, oh, I would love more, but I'm not going to allow myself more. Now again, I'm not saying that you shouldn't pursue pleasurable things. I mean this molecule dopamine exists for a reason. Frankly, because of its involvement in sex and reproduction, it's the reason we're all here in the first place. Because last time I checked, the only way any of us got here was one way or another, sperm met egg and there was conception. I still believe there are no exceptions to that, that I'm aware of anyways, that is a process, or I should say, the events leading up to that process typically involve dopamine in one way or another. There are exceptions to that too, but you get the idea. These dopamine pathways are not evil, they're not bad, but once you understand the way they work, you can leverage them to your advantage as opposed to them leveraging you to their advantage. So when you ingest something sweet, you perceive that sweet taste and a cascade ensues within your brain that makes you want more of the sweet thing. That's the conscious pathway for sugar perception, for sweet perception. Now there's the second pathway, the second pathway is what's called the post-ingestive reinforcing properties of sugar, which is really just a fancy nerd speak way of saying there are events that happen within your stomach and below your conscious detection, that are also driving you to seek out sweet tasting things, independent of their taste, and foods that increase blood glucose, independent of their taste. In order to illustrate the immense power of these subconscious circuits for sugar seeking, I'd like to describe an experiment. And this is just one experiment of many, of dozens or more experiments done in animal models and humans, which essentially illustrate the same thing. And as I describe this experiment, I think you will come to understand the power of these circuits. I'll provide a link to this study in the caption. The first author is Freeman. The paper was published in Frontiers in Bioscience, but there have been others, papers in Nature Neuroscience, papers in Neuron, Cell Press journals, et cetera, many, many journals, many, many papers. If subjects are given the choice of drinking plain water or a sweet tasting fluid, their preference for the sweet tasting fluid is much, much higher, right? Sweet tastes better than plain water, at least for most people and certainly for animals. Now, if, for instance, you take an animal which completely lacks sweet receptors, and you can do this through some molecular genetic tools and gymnastics in the laboratory, we call these knockout mice, where you can knock out a particular receptor for sweet taste, you can confirm that there's no perception of sweet things or at least no preference for sweet things in those animals. In humans, you can numb the mouth, there are other pharmacologic ways that you can eliminate sweet receptors in the mouth. And by doing that, you people will tell you, no, I can't taste anything sweet. You could give them a ice cream, you could give them pure sucrose, you could give them table sugar, and they wouldn't be able to perceive it as sweet. If you eliminate the perception of sweet taste in the mouth and you offer people or laboratory animals, water versus some sugar containing solution, you eliminate the preference for the sugary solution. Which tells us that the perception of sweet is important for the preference for sweet tasting drink. This is also true for sweet tasting foods, I should mention. However, in both animal models and in humans, after about 15 minutes, subjects start preferring the sugary water, even though they can't taste that it is sweeter. So to repeat that, if you eliminate the ability to sense sweet, to perceive sweetness in foods, then you eliminate the preference for sweet beverages or sweet foods. So that's not surprising. But if you wait about 15 minutes, the preference for the sweet beverage or the sweet food comes back. Now that doesn't mean that they can perceive the sweetness. In fact, the way these experiments are done is very clever. You offer people various cups of different things or different food items. And then you just look at what they eat more of or what they prefer to eat more of. So this experiment is so crucial because what it says is that the preference for sugar containing foods is in part due to the sweetness of those foods, but in part due to something else. And this something else is what we call the post-ingestive effect, and as I mentioned before, it took about 15 minutes. And you've actually experienced this, whether you realize it or not, this phenomenon of post-ingestive rewarding properties of sweet foods, meaning what happens in your body when you ingest something that increases your blood glucose very much, has no doubt controlled you from the inside, below your awareness, this was happening to you and you didn't realize it. And here's how it works. We all have neurons within our gut. These neurons have a name, they're called neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were famously discovered by Professor, Dr. Diego Bohorquez at Duke University. And these cells respond to, among other things, to the presence of sugar within the gut. So when we ingest a sugary food or drink, or we ingest a food or drink that simply contains fructose, sucrose, glucose, or some other form of sugar that later, through metabolism, will be converted into glucose, the neuropod cells are able to register the presence of those sweet or glucose stimulating foods. And in response to that, send electrical signals, because electrical signals are the way neurons communicate, up to the brain, via the so-called vagus nerve. The vagus nerve, of course, being a nerve pathway, famous for its role in relaxation. That's kind of the assumption out there, that it's always involved in relaxation, that's not the case. It's involved in a lot of things besides relaxation. But nonetheless, these neuropod cells send electrical signals through a particular highway within the vagus to the so-called nodose ganglion, and this is a cluster, a ganglion is just a cluster of neurons. And then the nodose ganglion sends on information to the nucleus of the solitary tract. The nucleus of the solitary tract is an area of the brain that we're going to talk about extensively today. It's very important for understanding sugar preference. These neuropod cells also trigger activation of dopamine pathways within the mesolimbic reward pathway. In other words, there are signals conveyed from the gut, meaning stomach and intestines, to the brain anytime we ingest sweet foods, but it has nothing to do with our perception of them being sweet, it has everything to do with the fact that sweetness of food is almost always correlated with an ability to increase blood glucose. And the net effect of this is a parallel pathway by which dopamine is increased further. Now, the experiment that I described before of animals or humans ingesting something that contains sugar, but not being able to perceive its sweetness, and yet, after a period of time, still preferring that food or drink to non-sugar containing food or drinks, even though they can't distinguish their taste, is dependent on these neuropod cells and related pathways. What this may for you is that anytime you eat something sweet, that substance is actually causing your gut, your stomach and your intestine, or to be more precise, I should say, that substance, food substance, is causing the neuropod cells in your stomach and intestines to send a parallel set of signals up to your brain saying, eat more of that, or simply eat more, eat more, eat more, and preferably eat more sweet foods. So we've all heard of hidden sugars, meaning the sugars that manufacturers have put into foods and disguised them with other flavors. I talked about this in the episode on salt, using salt to mask the taste of sweetness so that people ingest more sugar. That is not an accident that hidden sugars are often hidden with salt or with other flavors. It's done so that people will, meaning you or me, will want to ingest more of a particular food, independent of how sweet that food tastes. And in fact, some crackers, for instance, chips for instance, you might think, oh, well, you know, chips, they're not sweet, they're salty and savory. And again, I'll mention, I love salty and savory foods, including certain foods, I love kettle chips, for instance, I try not to walk by them in the grocery store. I usually have to eat one bag while I'm in the store, and then another later. The savory foods are often laden with these hidden sugars that we can't register as sweetness, but trigger the neuropod cells, which then further trigger dopamine, which make us want more of them. Now we may be able to resist eating more of them, but it makes us crave more food in general. Now we will talk about ways to regulate this pathway, to sort of intervene in this subconscious pathway. But for now I'm hoping that just the understanding that we all have this pathway, this is hardwired into our body, could potentially allow people to better understand why is it that their cravings are so intense, that it's not necessarily just about the taste of that food. And when you consider this in concert with the fact that we have this dopamine pain pleasure balance, excuse me, that I referred to earlier, you start to realize that there are multiple mechanisms hardwired into us, that make it especially hard to not eat the sweet thing or to not eat the food that we're craving. And indeed, that's the case. We have two major accelerators. It's like a car with two accelerators, and we will talk about the brakes, but two ways that really get us into forward motion toward pursuing the consumption of sweet foods. Now, if it doesn't already seem diabolical enough, that sweet things that we perceive as sweet, make us want to eat more of those because of dopamine and then send us down this pain pleasure pathway that I mentioned earlier, and the fact that we have this subconscious circuit coming from the neuropod cells in our gut that are registering the presence of sugar or glucose increasing foods in our gut and sending those signals to the brain for yet more dopamine and pain pleasure challenges, there's a third layer to this whole thing. And that has to do with how sugar is metabolized in the brain. Or I should say how glucose is used. Without getting into too much detail, some of the more beautiful studies of neuroimaging and evaluating which brain areas are active when we eat certain foods were done by Dr. Dana Small's lab at Yale University, and in some of her previous work when she was elsewhere, and of course by other laboratories too. And they used an approach called positron emission tomography, and they and others have used PET scanning as it's called, positron mission tomography, along with an tool called 2-Deoxy-D-glucose. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose is actually involved in the procedure of seeing which brain areas are active when people eat foods or engage in other types of behaviors. But the way that 2-Deoxy-D-glucose, sometimes shortened 2DG. The way that it works is to block glucose uptake from neurons. And instead, bring along with it, a marker that one can see through imaging. So in other words, a tool for looking at what parts of the brain are active when eating particular foods, actually prevents foods such as sugar, from allowing glucose to get into particular neurons. Now that might seem like a bad situation, you'd say, well, wait, you're trying to understand how sugar works in the brain, and then you block the ability for sugar, glucose, to bind to, or be used by these neurons, because of the thing that you're using for the experiment. Exactly, it's a huge problem, but it turns out to be a huge problem that led to a great insight. And the great insight is this, the preference for sweet tasting foods and liquids is actually blocked by 2-Deoxy-D-glucose. What that means, experimentally, but also in terms of what it means for you and me in the real world, is that there's yet a third parallel pathway that's related to the use of blood sugar, the use of glucose by neurons, that further reinforces our desire to eat more sweet things. And the preference for sweet foods can actually be eliminated through 2-Deoxy-D-glucose. Now I am definitely don't want people going out and consuming 2-Deoxy-D-glucose. This is a laboratory tool, it is not something that you should be ingesting. So don't go look it up and try and get some, there might be other uses for it, but that's not the point. The point is that it is the sweet taste of sugary foods. It is the signals coming from your gut, from your digestive tract to your brain, and it's the use of the metabolic consequences of sugary foods that are acting as a three pronged push on your desire to consume more sugary foods. So this car analogy that I used before, where it's some weird car that has two accelerators, it actually has three accelerators. And so with three accelerators, all pushing the system hard, we can say, wow, there must be something really special about this pathway. And indeed there is, this pathway is the quickest source of fuel for the brain and the rest of the nervous system, it's the source of fuel for the brain and nervous system. And I realize, as I say that all the ketonistas are probably going no, actually ketones are the preferred source. Okay, i acknowledge that there are conditions under which you can bring your blood glucose very low, and there are reasons to do that. Actually ketosis has been a terrifically successful treatment for a lot of forms of epilepsy, in particular, pediatric epilepsy. Many people do derive benefit from ketogenic diets, so I'm not knocking ketogenic diets, but if you were to look at what neurons normally prefer, meaning in a typical diet regimen, it would be glucose. And the fact that fructose is eventually converted to glucose, the fact that when we ingest sucrose, it's eventually converted into a fuel that neurons can use, that's very much in the glucose pathway, what you basically arrive at is the fact that your nervous system is a glucose consuming machine. And you've got at least three pathways, of which I've described, that are pushing on your brain consciously and subconsciously to get you to seek and consume more sugar. Now that all sounds like a pretty depressing picture, at least for those of you that are trying to reduce your sugar intake. And of course we can all reduce sugar intake by way of sheer will, we can not have those foods at home, we can restrict ourselves from those. But there are some things that we all can and perhaps should do in order to regulate these pathways such that we don't feel so controlled by them, but rather that we control their output. And of course they are us and we are them, so this gets into all sorts of issues of consciousness and freewill that I certainly don't want to cover in this episode. But nonetheless, I think once you understand that these circuits exist and you understand that there are simple substitutions and modifications that one can make to their food intake that can work within these pathways and even bypass some of these pathways, you start to realize that you have a lot more control over sugar intake and sugar appetite than you previously thought. Now, many of you have heard of the so-called glycemic index. The glycemic index is a measure of how quickly blood sugar rises after ingesting particular foods. And very broadly speaking, we can say that there are low glycemic index foods, of less than 55, typically, is the measurement, or medium glycemic index foods, which go from about 55 to 69, and then so called high glycemic foods, which are above 70. And of course there's additional nuance related to glycemic load and many more features of the glycemic index. A couple of things to understand about how the glycemic index is measured. And then I'd like to just briefly talk about how the glycemic index can be leveraged to short circuit some of the neural circuits that would otherwise lead us to crave and perhaps even ingest sugar foods. First of all, measurements of glycemic indices of food are typically made by having people ingest those foods in isolation. And in general, we can say that anytime we ingest fiber and/or fat, lipids, along with a particular food, it will reduce the glycemic index of that particular food, either the absolute level of blood glucose that a particular food causes or the rate at which that elevation in blood glucose occurs. And this is why there are some seemingly paradoxical aspects to sweet stuff in terms of the glycemic index. For instance, Ice cream has a lower glycemic index, provided its ice cream that includes fat, which I hope it would, 'cause that's the good tasting ice cream, in my opinion, compared to something like mangoes or table sugar, right? So the glycemic index is not something to hold holy, in most cases, because most people are not ingesting foods in isolation. And there's actually a lot of argument as to whether or not the glycemic index is really as vital as some people claim. There's also the context in which you ingest particular foods. As I mentioned earlier, after I do hard training of any kind, meaning training that ought to deplete glycogen, so hard resistance training, I actually make it a point to ingest some very sweet high glycemic foods like a mango, I'll also ingest some starches 'cause I'm trying to replenish glycogen. I'm also trying to spike my blood sugar a little bit because that can be advantageous in terms of certain strength and hypertrophy protocols, et cetera. But most of the time I'm avoiding these high glycemic foods and high sugar foods, I should point that out. Now, why am I telling you about the glycemic index? Well, if we zoom out and take our perspective on all of this discussion about the glycemic index, through the lens of the nervous system, and we remind ourselves that neurons prefer glucose for energy and that all sweet things, or things that we perceive as sweet, but also sweet things that are ingested and registered by those neuropod cells in our gut trigger the release of dopamine and trigger these neural circuits to make us want to eat more of these foods, what we start to realize is that a sharp rise in blood glucose or a very high degree of elevation in blood glucose, is going to be a much more potent signal than would a more moderate rise in blood glucose or a slower rise in blood glucose. So if we think about the analogy of three accelerators, meaning three parallel neural circuits, all essentially there to get us to seek out and consume more sweet tasting and sugary foods, well then the glycemic index is sort of our measurement of how hard we are pushing down or how fast we are pushing down on those three accelerators. And so for those of you that are trying to reduce sugar take, and you want to do that through an understanding of how these neural circuits work, and you want to short circuit some of the dopamine release that's caused by ingesting sugary foods. It can be advantageous to ingest sweet foods, either alone or in combination with foods that reduce glycemic index or reduce glycemic load. So that might mean making different food choices. So paying attention to sweet tasting foods that can satisfy sugar cravings, but do not have as steep or I should say, do not cause as steep a rise in blood sugar, or it could mean consuming other foods along with sweet foods in order to reduce the glycemic index and thereby, slow or blunt the release of dopamine. You might think, well, why would I want to do that? I want the maximum dopamine output in response to a given sweet food. I don't just want the you know, level 10. I want the level 100 output of dopamine. But you really don't, because of the pleasure pain balance that dopamine causes. And in fact, if we consider some of the non-food substances that really push hard on these dopamine pathways, we can come up with a somewhat sinister, but nonetheless appropriate analogy. The drug, cocaine, causes very robust, potent increases in dopamine within the brain, and typically causes people to want to ingest more cocaine because of those sharp increases in dopamine. But within the category of the drug cocaine, there are various modes of ingestion. Some people inhale it, some people will inject it intravenously, some people will smoke it, and those different forms of taking cocaine actually impact the dopamine circuits differently. And it turns out that crack cocaine, the smokable form of cocaine rock, increases dopamine to a very high degree, but also very quickly. And it is the sharp rise in dopamine over time, not so much the absolute level of dopamine, that makes crack cocaine so absolutely addictive. So sometimes you'll hear, you know, sugar is like crack, well, and that's getting a little extreme because even though I don't think the measurements have been done in the same experiment, I think it's reasonable to think that the absolute level of dopamine caused by ingesting sugar, at least for most people, is not going to be as high as the absolute level of dopamine caused by smoking crack. Of course it goes without saying, please don't do cocaine in any form, by the way. It is appropriate to say that the rate of dopamine increase over time has a profound effect on how people will, and if people will, go on to want to pursue more of what caused that increase in dopamine. So what I'm basically saying is if you're going to ingest sweet foods in order to satisfy a sweet craving, ingesting sweet foods for which the glycemic index is lower or in which you've adjusted those glycemic index foods through the co-ingestion of fiber, or maybe fat, might be beneficial. So is this justification for putting peanut butter on that piece of chocolate or for having a of ice cream along with the mango that you're craving? In some sense, yes, however, there's also the issue of how sweet and how delicious something tastes. Highly palatable foods, absolutely delicious foods, trigger that one neural circuit, that one accelerator that we were talking about in terms of our analogy of three accelerators, and the more delicious something tastes within our mouth, the further increase in dopamine. So if you really wanted to adjust your sugar cravings and you really still want to ingest some sugary foods, you probably would better off combining fiber with that sugary or sweet food. Now I do realize that it's somewhat unusual and you probably get some strange stares, if you decided to consume broccoli, for instance, along with your chocolate, or with a another dessert that would otherwise cause a steep increase in blood sugar and has a high glycemic index. But nonetheless, if your goal is to blunt your sugar cravings, what you really need to do is blunt that dopamine increase. So what we're really talking about here is trying to reduce the dopamine signal that is the consequence of ingesting sweet foods. And we're talking about doing that through these different parallel pathways, not just by preventing sweet taste, but also by preventing the post-ingestive effects of sweet foods. And of course the backdrop to all of this is that most of us, again, most of us, not all of us, should probably be ingesting fewer refined sugars. Certainly there are exceptions to that. But I think the bulk of data point to the fact that ingesting these highly palatable, certainly highly palatable, highly processed foods, or foods that contain a lot of high fructose corn syrup, can be really deleterious to our health, especially in kids. And I'm not going to cite off a bunch of statistics, you've all heard them before, that you know, for hundreds of years, we ingested, you know, the equivalent of a few cups or pounds of sugar per year. And you know, now people are ingesting hundreds of pounds of sugar per year. The major culprit always seems to be sugary drinks, meaning soft drinks, and I think indeed that's the case. I do want to point out the incredible work of Dr. Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist at the University of California San Francisco, who was really early in the game of voicing the dangers of so-called hidden sugars and highly processed foods, there are other people, of course, now talking about this. His laboratory has done important work showing for instance, that if high fructose corn syrup or even just fructose is replaced with glucose, even if the same number calories is ingested, that there are important meaning significant reductions in type two diabetes, some of the metabolic syndromes associated with high fructose corn syrup and on and on and on. And of course there are other culprits in type two diabetes, there are other factors that are going to lead to obesity. But I think that work from Lustig and others has really illustrated that we should all be trying to reduce our intake of highly refined sugars and high fructose corn syrup. And certainly trying to reduce our intake of very sugary drinks, not just soft drinks, but also fruit juices that contain a lot of sugar. Now, even for people that are of healthy weight and who don't have metabolic syndromes, there may be an additional reason to not want to ingest very sweet foods and highly refined sugars. And this has to do with a new and emerging area of nutrition neuroscience. And I want to point out that these are new data, right, so it's not a lock, the double blind placebo controlled studies in large populations have not been finished. So I want to make sure that that's clear, but I also want to make clear what some of the really exciting data, coming from Dana Small's lab at Yale, and from other laboratories are showing. And this has to do with what's called conditioned taste preference. Using a kind of Pavlovian paradigm, what they do, is they have people, and these studies were done in people, ingest maltodextrin, which increases blood glucose, doesn't have much flavor, but even if it does have a little bit of subtle flavor, the maltodextrin is cloaked by some other flavor. And by cloaking it with that other flavor or pairing it with that other flavor, what they find is that over time, because the maltodextrin increases blood glucose, and they're ingesting a particular flavor along with that maltodextrin, they can then remove the maltodextrin, and the flavor will induce an increase in insulin. The increase in insulin of course, is the consequence of the fact that anytime there's a rise in blood glucose, provided the person isn't diabetic, there's a parallel increase in insulin. Now this is very interesting because what it says is, well at a first pass, it says that we are very Pavlovian in terms of our physiological responses to foods and particular flavors come to be associated with particular patterns of blood glucose increase and hence patterns of insulin increase, because of course, insulin manages glucose in the bloodstream as I mentioned earlier. This also has implications for understanding things like artificial sweeteners. And here I want to highlight that this is still very controversial work, needs more data, but nonetheless, I'd like to share it with you for consideration. The small laboratory has done studies in humans, both in adults and in children, showing that if the flavor of artificial sweeteners is paired with maltodextrin, and then the maltodextrin is removed, that the artificial sweetener taste itself can subsequently increase insulin in the bloodstream. In other words, taking something that increases blood sugar, attaching a flavor experience to that, having children or adults ingest that thing, allows the nervous system to associate that flavor with that increase in blood glucose. But then you can remove the glucose increasing substance, and the flavor alone will increase insulin because insulin typically follows blood glucose. So this is a conditioning effect. Now, the reason these data are controversial is several fold. First of all, the landscape around the discussion around artificial sweeteners is definitely what I would call a barbed wire topic. And I want to preface what I'm about to say next by saying, I actually ingest artificial sweeteners. I will have the occasional diet soda, not every day, maybe I don't know, once or twice a month. I don't particularly like the taste, but I'll do it just 'cause it's around, and I want some caffeine and I like the carbonation if I'm on a plane or something, I do ingest plant-based non-caloric sweeteners. To my knowledge, there have not been high quality studies of plant-based non-caloric sweeteners in the context that I'm referring to here. Nonetheless, these studies show that particular flavors can be conditioned to cause an insulin increase. And the flavor associated with certain artificial sweeteners is included in that category of flavors that can induce insulin, even in the absence of something that can increase blood glucose. Now the simple takeaway from these studies would be the following, and this is actually one interpretation that Dana Small has offered to her data, but she offers other interpretations as well. One of interpretation is that if people are going to ingest artificial sweeteners, and they do that along with foods that very sharply increase blood glucose, then there is the potential, I highlight the potential, for those same artificial sweeteners to increase insulin, even in the absence of food. In other words, let's just draw the scenario out in the real world. You're having a diet soda along with a cheeseburger and fries. You do that every day for lunch, okay? Somewhat extreme example, but natural world example, you do that every day for lunch. And then you just have a diet soda alone. The extreme interpretation of the data that they've collected says, well, that diet soda alone will increase insulin, even though there's no increase in blood glucose because you haven't ingested food with it because you conditioned that taste of artificial sweetener to the experience of a rise in glucose and hence insulin. Now the counter argument to this would be, well, that's a very unusual situation, maltodextrin causes big increases in blood glucose, so that's not really a fair experiment or it's not a natural world experiment. And I think that's a decent assessment. Although I will point out that one of the reasons why this study is so controversial or why these data are so controversial, is that the experiment actually had to be stopped. And particularly the experiment in children had to be stopped because the changes in insulin that were observed early in the study were so detrimental, that the institutional review board, quite appropriately, said, we can't do this to these kids. They're experiencing these odd shifts in insulin that are not healthy for them when they're just ingesting artificial sweeteners in the absence of these glucose increasing foods. So once again, I do ingest artificial sweeteners, I'm not saying that they are dangerous, I'm not saying that they are not dangerous, I'm saying that you have to decide for yourself. In previous episodes, I've highlighted that artificial sweeteners have been shown in studies of animals, that when given in very high doses, sucralose in particular, there can be fairly robust disruption to the gut microbiome, which is vital for immune health and brain health, et cetera, et cetera. But thus far, our knowledge of how artificial sweeteners negatively impacts or positively impacts, I should say, the microbiome and other deleterious effects on the body, has mainly been explored in animal studies. Again, the work by Dana Small has been done in humans. There's some parallel work by others in animal models. I bring it up today to illustrate the following point. Normally we have a pathway that we don't have to condition at all, it's there from birth, whereby ingestion of sweet foods causes increases in dopamine. And there are parallel pathways by which neurons in our gut and elsewhere in our body, trigger further increases in dopamine. There's no need for a conditioned response or to become Pavlovian about this, right? You're hardwired to want to eat sweet things, by at least two and probably three parallel pathways. Now the work from Dana Small's lab and others that have illustrated this conditioned flavor preference, I think beautifully show that any flavor that's associated with a glucose spike or a long sustained increase in glucose can also be conditioned. In other words, the circuits for dopamine that reinforce the desire to eat particular things is not unique to the sugar pathway. And this is one of the reasons I believe, why ingestion of sweet foods doesn't just us to want to eat more sweet foods, I think that is absolutely clear based on animal data and on human data, I think that's robust, it's actually the stuff of textbooks now, but in addition, ingesting sweet foods and/or foods that raise blood glucose, but that we don't perceive as sweet. So for instance, foods with hidden sugars, sugars that have been masked asked by salty or spicy taste, increases our desire for glucose elevating foods and food, generally, I think that's the only logical interpretation of the data that I can arrive at. So for people that struggle with regulating their appetite or with regulating their sugar appetite, I think the understanding of conditioned flavor preference, while a little bit complicated, ought to be useful in trying to navigate reducing sugar cravings and sugar intake. As a segue into tools to control sugar intake, as a means to both regulate sugar intake itself, as well as food intake overall and steer us towards healthier choices. I'd like to talk about some of the special populations out there that might want to be especially wary of having a dysregulated sugar appetite system. And the group I'm referring to specifically are those with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or, I should say, and/or, people who have issues with focus and attention, generally. And I think more and more nowadays, I'm hearing that people are having a hard time focusing. This probably has something to do with our interactions with electronic devices. As I always say, if a picture is worth a thousand words, a movie is worth a million pictures, and the fact that we can access so any movies just by scrolling with our thumb, is something that the nervous system has just never contended with before in human history. I'm confident in that. And it's not that it can't deal with it, the question is what's the trade off? What are the consequences of that? So attention and ability to focus is obviously key to success in school, success in relationships, success in the workplace, and success in life. We could probably even go so far as to say one's ability to succeed in anything is proportional to one's ability to focus and then deliberately defocus when the time comes to defocus, right? 'Cause we all need rest and we need to disengage and then reengage, If you look at the sum total of the meta-analysis and the clinical data on ADHD and nutrition, you arrive at a pretty clear answer, which is that sugar consumption, in particular, highly refined sugars, is just not good for people with ADHD or with attentional issues. Now, as I say that, I also want you to recall the earlier study that I referred to, whereby the tuning of neurons in the brain is highly dependent on glucose. So this doesn't mean consuming no glucose is going to be a good idea. It doesn't mean that the ketogenic diet is necessarily the best diet for ADHD. Although there are some people pursuing that and exploring that, and we'll do yet another episode on ADHD at some point that go was a little bit deeper into that, because there's some new data. I did do a very long and fairly extensive episode on ADHD. You're welcome to look that up if you like in our archive, excuse me, in our archive at hubermanlab.com, it's all timestamped. So, you know, because the number of people said, oh, you know, it's an episode on ADHD and you made it two and a half hours long. Yes we did, because we wanted it to be as comprehensive as we could at the time. But it is timestamped, you can just jump to the particular topics of interest and there's short little cassettes there. Now, if you'd like to know upon what I'm basing this statement that sugar consumption and highly refined sugar consumption is potentially bad for ADHD, I'm basing this mainly on the conclusions of a really nice paper, the title of the paper is "Sugar Consumption, Sugar Sweetened Beverages, and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." And this is a paper, we'll put a link to this in the caption. This was published in Complementary Therapies in Medicine which is a bit of an atypical journal in some sense. But I really like this meta-analysis. The sum total of this meta-analysis is really that when, especially kids, get beyond four sugary drinks per week, so four sodas of a typical 12 ounce soda, when they get past four 12 ounce sugary sodas, they didn't, as far as I know, look at artificially sweetened sodas. That's when you start to see a shift towards more negative outcomes, more symptoms of existing ADHD. Now where the controversy comes in is whether or not sugar consumption can actually trigger or cause ADHD. And I don't think we can conclude that at all at this time. And this review, if you decide to check it out, review/meta-analysis, I should say, if you decide to check it out, goes into some of the nuance around that. What's also interesting in terms of ADHD and sugar intake, and it probably has relevance to all of us, is that they also cover some of the interesting data showing that supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids can actually beneficial for people, in particular kids with ADHD, I've talked before about the utility of omega-3s, that's been shown in various studies that have compared omega-3 fatty acid intake to say prescription antidepressants, like SSRIs, like Prozac, Zoloft, and similar, Fluoxetine, and the results of those studies are pretty clear, at least to me, that provided that one gets at least one gram of EPA, essential fatty acids, so it's not just getting one gram per day, but one or more grams per day of the EPA form of essential fatty acid, can rival some prescription antidepressants and/or decrease the amount of antidepressants that's required to take. Which for a lot of people can be a very useful thing because of the side effect profile of many of those antidepressants. Of course, talk to your psychiatrist, talk to your doctor, but the omega-3s are no doubt powerful. And then of course there's a whole story about omega-3s and heart health. And of course, like anything else, there's some controversy around omega-3s, but I think the data are clear enough to me around mood and cardiovascular health, that certainly I personally ingest them. But as always, I always say, anytime you're going to add or remove anything from your nutrition, supplementation, exercise, or otherwise your lifestyle, definitely consult with a board certified physician. I don't just say that to protect me, I say that to protect you, you are responsible for your health ultimately. So omega-3 supplementation has been shown to be beneficial for ADHD. Why am I talking about this in the context of an episode on sugar and the nervous system? Well, if you remember those neuropod cells, those cells in your gut that respond to sugar and send signals up to the brain to cause the release of dopamine. Well, it turns out that neuropod cells also respond to amino acids and to fatty acids, in particular, essential fatty acids. So these cells that we call neuropod cells, have three jobs. One is to levels of sugar in the gut, the other is to detect levels of amino acids, and to detect levels of particular essential fatty acids, and communicate that information to the brain. And I should point out when I say communicate that information, they're not actually saying, hey, there's amino acids here, or hey, there's sugar here, or, hey, there's essential fatty acids, because the language of these cells is somewhat generic. It's just the firing of electrical potentials. But that's the key point, it's generic and all three or any of those three, sugar, essential fatty acids, or amino acids, will trigger these neurons to signal to the brain to increase dopamine. And it is not coincidental that omega-3 fatty acid supplementation can help ameliorate some of the symptoms of ADHD by way of presumably increasing dopamine in this neuropod to dopamine pathway that we talked about earlier. The whole thing has a very nice logical structure to it. And points to yet again, the immense value of bringing the proper amounts, maybe even supplementing the proper amounts of omega-3 fatty acids and the proper amounts of amino acids into the gut as a way to supplant some of the stimulation of these pathways that would otherwise be caused by sugar. There's actually a version of this where one could say, if you want to reduce sugar cravings, you might consider increasing certain forms of amino acid intake or certain forms of fatty acid intake. So what are some ways that we can reduce our sugar cravings, and ideally ways that we can do that, that also benefit us in other ways, both nutritionally and from the neuroscience standpoint? Well, these neuropod cells that respond to and signal the brain when we ingest sugar, as I mentioned, also respond to amino acids and essential fatty acids. We already talked about the essential fatty acids. I make it a particular point to ingest anywhere from one to three grams, that's grams, of EPA essential fatty acid per day. I make it a point to do that with the ingestion of high quality omega-3s. For me, the simplest way to do that, and I think for most people, the lowest cost way to do that, is to use some liquid form of fish oil or some capsule form of fish oil. You really do have to see how much essential fatty acid in the form of EPA is in those. If you try and do that only through capsules, it can get kind of expensive, depending on which particular brands you use, some have more EPA, some less. You can, of course also do this through foods, you can do this with non fish sources, through things like algae, and there's some other forms, you can look it up online now, plant-based sources of EPAs, you can do this with high quality fish oil. In any case, that does seem at least based on a modest amount, but nonetheless solid literature, to reduce sugar cravings somewhat, but that could easily be by mere replacement of calories. So we don't know yet based on human studies, whether or not the ingestion of those EPAs is specifically activating the neuropod cells, which specifically activates dopamine release and bypasses the need for, or the craving for sugar. We don't know that yet. But logically, it holds up to assume that. The fact that these neuropod cells and I should say other neurons within the gut respond very robustly to the presence of particular amino acids is also a potential lever by which one could reduce sugar cravings. And there's an interesting literature around the amino acid, glutamine, in particular supplementing with the amino acid, glutamine, as it relates to sugar cravings, and certainly as it relates to other aspects of the gut, in particular leaky gut. The use of supplemental glutamine to try and treat leaky gut is not a new phenomenon. There are other approaches too, of course. But there are many people who are experimenting with supplementing with glutamine, several grams per day, often even, you know, five grams distributed through three or four different servings throughout the day as a way to blunt their sugar cravings. Now there has not yet been a large scale clinical trial using glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, but the results of the few studies that I looked at, as well as my understanding of the logic of these neuro circuits, including the neuropod cells, brings us to a conclusion that it makes sense why if there's a population of neurons within our gut, that responds very robustly to the presence of sugar, fatty acids, or amino acids, that the intake of particular amino acids would allow the dopamine pathways that might otherwise be triggered by sugar to be triggered by something like glutamine, which has very few or no calories. And in fact, having talked about this previously, a number of people that I know went out and tried this, now this is of course is what I call anec data, right? This is not a quality peer reviewed study, this is anec data. Many of them have reported back that they actually feel as if their sugar cravings are reduced. I know some people who actually take glutamine and mix it with full fat cream and take it kind of like a shot of full fat cream, which sounds absolutely delicious by the way, glutamine is a little bit chalky, so it's not that great tasting to ingest with sugar. I should mention, if you do try and take this approach of ingesting glutamine to reduce sugar cravings, you want to increase the amount of glutamine that you take somewhat gradually. It can create some gastric distress if you just, you know, I certainly wouldn't take a big table spoon of it, throw it in water and chug it down three times a day. Some of you with very hardy stomachs can probably tolerate that. You know, if you're like my bulldog, which unfortunately passed away, but Costello, I always imagine that if ever we did an autopsy on him, he'd have like a license plate and like a human being in his gut, 'cause it seemed like he could ingest anything with no issues, but of course, many people have kind of sensitive guts. So if you're going to try taking glutamine as a means to reduce sugar cravings, just know that the studies are still ongoing. Some people have achieved benefit. Please also realize that there's an entire literature devoted to the potential hazards of increasing glutamine if you have a preexisting cancer. So if you have cancer or you're cancer prone, I would really discourage you from this approach. And in any case, as always, talk to your doctor. The logic nonetheless is there, why increasing amino acid intake or fatty acid intake might decrease sugar craving. Now there are other ways to reduce sugar craving and there are certainly ways to reduce the sharp rise in blood glucose that can occur when we ingest sugary sweet foods or even just an abundance of carbohydrate foods, and there are a huge number of these things. I'm going to sort of layer up through the ones that you might find in your cupboard, at the grocery store, and then get into some of the more extravagant or I should say, esoteric ones, many of which however can be quite potent. The first of which is simple lemon juice, right, or lime juice. There was an old lore and actually some papers, pointing to the idea that the ingestion of vinegar, either white vinegar or wine vinegar, could somehow blunt blood glucose after the ingestion of sugary foods or the ingestion of a lot of carbohydrate foods, or even just a big meal. Actually, Tim Ferris, I should say the great Tim Ferris, 'cause I do have great respect for the fact that he seems to be about 10 years ahead of everything, both in terms of nutrition and skill learning and things of that sort, many of the things that he predicted in his books, "The Four Hour Body" and "The Four Hour Chef" actually turned out to be true based on scientific data, some of which only exists in the animal models, but now also some predictions that played out to be true in both the animal models and and the human models. So I think that Tim certainly deserves a hat tip for the fact that he experimented with these methods and reported his experiences with those methods and that now some of them, many of them, have been validated by what I perceive to be quality science. He talked about the fact that, at least in his experiments on himself, the ingestion of vinegar did not seem to blunt blood glucose, and he was using continuous glucose monitors. These incidentally, another example of where Ferris was early to the game and the rest of us are kind of just in his wake. He talked about the use of blood glucose monitors, those, I think at the time were implanted below the skin. Nowadays there are less invasive blood glucose monitors, things like Levels and so forth, and these are actually becoming pretty popular. I've worn one of these before. They're actually pretty informative. I learned for instance, that when I go in the sauna that I experience a sharp rise in blood glucose. And that makes sense because of the dehydration associated with being in the sauna, a lot of sweating, the concentration of sugar in the bloodstream goes up. So there's some other things that certain foods affect my blood glucose one way or another. It's kind of an interesting and fun experiment that some of you might be interested in doing as well. Regardless, there are now data pointing to the fact that lemon juice and lime juice, a couple tablespoons or so, if ingested before, or even during, or even after, consumption of sugary foods, or I should say foods that sharply increase blood glucose or large carbohydrate meals, can actually blunt the blood glucose response. And I did see that when I did my own experiments on myself with a continuous glucose monitor, it was kind of fun to do those experiments. I preferred to do those experiments by eating somewhat larger meals of things that didn't contain a lot of sugar. I saw some big increases in blood glucose in certain instances, and then I would ingest some lemon juice or lime juice, typically mixed in with water. And sure enough, you could see a blunting of the blood glucose response. And of course this was real time, continuous, hence continuous, blood glucose monitoring. So for those of you that are interested in blunting your blood sugar response, certain foods, that's a simple, low cost way to do that, if you want to explore it. I will say, if you are fasting and you already have low blood glucose, and you ingest lemon juice, or I should say some lemon juice and water or lime juice and water, be careful because you can actually become hypoglycemic. For the very same reasons that that lemon juice and lime juice can blunt blood glucose when your blood glucose levels are moderate to high, you can also reduce blood glucose levels even further when blood glucose levels are low. Now that's lemon juice and lime juice there. But we can't say that has to do with acidic things, generally. And just as a side point, many of you have probably seen in the store, so called adjusted pH waters or foods and drinks that are supposed to adjust your pH. Hate to break it to you, but your pH is very tightly regulated throughout your brain and body. You do not want this to change. It is entirely impossible, at least in any safe way, that you would become quote unquote more alkaline by ingesting an alkaline water or something like that. It is true that the pH, your alkalinity and acidity varies in different compartments in your body, that's important. Unless you are hemorrhaging or vomiting, or there's something badly wrong with you, health wise, and you're in a really dire circumstance, you don't want big shifts in your body pH and your body has all sorts of ways of buffering against changes in pH. So I encourage you not to fall on the, or hop on the bandwagon of adjusting pH and becoming less acidic, and that kind of thing. When you ingest lemon juice or lime juice, the mechanism by which it blunts blood glucose is probably twofold. One is probably through the post-ingestive effects of glucose in the gut, meaning the way in which sugars are interacting with neurons and other components of your gut circuitry to impact things like gastric emptying time, to impact things like the firing of those neuropod cells and their signaling to the brain. But almost certainly it has something to do also with the perception of sour taste on the tongue. We didn't go into this too much today, but you, of course, don't just have sweet taste receptors in your mouth, you also have bitter taste receptors, you have salty taste receptors, you have sour taste receptors in your mouth and of course, that means your tongue and palate. And those are interacting. If you ingest a substance that's just sweet or mostly sweet, that causes a certain set of effects on your blood glucose, but also your brain, dopamine, and the other neuro circuits of your brain. If you also ingest something that's sour like lemon juice or lime juice, it adjusts the output of those neural circuits in your brain. So again, where you have a situation where you have two parallel pathways, one that's post-ingestive coming from phenomenon within our gut neurons, but also things like gastric emptying time, the clearance and transfer of food, and the conversion of food into particular nutrients and the circulation of glucose in your bloodstream and how it gets into the brain. But also simply by ingesting something sour, you are changing the way that sweet things impact your brain. And so I think it stands to reason that the lemon juice/lime juice effect is not going to be magic. It's going to have everything to do with the way that ingesting sour foods can adjust the taste. Excuse me, can adjust the neural response to taste of sweet foods. And in fact, we know based on the beautiful work of Charles Zuker at Columbia Medical School, that that's exactly what I happens. They've measured the activity of neurons at various locations in the so-called taste pathways of the brain. And they found that when particular tastes like just sweet or just bitter or just sour evoke certain ensembles of neurons to fire in particular sequences, when sweet and sour are co-ingested, when bitter and sour are co-ingested, you get distinct ensembles, meaning distinct patterns of activity of those neurons. And of course, distinct patterns of downstream activity within the brain and body. So while it is still somewhat mysterious as to how exactly things like lemon juice and lime juice can reduce our blood glucose spikes. When we ingest those with sweet foods or carbohydrate laden foods, or with big meals, you can use this as a tool with the understanding that there's a grounding in the biology of the way these circuits work. Now, some of you have probably heard that cinnamon can be a useful tool for controlling blood sugar. And indeed that's the case. It's very clear that cinnamon can adjust the rate of glucose entry into the stream, possibly by changing the rate of gastric emptying, it might slow the rate of gastric emptying and thereby also reduce the glycemic index of particular foods. So I suppose if I were going to eat a mango, and I hadn't just done a bunch of hard training, I might sprinkle some cinnamon on it here. I always enjoy kind of coming up with new ideas of ways that I can eat foods during these podcasts. In any event, there's some debate out there, if you look online as to whether or not Saigon Cinnamon, Cassia cinnamon, excuse me, or Ceylon cinnamon is best for purposes of blunting blood glucose spikes. But I think the, at least by my read of the data and from what I've found, it doesn't really matter provided it's real cinnamon. And you have to actually look and make sure that it's real cinnamon, because a lot of cinnamon that you buy is not real. I do want to provide a cautionary note about cinnamon however. Cinnamon contains something called coumarin. which can be toxic at high levels. So you don't want to ingest more than about a teaspoon, maybe a teaspoon and a half of cinnamon per day, because you'll start to exceed the threshold at which cinnamon could start to be problematic. But certainly if you're going to have a big meal or a meal that has a lot of sugar in it, or a lot of carbohydrate laden foods, and you don't want an increase in blood glucose, you could put cinnamon in a beverage, you could put cinnamon on food in order to blunt that blood glucose increase, reduce the glycemic index by way of reducing gastric emptying time. Again, just making sure that you don't get out past that one and a half teaspoons per day, 'cause you really don't want to start dealing with any of the toxicity related to coumarin. So we've talked about lemon juice and lime juice and cinnamon, these are kind of commonplace in many kitchens. Then of course we can venture into the more esoteric or I would say the more advanced tools for adjusting sugar intake. And the one that comes to mind is of course Berberine. Berberine is a derivative of tree bark and it is a very, very potent substance for reducing blood glucose. So much so that it is on par with Metformin or Glibenclamide, which are prescription drugs specifically used to reduce blood glucose. So using Berberine is a serious step, you should absolutely talk to your doctor about it. I know of a number of people that use it to lower blood glucose when they eat really large meals. I know the number of people that are using it to get to some of the other effects of Metformin that people have discussed, things like activating or tapping into the so-called AMPK pathway, reducing mTOR, these are people that are aiming their activities at increasing longevity, a somewhat controversial approach, still, but I know many people are doing it. It is true that if you ingest Berberine, your blood glucose will plummet. And I point that out because I've actually tried it before, it gave me brutal headaches and I felt really dizzy, and I felt like I couldn't see straight. And actually I couldn't see straight, why did it do that? Well, it made me hypoglycemic. It actually drove my blood glucose down too far. And the reason it did that is that I took Berberine on an empty stomach. I know some people can tolerate it. I would say, be very cautious about ingesting Berberine on an empty stomach, or if you are in a low carbohydrate diet, unless you really know what you're doing and you have a medical professional to kind of guide you through that. If I took Berberine along with a very large meal, that included a lot of carbohydrates, you know, I can recall the days in which Costello and I would eat a couple of pizzas and then we might get ice cream, that kind of thing. Then I felt perfectly fine on even up to 750 milligrams or a gram of Berberine. It has the kind of unique property of making you feel not overwhelmed by the amount of blood glucose increase that you're experiencing from eating a big meal. I don't quite know how else to describe it. It's almost as if you can keep eating and eating and eating, and of course you have to protect your gastric volume. I mean, you only have so much space in your stomach to ingest food. I wasn't using it to gorge on food, I just heard about it, I was interested in experimenting with it. I don't have any chronic blood sugar issues. But again, when I took it on an empty stomach, it made me hypoglycemic on a low carbohydrate intake, hypoglycemic, not a good experience. And again, an experience I think to avoid. But provided there's a lot of glucose in your bloodstream, and certainly if you are of the experimental type or you're trying to regulate blood glucose, Berberine might be a good option. But again, talk to your doctor. It does have some other interesting effects in terms of lowering total cholesterol that are research supported of reducing insulin a little bit. Well, that's not surprising if you reduce blood glucose, you're going to reduce insulin because of course, insulin manages blood glucose in the bloodstream. So I would place Berberine and of course, Metformin and Glibenclamide in the kind of the heavy hitting potent tools for regulating blood glucose. Now, this is an episode, not about sugar per se, but sugar viewed through the lens of the nervous system. And what's interesting about Berberine, Metformin, Glibenclamide and related substances, is that some of the effects are of course on gastric emptying or buffering blood glucose within the bloodstream, et cetera. But there appeared to also be some neural effects of having chronically low glucose or blunting blood glucose through things like Berberine. And some of those neural effects include longstanding changes in the hormonal cascades that are the consequence of having low blood sugar and thereby, changes in the neural circuits that manage blood glucose overall. The simple way of saying this is that by maintaining low to moderate blood glucose, either by not ingesting heavily carbohydrate laden foods. So here I'm speaking to the low carb or the ketogenic types or by blunting blood glucose through things like Metformin or Berberine, even if ingesting carbohydrates, maybe even some sugars, over time, it seems that there's a adjustment, what we call a homeostatic regulation of the neural circuits that control things like sugar craving, and indeed, some people report feeling fewer sugar cravings over time. Now I didn't use Berberine for a very long period of time, I've never used Metformin. I have experienced a somewhat odd but welcome phenomenon of with each progressive year of my life, I have fewer and fewer sugar cravings. Why that is, I don't know. I suspect it might have something to do with my sleep. And I'll talk about that in a few minutes. But if you're going to explore Berberine or Metformin or otherwise, in addition to working with a doctor, I think you should understand why you're doing it, right. I think that many of the effects can be quite potent. They can happen in both the immediate term in terms of regulating blood glucose, they can send you hypoglycemic if you aren't careful, they can also cause longstanding changes to the neural circuitry that regulates blood sugar over time. Some of which might be welcome changes, right? Reduce sugar cravings for instance. And if you are really, really serious about modulating blood glucose through things like Berberine, the typical dose range, again, is anywhere from half a gram to 1.5 grams daily, that's the typical dosages that have been explored. And there are some other substances like sodium caprate which are known to augment the effects of Berberine via the AMPK pathways. They basically can increase the ability for Berberine to have its glucose lowering actions. But that of course is getting into the really potent, what I would call sharp blade tools for controlling blood glucose. And listen, anytime you're dealing with blood glucose, you are dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel. And anytime you're dealing with the brain's preferred source of fuel, you have to be especially cautious about depriving the brain of what it needs. So whether or not you're low carb, high carb, you know, keto, vegan, carnivore, these substances, like Berberine, are very, very potent and you need to take them seriously. There is yet another tool for controlling sugar cravings and the neural circuits that regulate sugar craving and its downstream consequences. And this tool is what I would call a high performance tool, but it's one that you probably didn't suspect and that's sleep. I've done extensive episodes about sleep, and we actually have an episode called master your sleep. You can find that episode easily at hubermanlab.com. It's available in all the various formats, YouTube, Apple, Spotify, et cetera. and it provides a lot of tools. And on social media, I provide a lot of tools, often we have a newsletter that provides tools on how to maximize sleep. What is the role of sleep in sugar metabolism, sugar, hunger, and the way that the brain regulates those things? Well, there's a really exciting study that came out just last year. This study was published in the journal, Cell Report, a Cell Press journal, excellent journal. And the reason I love this study so much, is it involved having people, so yes, this was done in humans, sleep in the laboratory. That's not unusual, there's a sleep lab at Stanford, there's sleep labs elsewhere. But what they did was they actually measured from the breath of these people, and they extracted from their breath, the metabolites that would allow them to understand what sorts of metabolism was occurring in these people's bodies at different phases of sleep. And this is a really remarkable study. They actually did this every 10 seconds throughout the entire night. So in little tiny 10 second bits, meaning at very high resolution, they could evaluate what is the metabolism in the brain and body that people experience as they go from REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep to slow wave, sleep, and so on. And I'll go deeper into the study again in the future, because it's so interesting, and I think so important. But what they discovered was that each stage of sleep was associated with a very particular signature pattern of metabolism and particular phases of sleep are associated with sugar metabolism, or more with fat metabolism, or more with other aspects of metabolism. And the reason why I think this study is important to discuss in the context of today's discussion about sugar in the brain, is that many people have experienced the effects of disrupted sleep on their appetite. And in particular, it's been reported that when people are sleep deprived or the quality of their sleep is disrupted, that their appetite for sugary food increases. Now that was always assumed to be due to some metabolic need that was triggered by the sleep deprivation or by the poor sleep. But in reading over this study, some of the more important points made by the authors relate to the fact that well, sleep is known to have incredibly important effects on brain and body, for a variety of systems, immune system, neural functioning, et cetera. This very organized sequence of particular forms of metabolism being active during particular phases of sleep, which are very, very well orchestrated, as we know, slow wave sleep, and REM sleep being orchestrated in 90 minutes, so-called ultradian cycles and so on and so forth, is thought to of perhaps set up the brain and body to be able to regulate itself in the waking hours. And therefore, when people are sleep deprived or deprived of certain forms or states within sleep, such as rapid eye movement sleep, that it creates a disruption in a particular set of metabolic pathways. Now we don't a leap too far from this study to sugar metabolism and the neural circuits controlling sugar metabolism. But I will say this, if you look at the sum total of the data on obesity or on type two diabetes or on metabolic syndromes of any kind, you almost always see disruptions in sleep. Now, some of those could be you do to sleep apnea caused by even just the size of somebody's neck or the weight of their body. In other words, we don't know the direction of the effect, metabolic syndromes could disrupt sleep, which disrupt metabolic syndromes. And indeed the authors point out quite appropriately, that they don't understand the direction of the effects that they observe either. But there is now a plethora of data pointing to the fact that getting quality sleep each night helps regulate not only appetite, but also the specific forms of metabolism that drive specific appetites. So the takeaway is, while there are extravagant and potent and interesting ways to regulate blood glucose, everything from cinnamon to lemon juice, to Berberine, to sodium caprate, to behavioral tools, to the mere understanding of how the direct and indirect pathways go from the gut to dopamine, et cetera, if you're not establishing the firm foundation of proper metabolism, all of those things are going to be sort of rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic as it's sometimes described. So we can't overstate the importance of getting regular sufficient amount of high quality sleep, at least 80% of the time, not for sake of immune system function, for clear thinking, et cetera, but also for properly regulating our metabolism, including our sugar metabolism. Thank you for joining me for this discussion about sugar and the nervous system and how they are regulating each other in both the brain and body. If you're enjoying and/or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. Please also subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have comments and feedback or suggestions for future topics and guests, please leave those in the comments section on YouTube. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast, that's best way to support us. In addition, we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram or Twitter, please do so. There I cover science and science-based tools that sometimes overlap with the content of the podcast, but often is distinct from the content of the podcast. During today's episode, and on many previous episodes of The Huberman Lab Podcast, I've discussed supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. One issue with supplements is that if you're going to take them, you want to make sure that they have the absolute highest quality. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E, 'cause Thorn has partnered for instance, with all the major sports teams and the Mayo Clinic. There's tremendous trust in the fact that Thorne supplements contain the specific amounts of supplements that are listed on the bottle and that the quality of the ingredients they include are of the very highest standards. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/U/Huberman, and you can get 20% off any of the supplements listed there. Also, if you navigate further into the Thorne site, through that portal, thorne.com/U/Huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Also, if you haven't yet signed up for the Huberman Lab Neural Network Newsletter, it's a semimonthly newsletter that includes summaries of various podcasts, it has some actionable protocols, it's completely cost free. You simply provide your email. We have a very clear privacy policy. We do not share your email. If you want to get the newsletter, you can go to Hubermanlab.com. Just go to the menu, you can find the sign up there easily. You can also see some examples of previous newsletters without having to sign up at all. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 284 ---
Video ID: azb3Ih68awQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=azb3Ih68awQ
Title: Using Salt to Optimize Mental & Physical Performance | Huberman Lab Podcast #63
Published: 2022-03-14 12:00:01 UTC
Description:
I discuss the role of salt (sodium) in the nervous system and the key role that it plays in mental performance, physical performance and health. I explain how the brain senses salt levels in our body and how that relates to our feelings of thirst. I cover the physiology of the renal system and the hormones that control sodium and water balance in our body. I also explore how salt interacts with stress and our immune systems and its crucial role in neuron function. Additionally, I examine research findings suggesting that some individuals might benefit from increased intake of sodium and other electrolytes (magnesium and potassium) to enhance mental performance, lessen anxiety, and offset dizziness. Yet, other people may need less sodium. I discuss how you can determine your optimal sodium intake and why sodium intake levels need to be uniquely tailored to an individual’s lifestyle. Finally, I explain how salt creates ‘hidden’ sugars in many processed foods and the problems that can create. Throughout the episode, I explain peer-reviewed findings outlining salt’s essential role in overall health and describe general recommendations and tools anyone can use to find their optimal salt balance and thereby enhance their brain and body’s performance.

#HubermanLab #Hydration #Salt

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
Tuesday, May 17th: Seattle, WA
Wednesday, May 18th: Portland, OR  
https://hubermanlab.com/tour

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok - https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Article Links
"The preference for sugar over sweetener depends on a gut sensor cell": https://go.nature.com/33X9zuA
"Urinary Sodium and Potassium Excretion and Risk of Cardiovascular Events": https://bit.ly/3MOJEGW
"Dietary sodium and health: How much is too much for those with orthostatic disorders?": https://bit.ly/3tSP7UO
"Increased salt consumption induces body water conservation and decreases fluid intake": https://bit.ly/35PCPVg

Book Links
"The Salt Fix: Why the Experts Got It All Wrong--and How Eating More Might Save Your Life": https://amzn.to/3CD1KHi

Timestamps
00:00:00 Role of Salt  
00:02:18 The Brain-Body Contract 
00:02:57 Neuropod Cells, Artificial Sweeteners & ‘Hidden’ Cravings 
00:10:57 AG1 (Athletic Greens), LMNT, InsideTracker 
00:15:06 Salt Regulation 
00:17:13 How the Brain Senses Salt
00:24:15 Salt & Thirst  
00:29:27 Blood Pressure & Thirst 
00:33:47 Kidneys & Urine Regulation
00:39:08 Vasopressin: Roles in Libido & Urination 
00:45:46 How Much Salt Do You Need? 
00:56:45 Should You Increase Your Salt Intake? 
01:02:19 Tools: Determining Your Individual Salt Intake
01:14:02 Iodine, Sea Salt 
01:17:13 Salt: Roles in Stress & Anxiety 
01:24:20 Other Electrolytes: Magnesium & Potassium 
01:27:57 Tools: Effects of Low-carbohydrate Diets & Caffeine 
01:32:28 General Recommendations for Salt Intake  
01:36:34 Perception of Salt & Sugar Taste, Processed Foods 
01:47:13 Role of Sodium in Neuronal Function, Action Potentials 
01:53:13 Dehydration 
01:55:36 What Salt Intake is Best for You? 
02:00:58 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 285 ---
Video ID: ouCWNRvPk20
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ouCWNRvPk20
Title: Dr. Justin Sonnenburg: How to Build, Maintain & Repair Gut Health | Huberman Lab Podcast #62
Published: 2022-03-07 13:00:23 UTC
Description:
My guest this episode is Dr. Justin Sonnenburg, Professor of Microbiology & Immunology at Stanford University. Dr. Sonnenburg’s research focuses on how microbes in our gut impact our mental and physical health and how diet and your environment shape your gut microbiome. We discuss the architecture of the gut microbiome and microbiota variability in different regions of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and how these can change in response to diet, environment or genetics. We explore the early establishment of your microbiome and how your mode of delivery into the world (C-section or not) shapes your gut. We also discuss lifestyle factors that can alter your microbiome and the integral role the gut microbiome plays in communicating to other organs, including your brain. Dr. Sonnenburg details his recent clinical study, which found that diets rich in fermented foods (but not fiber) increase microbiota diversity and reduce signals of inflammation. Additionally, we examine how foods typical in Western Diets (e.g., high fat, low fiber, processed foods) can negatively impact the gut microbiome. Throughout the episode, we discuss actionable tools from peer-reviewed clinical findings that anyone can implement, regardless of budget, in order to optimize their gut microbiome and health.

#HubermanLab #Microbiome #GutHealth 

Thank you to our sponsors:
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com - code "huberman"
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman

See Andrew Huberman Live: The Brain Body Contract   
Tuesday, May 17th: Seattle, WA
Wednesday, May 18th: Portland, OR  
https://hubermanlab.com/tour - code: ‘huberman’ 
Pre-sale tickets go on sale on Tuesday, March 8th at 10 AM PT 

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Justin Sonnenburg Links:
Center for Microbiome Studies: https://stanford.io/3vGkdS0 
Dr. Sonnenburg’s Lab: https://sonnenburglab.stanford.edu 
Dr. Sonnenburg’s Published Work: https://stanford.io/3HN6eMF

Article Links:
"Gut-microbiota-targeted diets modulate human immune status": https://bit.ly/3sLv2QI

Book Links:
"The Good Gut: Taking Control of Your Weight, Your Mood, and Your Long-Term Health": https://amzn.to/35RQP0c
"The 4-Hour Chef: The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning Anything and Living the Good Life": https://amzn.to/3hqxkP0

Other Links:
NIH Human Microbiome Project: https://hmpdacc.org 

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Dr. Justin Sonnenburg, Gut Microbiome 
00:02:55 The Brain Body Contract   
00:04:16 AG1 (Athletic Greens), ROKA, Helix Sleep 
00:08:30 What is the Gut Microbiome?
00:12:49 Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract & Microbiota Variability 
00:16:00 Breast Feeding, C-Sections & Pets
00:21:56 The Human Microbiome Project at Stanford
00:26:30 Traditional vs. Industrialized Populations
00:28:58 Resilience of the Microbiome
00:35:10 Regional Differences Along Your GI Tract 
00:42:04 Fasting, Cleanses & Gut Health
00:51:19 Dietary Differences 
01:01:24 Simple vs. Complex Carbohydrates, Processed Foods 
01:07:03 Artificial & Plant-based Sweeteners 
01:12:44 Cleanses: Useful? Harmful?  
01:14:50 Your Microbiome & Your Immune System
01:20:17 Dietary Fiber & Fermented Foods 
01:32:13 High-Fiber vs. High-Fermented Diet; Inflammation
01:41:33 Ripple Effects of a Healthy Diet
01:45:00 Does a High-Fiber Diet Make Inflammation Worse?
01:47:22 Over Sterilized Environments 
01:50:15 The Gut Microbiome’s Effect on Physiology 
01:56:45 Gut-Brain Connection 
01:59:30 Probiotics: Benefits & Risks
02:04:20 Prebiotics: Essential?
02:07:00 Tools for Enhancing Your Gut Microbiota 
02:11:12 Dr. Sonnenburg’s Research, Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. Justin Sonnenburg. Dr. Sonnenburg is a professor of microbiology and immunology at Stanford School of Medicine, and one of the world's leading experts on the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome is the existence of trillions of little microorganisms throughout your gut, and by your gut, I don't just mean your stomach. I mean your entire digestive tract. Turns out we also have a microbiome that exists in our nose, in any other location in which our body interfaces with the outside world. In fact, there's a microbiome on your skin. And while it might seem kind of intrusive, or kind of disgusting to have all these little microorganisms, they can be immensely beneficial for our health, meaning our hormonal health, our brain health and our immune system function. Dr. Sonnenburg teaches us about the gut microbiome, how it's organized spatially, meaning which microbiota live where. He teaches us about these incredible things called crypts and niches, which are little caves within our digestive tract that certain microbiota take residence. And at that premier real estate, they're able to do incredible things to support our health. He also talks about the things that we can all do to support our microbiome in order for our microbiome to support our brain and body health. Dr. Sonnenburg co-runs his laboratory with his spouse, Dr. Erica Sonnenburg, and together they've also written a terrific and highly informative book called, "The Good Gut: Taking Control of your Weight, your Mood, and your Long Term Health." Even though that book was written a few years back, the information still holds up very nicely. And today he also builds on that information, informing us about recent studies, that for instance, point to the important role of fermented foods, and the role of fiber in supporting a healthy gut microbiome. So if you heard about the gut microbiome, or even if you haven't, today you're going to hear about it from one of the world's leading experts. He makes it immensely clear as to what it is, how it functions, and how to support it for your brain and body health. During today's discussion, we don't just talk about nutrition. We also talk about the impact of behaviors and the microbiome. Behaviors such as who you touch, who you kiss, who you hug, whether or not you interact with, or avoid animals, whether or not those animals belong to you, or whether or not they belong to somebody else. If all that sounds a little bit bizarre, you'll soon understand that your microbiome is constantly being modified by the behavioral interactions, the nutritional interactions, and indeed your mood and internal reactions to the outside world. This is an incredible system. Everyone has one. Everyone should know how it works, and everyone should know how to optimize it. And today you're going to learn all of that from Dr. Sonnenburg. I'm pleased to announce that I'm hosting two live events in May, 2022. The first live event will take place in Seattle, Washington on May 17th. The second event will take place in Portland, Oregon on May 18th. Both are part of a series called "The Brain-Body Contract." For this series, I will discuss science, so I will discuss the mechanistic science around things like sleep and focus and motivation, physical performance, mental health, physical health, a large number of topics that I believe many people are interested in, and that certainly are important for our health and wellbeing, and performance. In addition, I will of course describe tools and actionable items, most of which I have not discussed on The Huberman Lab Podcast, or anywhere else. Pre-sale tickets for these two events go live Tuesday, Match 8th at 10:00 a.m. Pacific Time. We've made these tickets exclusively available to the listeners of The Huberman Lab Podcast. So they are password protected. To find them, you can go to hubermanlab.com/tour and use the code Huberman. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, now called AG1. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason still take AG1 once or twice a day is that it meets all my basic, foundational supplementation needs. What I mean by that is it covers any vitamin and nutritional deficiencies that I might have, 'cause I'm trying to be good about my nutrition and diet, but I don't always manage to get everything that I need, and I'm sure that there are a lot of gaps in there. So it covers those gaps. It also has probiotics, and as you'll learn in today's episode, and I've talked about it on previous episodes, the probiotics are essential for a healthy gut microbiome. We need probiotics in order for our microbiome to thrive, and our microbiome supports things like gut-brain health, indeed things like metabolism, mood, hunger. It also that supports the immune system. As you'll learn today, your gut microbiome actually manufactures neurotransmitters, the very chemicals that impact mood and brain function. Athletic Greens primes your system for a healthy gut microbiome, something that can be achieved with food and lifestyle factors, but is often hard to achieve with just food and lifestyle factors. If you'd like to try out Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They give you five free travel packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. And a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. vitamin D3 has many important biological functions that support your media and long term health, and K2 as well is very important for things like cardiovascular health, calcium regulation and so on. Again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can claim the special offer of the five free travel packs and the vitamin D3 K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that I believe are of the very highest quality. I've spent my lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and I can tell you that the biology of the visual system has a lot of mechanisms in there. So that for instance, if you move from a bright environment to a dim environment, your visual system needs to adapt. One issue with a lot of sunglasses and eyeglasses is you move from one environment to the next, you have to take sunglasses or eyeglasses off, you get a glare or you have to adjust because of the way that the lenses are designed. With ROKA, they've taken the biology of the visual system into account, and so you never have to take them off and on in order to move from one environment to the next. They are also designed for movement and athletics, or you can wear them for just things like work, and going out to dinner and so forth. They have a terrific aesthetic, they're extremely lightweight. In fact, I often forget that they're even on my face. I wear sunglasses when it's very bright and when I'm driving into sunlight, I wear readers at night. I hardly ever remember that they're on my face. They also won't slip off your face if you use them when running or cycling. The company was developed by two all-American swimmers from Stanford. So everything about these sunglasses and eyeglasses was developed with performance in mind, in a lot of different situations and scenarios. If you'd like to try ROKA, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A .com, and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com, and enter the code huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix makes mattresses and pillows that are designed for your particular sleep needs. What I mean by that is you can go to the Helix site, you can take a very brief two or three minute quiz, ask questions like do you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach, do you tend to run hot or cold through the night? Maybe you don't know the answers to those questions. And then they match you to a mattress that's designed for your particular sleep needs. I matched to the Dusk, D-U-S-K, mattress. I like a mattress that's not too firm, not too soft. I tend to sleep on my side, or sort of in the crawling soldier position. Seems to be the the most common position I sleep in. And that really works terrifically well for me. But you need to take the quiz to see which mattress works best for you. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take the two quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress. You can figure out how to get your optimal sleep, which was talked about on this podcast so many times before. Sleep is the foundation of all mental and physical health, and performance in any aspect of life. Sleep is key, and the mattress you sleep on is key to the sleep you get. After matching you do a customized mattress, you can get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, you can go to heli sleep.com/huberman to get up to $200 off and two free pillows. And now for my discussion with Dr. Justin Sonnenburg. Justin, thanks so much for being here. - Great to be here. - Yeah. I am a true novice when it comes to the microbiome, so I'd like to start off with a really basic question, which is, what is the microbiome? I imagine lots of little bugs running around in my gut and I don't quite like the image of that, but I'm aware that our microbiome can be good for us, but we can also have an unhealthy microbiome. So if I were to look at the microbiome at the scale that I could see the meaningful things, what would it look like, and what's going on in there? - Yeah, I mean essentially you're correct. I mean, we have all of these little microorganisms running around in our gut. I think, just to start off with clarifying terminology, microbiome and microbiota quite often are referred to, or used to refer to our microbial community interchangeably, and I'll probably switch between those two terms today. The other important thing to realize is that these microbes are not just in our gut, but they're all over our body. They're in our nose, they're in our mouths, they're on our skin. And so basically anywhere that the environment can get to in our body, which includes inside our digestive tract, of course, is colonized with microbes. And the vast majority of these are in our distal gut and in our colon, and so this is the gut microbiota or gut microbiome. And the density of this community is astounding. I mean, it really is. If you get down to the scale of being able to see individual microbes, you start off with a zoomed out view and you see something that looks like fecal material that digest inside the gut, and you zoom in, and you start to get to the microscopic level and see the microbes. They are just packed side to side, end to end. It's a super dense bacterial community, almost like a biofilm, something that's just made up of microbes, to the point where it's thought that around 30% of fecal matter is microbes, 30 to 50%. So it's an incredibly dense microbial community, we're talking of trillions of microbial cells. And all those microbial cells, if you start to get to know them, and see who they are, break out in the gut probably to hundreds, to 1,000 species, depending upon how you define microbial species. And then most of these are bacteria, but there are a lot of other life forms there. There are archaea, which are little microbes that are bacterial-like, but they're different. There are eukaryotes. So we commonly think of eukaryotes in the gut as something like a parasite. But there are eukaryotes, there are fungi, there are also little viruses. There are these bacteriophages that infect bacterial cells. And those actually outnumber the bacteria, like 10 to one. So they're just everywhere there, they kill bacteria. And so there's these really interesting predator/prey interactions. But overall, it's just this really dense, complex, dynamic ecosystem. And so, we're talking about the human as a single species, but we're also thinking of the human as this complex, integrated ecosystem of hundreds to thousands of species, interacting concert to do all the fantastic things that we know happen in the human body. - Amazing. So we've got a lot of cargo. Or maybe we're the cargo. - Yeah. - Who knows? - Yeah, I mean, there have been people that have likened humans to just a really elaborate culturing flask for microbes, and that we've actually been designed over the course of evolution, designed to just efficiently propagate this microbial culture from person to person, from generation to generation. So it's a different way of thinking of the human body. - Interesting. I believe that our pH or the pH of our digestive system varies as you descend, as you go from mouth to throat and stomach. And you said that most of the microbiota are in the distal colon. Are there distinct forms of microbiota all along the length of the digestive tract, and within these other interfaces with the outside world? - Totally. Yeah. So it starts with our teeth and in our mouth, and saliva, there's a oral microbiota. These microbial species are very different than the ones that you find in the digestive tract. They're usually built to deal with oxygen very well. They're in an area that is exposed to a lot of oxygen, they of course see different nutrients than, for instance, the colonic bacteria would see. And they grow quite often in mats that live on teeth. So they're very structured in terms of... And not moving around a lot. So they're very, fairly stationary. As you move down the digestive tract, there are microbes in esophagus in our stomach, but those communities are not very dense, and actually not very well studied. We know of a very... There's a very famous stomach bacteria known as Helicobacter pylori, which can cause stomach ulcers and cause gastric cancer in some less frequent situations. But this is a very different set of microbes, they have to be adapted to a different environment, in the stomach especially, incredibly acidic environment. But also very different in terms of their ability to interact with other microbes, just because the communities are less dense, they're less dynamic, there's less nutrients that stay there and passage through the community. So a lot of times those communities are reliant upon nutrients derived from the host, as opposed to nutrients derived from our diet. As you move down out of the stomach, into the small intestine, you start to see these communities, which are the ones that are becoming more well-studied. Small intestine is still a bit of a black box, just because it's hard to access. And so there's some really cool technologies out there for using, for instance, capsules to do sampling as the capsule passes through the digestive tract, so that we have a better idea of what's going on in the small intestine. And then you get to the colon, and this is the community that's just so incredibly densely packed, doing a ton of... There's a ton of metabolic activity happening there, and a bunch of interaction with the host. And that's the community that's really the best studied. Part of the reason for that is because stool is so easy to obtain compared to, for instance, something in the stomach or small intestine. And that stool is fairly representative, we know, from studies that have been done using colonoscopies and so forth. Stool is fairly representative of what's happening in the colon. So dense, super exciting community, but also the best studied, just because it's the easiest to access in the lower digestive tract. - Very interesting. I imagine these microbiota have to get in there at some point, are microbiota seen in newborns? In other words, where do they come from? And dare I ask, what direction do they enter the body? Or is it from multiple directions? - Yeah, yeah. Great question. So one of the burning questions that we can come back to at the end of this, is where does our microbiota come from? Because it is this kind of existential question in the field, like where is this community assembling from? And the reason that it's such an interesting question is that, a fetus, when it's in the womb, that's actually a sterile environment. There have been some studies that have looked at whether there are microbes in the womb, and microbes colonizing the fetus at that point. There's some debate about this, but overall it looks like that's not a big part of the equation of microbial colonization. And so each time I'm an infant is born, it's this new ecosystem. It's like an island rising up out of the ocean that has no species on it, and suddenly there's this land rush for this open territory. And so we know that infants go through this really complex process of microbiota assembly over the first days, weeks, months, years of life. And then you get into switching to solid food, two to three years of age. There are some changes in childhood, adolescence, working into adulthood. But that first zero to one year is a super dynamic time with really kind of stereotypical developmental changes in the gut microbiota, that appear to have the possibility of going wrong and causing problems for infants in some instances. But if you step away from that extreme side of things going wrong, there also were a lot of different trajectories that developmental process can take, because our microbiota is so malleable and so plastic, and those trajectories can be affected by all sorts of factors in early life. So an example is whether an infant is born by C-section or born vaginally. We know from beautiful work that's been done in the field that infants that are born by C-section actually have a gut microbiota that looks more like human skin than it does like either the birth canal, the vagina microbiota, or the mother's stool microbiota. Babies that are born through the birth canal have initial colonization of vaginal microbes and of stool microbes from their mother. And so just these first days, whether you're born by C-section or through natural childbirth, your gut microbiota looks very different. And then compound on top of that, whether you're breast fed or formula fed, whether your family has a pet or doesn't have a pet, whether you're exposed to antibiotics, there are all these factors that really can change that developmental process, and really change your microbial identity, eventually in life. The reason that the field is paying really close attention to this and studying this right now is because we know from animal studies, that depending upon the microbes that you get early in life, you can send the immune system or metabolism of an organism or other parts of their biology in totally different developmental trajectories. So what microbes you're colonized with early in life can really change your biology, and we can come back to that later, but- - Yeah, we should. - Getting back to that original question of where do your microbes come from, you'd think because you're born through your mother's birth canal, or exposed to her skin microbes, that a lot of your microbes would come from your mother, but it actually turns out that, we can certainly detect that signal, we certainly see maternal microbes in the infant, but there are a lot of microbes that are coming from other places, surfaces, other people, perhaps other caregivers, but perhaps strangers as well. So we acquire our microbes from a variety of sources. The first ones are from our mom, or from our caregivers from the hospital, but then we add to that tremendously over the first year or so of life. - Incredible, you even said pets. So if there's a dog in the home or a parakeet in the home, clearly they have a microbiome also, and potentially the child is deriving microbiota species from those pets, correct? - Exactly, yeah. And so the best studies that have been done have just looked at pets in the household as a factor, and whether that changes the group of infants that have a pet to look slightly different than the group of infants that don't have a pet. And then the question is, what is the pet doing to change those microbes? And some of it is probably actually contributing, direct members of the microbiota. Actually, I have a dog, that dog occasionally will lick my mouth without me paying attention, and that's probably introducing microbes. We also know that pets are down in the dirt, they're outside, they're being exposed to a lot of environmental microbes. And so just pets serving as a conduit for a bunch of microbes that we wouldn't otherwise come in contact with is a possibility as well. - Well, we will return to pets, and in particular your dog, an amazing dog, by the way. I met your dog just the other day, and I had to force myself, I had to pry myself away from... It's a Havanese, right? - Havanese. - [Andrew Huberman] Incredible. What is your dog's name? - Louis. Louis Pasteur. - Louis Pasteur. - Yeah, yeah. - How appropriate. Amazing dog, what a personality on that dog. - Yeah. - The issue that I think a lot of people are probably wondering is, what is a healthy microbiome? What is it supporting? We hear that you need a healthy microbiome to support the immune system or metabolism, or even the gut-brain axis. How do we define a healthy, versus a unhealthy microbiome? Some people might know the unhealthy microbiome is dysbiosis is the word that I encounter in the literature. But given that there's so many species of microbiota, and given that I think we probably each have a signature pattern of microbiota, how do we define healthy versus unhealthy microbiota? Is there a test for this? Later we'll talk about technologies for testing microbiota. There are a lot of companies now, a lot of people sending stool samples in the mail. Never look at the Postal Service the same way again, but it's out there and it's getting analyzed. So how should I think about this? I can think about things like heart rate, heart rate variability, BMI, all sorts of metrics of health. How should I think about the microbiota? How do I know if my microbiome is healthy or unhealthy? - Yeah, it's a million dollar question right now in the field, and there's a lot of different ways of thinking about that, and I can talk about some of those. But I would say that there are sessions at conferences, there are review articles being commissioned. There are all sorts of thought pieces about this right now, like what is a healthy microbiota? What are the features that define it? And I think before diving into this, the important thing to realize is, it's a complex topic. Context matters a lot. What's healthy for one person or one population may not be healthy for another person or population. And the microbiota is malleable. It's plastic, it changes our human biology, which I think is, how we think about health quite often, BMI and longevity, reproductive success, however you want to define it. It certainly can accommodate a variety of configurations of gut microbiota, and we don't have... It's really hard to untangle all of the different factors of what could be very healthy, versus a little bit less healthy. So I will say that there's no single answer to this, but there's some really important considerations. And perhaps the best way to start talking about this is to go back to the inception of the Human Microbiome Project, which was this program that NIH started. They invested a lot of money in 2008, 2009 for really propelling the field of gut microbiome research. It was becoming evident at that point that this was not just a curiosity of human biology, that it was probably really important for our health. And they had all this wonderful sequencing technology from the Human Genome Sequencing Project, and with the human genome completed that point, they started turning that technology to sequencing our gut microbes. And it's important to contextualize the amount of information that they're trying to document, the collective genome of our gut microbes is on the order of 100 to 500 times larger than our human genome. So it's just in terms of the number of genes. So it's just this vast number of genes, and then if you start getting into some of the fine variation, it's scales by 10 to a 100 fold. So really a huge amount information they're trying to document. And so it was a wonderful investment, and it continues to pay dividends to this day. But one of their goals of that project was to try to define what a healthy microbiome is, versus a diseased microbiome in different contexts. And so they started enrolling a bunch of healthy people and a bunch of people with, for instance, inflammatory bowel disease and other diseases. And the idea was, let's document those microbiomes. What microbes are there, what genes are there? And then we can start to get a sense of, what are the commonalities of the healthy people, and how can that go wrong in these different disease states? There were some answers from that, but through those studies, we really started to get the image that there is this tremendous individuality in the gut microbiome. And so it's really hard to start drawing conclusions after initial pass of that project, of what is a healthy microbiome? But the other thing that we started to realize at the same time, there were studies going on documenting the gut microbiome of traditional populations of humans, hunter-gatherers, rural agricultural populations. And those studies were really mind-blowing from the perspective of all these people are healthy, they're living very different lifestyles, and their microbiome doesn't look anything like a healthy American microbiome. - So does that mean that the healthy American microbiome is healthy, but only in the context of living in the United States and consuming what's consumed here? Or is it that there is a superior microbiome signature, somewhere in our history or currently in the world? - Yeah, I think that's kind of a big question right now. I think there's a great quote from Dobzhansky that says, "Nothing in biology makes sense, except in the light of evolution." And these traditional populations are all modern people living on the planet now, but their lifestyle does represent the closest approximation to how our ancestors, early humans lived. And so those microbiomes, and now we know from sequencing of paleofeces, the microbiome of these traditional populations is more representative of the microbiome that we evolved with, that potentially shaped our human genome. And so one possibility is that in industrialized world, we have a different microbiome from traditional populations, and that microbiome is well-adapted to our current lifestyle, and therefore healthy in the context of an industrialized society. And there probably are elements of that that are true. But another possibility is that this is a microbiome that's gone off the rails, that it is deteriorating in the face of antibiotic use, and all the problems associated with an industrialized diet, Western diet. And that even though the Human Microbiome Project documented the microbiome of healthy people, healthy Americans, that what they really may have been documenting there is a perturbed microbiota that's really predisposing people to a variety of inflammatory and metabolic diseases. - It reminds me, as a neurobiologist, was weaned in the landscape of so-called critical periods, where early life environment very strongly shapes the brain. And so many studies were done on animals raised in traditional cages with a water bottle and some food, maybe a few other animals of the same species. And then people came along and said, wait, normally these species in the wild would have things like things to climb over and things to go through, and you provide those very basic elements, and all of a sudden the architecture of neural circuits looks very different, and you realize that were studying a deprived condition. And earlier you actually referred to, if I understood correctly, to critical periods for gut microbiome development. Is it fair to say that there are critical periods? Meaning, if let's say my... Let's aim it at me. If my gut microbiome was dysbiotic, it was off early in life, can I rescue that through proper conditions and exercise? Or is there some sort of fixed pattern that's going to be hard for me to escape from? - Yeah, there's a big field that's emerging now that we refer to as kind of reprogramming the gut microbiome. And I think if we want to conceptualize humans as this aggregate human microbial biology, most people have heard of CRISPR, and the ability to potentially change our human genome in ways that correct genetic problems. That's a wonderful technology, and has kind of put on the table genetic engineering for cur disease, but it's much easier to change gut microbes for a problem, just because that community is malleable. The issue that I think we're seeing in the field is that microbiomes quite often, whether they're diseased or healthy, exist in stable states. They kind of tend towards this well that has gravity to it in a way, biological gravity, where it's really hard to dislodge that community from that state. So even individuals, for instance, that get antibiotics. You take oral antibiotics, the community takes this huge hit. We know that a bunch of microbes die, the composition changes. And that represents a period of vulnerability where pathogens can come in and take over and cause disease. But if that doesn't happen, the microbiota kind of works its way back to something that is not exactly like, but similar to the pre-antibiotic treatment. We know with dietary perturbations, quite often you'll see a really rapid change to the gut microbiome. And then it's almost like a memory where it snaps back to something that's very similar to the original state, even though the diet remains different. And so there's this incredible, what we refer to as resilience of the gut microbiome, and resistance to change, or at least resistance to establishing a new stable state. So that doesn't mean it's hopeless to change an unhealthy microbiome to a healthy microbiome, but it does mean that we need to think carefully about restructuring these communities in ways where we can achieve a new stable state that will resist the microbial community getting pulled back to that original state. And one of the really simplest and nicest examples of this an experiment that we performed with mice, where we were feeding mice a normal mouse diet, a lot of nutrients there for the gut microbiota, things like dietary fiber. And we switched those mice, half the mice, to a low fiber diet. And we were basically asking the question that if you switch to kind of a Western-like diet, a low fiber, higher fat diet, what happens to the gut microbiota? And we saw the microbiota change, it lost diversity. It was very similar to what we see in the difference between industrialized and traditional populations. But when we brought back a healthy diet, a lot of the microbes returned, it was fairly... There was this kind of memory where it went back to very similar to its original state. The difference is that when we put the mice on the low fiber, high fat diet, and then kept them on that for multiple generations, we saw this progressive deterioration over the course of generations whereby the fourth generation, the gut microbiome was a fraction of what it originally was. Let's say 30% of the species only remained something like 70% of the species had gone extinct, or appeared to have gone extinct. We then put those mice back onto a high fiber diet, and we didn't see recovery. So in that case, it's a situation where a new stable state has been achieved. In that case, it's probably because those mice don't actually have access to the microbes that they've lost. And we actually know that we did the control experiment of mice on a high fiber diet for four generations. They maintain all their microbes. If we take those fourth generation mice with all the diversity and do a fecal transplant into the mice that had lost their microbes, but had been returned to a high fiber diet, all of the diversity was reconstituted. So your question of like, how do we establish new stable states? How do we get back to a healthy microbiota if we have taken a lot of antibiotics, or have a deteriorated microbiota, it's probably a combination of having access to the right microbes. And we can talk about what that access looks like. It may look like therapeutics in the future. There are a lot of companies working on creating cocktails of healthy microbes. But it'll be a combination of access to the right microbes and nourishing those microbes with the proper diet. - Very interesting. This multi-generational study reminds me of something that I was told early in my training, which was that it takes a long time for a trait to evolve, but not a long time for traits to devolve. - Yeah, exactly. - Which generally is true of human behavior too, although it depends. We can all do better, nonetheless. - [Justin Sonnenburg] Very interesting. - So I have a puzzle or a bit of a conundrum around this notion of species of microbiota. So if the pH, if the acidity differs along the digestive tract, but is more or less fixed for a given location, right? I mean, unless something's really off, the pH of the stomach is within a particular range, and the intestines and so forth. And certain microbiota thrive at a given station, a given location along the digestive tract, and the pH is sort of fixed more or less. I'm trying to figure out, what is allowing certain microbiota to stay in a given location? Why don't they migrate up or down? So are they pH sensitive, and that's what they're selecting for along the tract? And I'm also trying to figure out how these changes in food so robustly change the microbiome. The way you describe it almost makes it sound like food is the variable that's going to dictate the quality of the microbiome, although I'm sure there are other factors as well. And then in the back of my mind, I don't know that I want to ask this question, but I really want to ask this question, which is, where are they in there exactly, and why don't they all get flushed out? Right? - Right. - If 30% of fecal matter is microbiota, then where are they living? Are they along the lining, and the little microvilli of the intestine, and what are they attaching to and interacting with? we know there are neurons in there, especially within the stomach, there's a lot of work now being done on the gut neurons and how they signal to the brain and so forth. But who are they talking to in terms of the host cells? - Yeah. - Because if it's just from food, I imagine that they're in there having their good time, or not, and then some are getting flushed out or not, but how do they actually stay in there? - Yeah. - Who are they attaching to? What are they talking about? What are they doing for fun? - Yeah. - And so forth. - Yeah, yeah. Super interesting. So I'll come back to the attachment question, and kind of why they don't get washed out, 'cause this is a super fascinating question. And I think your initial point of like, the kind of regional differences in what's happening in terms of physiology, biochemistry along the length of the gut is really interesting. There certainly is a pH gradient along the length of the gut. There is actually bicarbonate that's secreted into the small intestine to try to neutralize stomach acid. There also is bile that's secreted. That creates a different chemical environment in there, bio-loving bacteria that kind of live in that region of the gut. And then there is a nutrient gradient, just because as food leaves the stomach, a lot of the simple nutrients are absorbed. And so you might see microbes in the small intestine, for instance, that are better at consuming simple sugars, but you won't find many microbes in the colon like that, because all the simple sugars have been depleted at that point. And then the immune system is a big factor as well. And the immune system is incredibly active in the small intestine. The small intestine is this really interesting challenge for the host, because it's a tissue that's been... Its purpose is mainly absorptive. And so there has to be flow of a lot of things, a lot of nutrients from the luminal contents into host cells. And so that means the barrier can't be as fortified. And so the immune system is incredibly active in the small intestine to make sure that microbes aren't getting so close, and if they are getting close, there's a response to them to put them back in their right location. And then along this whole kind of architecture of the gut, there's the longitudinal gradients, things like pH and so forth. And I should say that pH starts to drop again in the colon, because a lot of those microbes are fermenting things and producing acids. And so you actually end up with the pH starting to drop, not as low as the stomach, but starting to drop again if there's a lot of fermentation happening in the colon. In addition, you also have a gradient from the host surface epithelium out to the middle of the gut. And that is likely the key for what is retained in the gut and how the community isn't washed out. So lining the gut, we have epithelial cells. In the small intestine, they're largely absorbative. In the colon, there's a lot of mucus production. And we also see this in the small intestine, and this mucus lining is this substance that we secrete, largely made of carbohydrate actually. And the purpose of that is to keep microbes in the right spot and to allow nutrients and water to be absorbed in the small intestine and large intestine. And so it's this mesh work that is supposed to keep out large things like back to and lead, and small things like nutrients. That mucus layer is, it turns over more slowly than the luminal contents passing by. And so if a microbe learns to hold onto that mucus layer, it can actually resist the flow of the contents of the gut. And so there there's many microbes in the gut that are not just good at attaching to mucus, but also good at nibbling on it, at eating it. And there are these bacteria, like Akkermansia muciniphila, mucus-loving. One of its main things it does is actually eat mucus in the gut, that's its lifestyle. And so there's an incredible gradient of activity from the host tissue, working your way out to the middle of the gut. What's amazing is some microbes actually do penetrate past the mucus, and there are these invaginations in the intestine known as crypts, actually where the stem cells live that produce the epithelium, and there are microbial communities that can form in those crypts. And we don't know completely what their function is, but we've done some studies that appear to indicate that if you can localize to a crypt, you've hit the jackpot as a microbe for being able to maintain dominance in the gut. So if you sit in the crypt and something similar to you, another microbe that's similar to you, comes into the gut, you can actually exclude that microbe. And the thinking is that it can't find a spot to resist being washed out of the gut. So there probably are these little niches close to host tissue in the mucus that are absolutely essential for resisting getting washed out with the flow of all the contents. - Incredible. That raises a question about two things that are reasonably popular. One is this notion of cleanses, from either direction. People will consume things by mouth to try and cleanse their digestive tract. This there's a long history of this. I'm not recommending this. There's differing opinions on whether or not this is good or bad. And the other is fasting or time-restricted feeding. The reason I ask about time-restricted feeding, is my understanding is that after a prolonged period of fasting, there's some auto-absorption or digestion of one's own digestive tract, that then gets renewed. In other words, you're testing and stomach start eating its own lining to some extent in the absence of food. So what do we know about cleanses? Oh, and then I suppose there's cleanses from the other direction too, right? Which, less popular, but I've never run the statistics, but certainly exist out there. What's the idea about cleanses and fasting as it relates to the health or the dysbiosis of the microbiota? - Yeah, there hasn't been a lot of high quality science in this area, and so it's really hard to conclude whether these are good for health or bad for health. I think the fasting... We're in a really interesting situation in the industrialized world, because we have so many problems associated with our digestive tract, and that probably has to do with our highly processed diet and perhaps having a microbiota that's fairly perturbed as well. And so, whether doing things like this are good or bad, it's really hard to define, because we may be starting off in a fairly bad state anyway. There's so many diseases that we're dealing with, metabolic syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, that just put a massive portion of the population in a very different category than people that are thinking about how do I maintain health, how do I live a long life, from starting off in what we consider a fairly healthy state. And so things like fasting and a lot of other therapies that have been developed in the field, I think ketogenic diet may be in this category as well. There can be tremendous benefits in terms of their impact in the context of metabolic syndrome, and for people that are battling eating a continual bad diet or something like that. - And adherence. I think one of the one of the reasons for the popularity of intermittent fasting, time-restricted feeding, and what do they call them now? Exclusion diets, where you entire entirely exclude meat, or you entirely exclude plants or whatever it is, is that adherence is sometimes easier in the all or none. As neurobiologists, we think of it as a go, no-go circuitry. It's harder to make decisions, nuanced decisions often, about food than it is to just eliminate entire categories of food. Not eating, for many people- - Yeah. - Is easier than eating smaller portions. - Yeah, yeah. Yeah, and- - Yeah. So some of it, I think, is neurobiological and psychological. - Absolutely. And we've had gastroenterology fellows in our lab that come in and we kind of... I think that to kind of slice through the nuance of all this, there's a very simple recipe and a really well accepted, broad definition of what a healthy diet is. kind of the Mediterranean diet, plant-based diet is... There's just a ton of data that particularly people of European ancestry, but there's a pretty broad acceptance that if you eat mostly plants, for most people, that's going to be very healthy, to the point where... A wonderful colleague of ours, Christopher Gardner, who's studied diet his whole life, trying to establish what a healthy diet is. And people was giving advice, I saw him giving advice to a dietician who is trying to get all the rules of what she should be recommending to people that she deals with that are interested in a healthy diet. And she said, so the number one, I'm going to say, plant-based fiber is probably super important, and that should be very high on the list. And she goes on to number two and he said, stop. He said, if people do number one well, you don't need to know any other rules. I mean, it's basically like if you can have a high fiber, plant-based diet, for most people, at least, talking about the bucket of people that are already in a healthy state, you don't really need to think about other things, because you can't eat too much meat, you can't eat too many sweets. You've already eaten a huge amount of plant-based fiber. Your gut is full, you're not going to be hungry. And it kind of takes care of worrying about what should I eat or what, what shouldn't I eat. Just eat a ton of whole grains, legumes, vegetables, fruit that's high fiber based, not high sugar. - Does it completely exclude meat, and fish and dairy? - And he was saying people can add their own spins on this. But I think that the main rule is just start off with... And it kind of gets back to, to Michael Pollan's mantra, eat food, not too much, mostly plants. I think if you stick with these simple rules, and don't overthink, like, should I have this? Can I eat eggs? Can I eat... Just kind of stick to these simple rules, it makes it very approachable. But I agree, so these gastroenterology fellows that we've had in our lab say that they... It's really hard. We kind of say to them, why won't you give this dietary advice that's really well-known. And they just said, well, it's, it's really hard to get people to change their diet, unless you're doing either a go, no-go sort of thing, or eliminating something. So if carrots are giving you problems, don't eat carrots. And that's a very simple, easy instruction to follow, but doesn't really deal with the root problem of why can't you eat carrots, because you should be able to eat carrots. Most people can eat carrots. And so I think that we... Yeah, when we're thinking about things like fasting, and all these different dietary regimes and cleanses that people do, we have to step back for a moment and say, okay, well, what are really the big, high level rules that we should take home? And then if you are experiencing problems, and you want to think about how to deal with them, it's good to go to an evidence-based method where there's actually data to back it up. The data in the field really shows that with like fasting, particularly if you go to animals that hibernate, or things like that, where there's really extended fasts, you actually have a microbiota come up that blooms in the absence of food coming in through diet that's really good at eating mucus. So you have bacteria that's that specialize in eating nutrients derived from the host, because there's no other nutrients to live on. Now, whether this is good or bad, we don't know. But it seems like the consumption of mucus in excess is a problem from the standpoint of microbes getting too close to host tissue and inciting inflammation, which is what we see in animal models when we deprive of dietary fiber. We see these mucus utilizers become abundant, and inflammatory markers start to come on. So fasting short term might be fine, probably. There's definitely benefits that are seen metabolically. In terms of what it means for long term health from the standpoint of the gut microbiota, I would say we don't have the answer to that yet. In terms of the cleanses and the flushes and all this, personally, I think it's a terrible idea. I mean, we know that if... In studies that are being done now to reprogram the gut microbiota to install a completely new microbial community, the first step is to wash away the resident microbial community that's there. So if you're in the process of acquiring a really good microbiota and you know how to do that, then flushing everything out is great. Otherwise, what is happening is you're kind of leaving rebuilding of the community to chance, like what is it? And so what microbes are going to colonize? Who's going to take up space after you do this flush or cleanse? And I think it's a little bit like playing Russian Roulette. You may end up with a good microbial community in there afterwards, you may not. You certainly want to pay close attention to what you're eating while you're doing the reconstitution of the community after you do something like that. - Yeah. Thank you for that. I know a lot of people are interested in these kinds of elimination diets. And intermittent fasting/ time-restricted feeding seems to be getting some traction, in part, because at some level we are all doing this when we sleep. Most of us aren't eating while we sleep anyway, and adjusting the numbers seems more accessible for a lot of people. We have a lot of colleagues at Stanford who I know happen to of that regimen, or a time-restricted feeding regimen, but also who follow the more traditional meal spacing as well, of course. One of the things that I wonder about as we talk about primarily plant-based with some, what did you say the Pollan thing was? It was eat mostly plants and then maybe some meat, but not too much, or not too much... - Yeah, eat food, mostly plants, not too much. - Got it. - Or sorry, eat food, not too much, mostly plants. - Got it. I hear this again and again. I know there are a number of people who do seem to do well on a lower carbohydrate, and even some people who report feeling much better on a really strictly, almost meat, organ-only diet. And the only reason I raise is not... I don't participate in... I'm one of those omnivores that out there, I do eat some meat and I do eat plants as well. But the reason I raise this is that earlier you were talking about communities that may have microbiota that are healthier than ours, or at least different than ours. And there are communities in the world that subsist largely on animal products, or for which unprocessed animal products are considered the richest-nutrient foods in those communities. Protein is very scarce in... Ancestrally, protein was more scarce, so eggs and meat and things of that sort. So could there be a genetic component? In other words, if we fast forward 10 years and we actually can make sense of all this human genome stuff, are we going to find that someone who has Scandinavian roots, or somebody who has South American roots, or somebody had descended from a different tribe, will do better on one particular diet versus another, and thereby, or I should say, and in parallel with that, that their gut microbiome will have different signatures that are... So your microbiome might thrive on plants and mine might thrive on organ meats. And as I say this, I'm not a big consumer of organ meats. I'm just laying this out for sake of example. - Yeah. Yeah, great. So, a few notes, the first one has to do with carbohydrates and restriction of carbohydrates, and some people feeling healthier when they cut carbohydrates out. My guess is... This is my theory to be tested, that people feel better cutting carbohydrates out, because the diet that we eat in the United States and in industrialized countries, the carbohydrates are largely crap. - Processed. - They're processed. - Right. - It's like starch, simple sugar. It's things that contribute to glycemic index. It's these sugars that we eat. They make it to our small intestine, they get chopped up into simple sugars, absorbed into our bloodstream, and we have a ton of glucose then coursing through our veins, which we know is bad and can lead to things like diabetes. If the carbohydrates that were in our diet were complex carbohydrates, dietary fiber, and we like to refer to the subset of dietary fiber that the microbiota can actually access as microbiota-accessible carbohydrates. And the reason that we like that term is it has the word carbohydrate in it. And it's to point out that not all carbs are bad, it's just, there are bad carbs or carbs, or carbs that are bad if you consume them in too high quantity, things like table sugar and simple starches, but there are good carbs as well. And these microbiota-accessible carbohydrates are the complex ones that we can't digest, and fuel our got microbiota, our gut microbiota can ferment them. I think we probably all would be better off with less of the carbs that we're typically served, but most of us, and probably the vast majority of us would be better off by consuming a lot more carbs that were complex, that we're microbiotic-accessible. And I'll come back to why that's important in terms of our biology. There's some mechanisms that are known as to why those complex carbohydrates are so important for our health, for most of us. I think this aspect of human genetic adaptation to diet is super interesting. And then layer on top of that got microbiota adaptation to diet, which is another layer of this that is also fascinating. It's very clear that over very short periods of time, humans can adapt to differences in their diet, lactase persistence as kind of the classic example of this. Just over the past 10,000 years, certain groups of humans have adapted to being able to consume dairy by taking this enzyme, lactase, that normally is just expressed in most of the world's population early in life to be able to metabolize lactose in breast milk. By extending the expression of that throughout life, now you can consume milk for your whole life. And so that is an example of specific populations of human genome, genetically adapting to diet in a very short period of time. And there are other examples of this, and undoubtedly, this has happened throughout the world to various aspects of diets. So certainly it's important to remember that there will be different diets that are better for different groups, based on what genes you harbor and have in your human genome. The other aspect on top of that is that, there are good examples of the gut microbiome adapting to cultural differences in diet. And the classic example of this is the degradation of seaweed. So we know that most Americans, if you eat sushi, and there's nori there and you eat some of the seaweed, it has a dietary fiber in it known as porphyrin. That porphyrin will shoot through most of us untransformed. Inert substance. It'll do other things like retain water, and serve as kind of something like cellulose, not be fermented at a high level. If somebody from Southeast Asia that's always consumed seaweed, and is part of a culture that consumes seaweed, eats seaweed, they have a gut microbe that can now metabolize porphyrin. And so there are these very specific gene transfer events where the genes for breaking down porphyrin have been imported into the microbiome of many people in Southeast Asia to... We can think of it as helping digest porphyrin, but it's really just a microbe that's found a niche, found a way to make a living in the gut by consuming something that's common in the diet there. So there are these different layers, there are human genetic adaptations, and there are microbiome adaptations that are cultural, and based on people's geographic location. But there's no escaping the fact that for much of human evolution, the vast majority of people that are on this planet had ancestors that were hunter-gatherers, foraging, consuming huge quantities of plant material, just because that's what was there. And so one of the groups that we study, the Hadza hunter-gatherers in Africa, and I should take a moment just to say that our research, and research of many people in our field and other fields rely on study of indigenous communities. And it's really important to think of these communities, as our equals, they're modern people on the planet. They have interesting lifestyles that are informative with regard to certain aspects of human biology, but in many cases, they also are leading a vulnerable existence. And so we really take great care in our research program, and it's important for people to realize that these populations take part in our research, because they're wonderful research partners. And we need to be mindful of kind of thinking about how, yeah, both we talk about them and use our data that has been gained through their generous contribution to our research program. The Hadza hunter-gatherers, it's estimated, consume on the order 100 to 150 grams of dietary fiber per day, and that's in stark contrast to the typical American that consumes about 15 grams. So somewhere, a seven to tenfold decrease in the main nutrient that feeds are got microbiome in the American diet. The Hadza are one example. There are many different foraging populations, but the vast majority of these populations consume huge amounts of dietary fiber, because plants are the reliable, consistent source. If you, as a hunter-gatherer go on a hunt, usually that hunt is unsuccessful. I think the data that one out of 20 hunts are successful in landing actually big game for the Hadza. They have birds that they shoot and small animals, but quite often, day after day, they're relying upon berries, tubers, baobab fruit. They're relying on the plants in their environment. And actually if you go to the data and look at what their fruit food preferences are, their food preferences are actually meat and honey. So they don't eat a high fiber diet because they love fiber. They eat a high fiber diet, because that's what's available and consistent for them to survive. But our brains are wired for caloric density. And so if you took a Hadza and put them in a restaurant in the United States, they would make the same crappy decisions that we make, because we all want sugar and fat and calories. It's how our brain is wired. - And protein and fat for brain development, as far as we know, right? So it sounds like the Hadza, I hope I'm pronouncing that correctly, you said would prefer to eat meat and honey, but they happen to consume a lot of plant fiber as a consequence of what's available. One of the questions I have as it relates to all of this, is it sounds to me like there is no question from the pure vegan all the way to the extreme opposite, which would be pure meat diet, that avoiding processed foods is a good idea. - Yeah. - Or heavily processed foods, in general and I mean, not that the occasional consumption is necessarily bad. But whether or not one is thinking about one macronutrient profile or another, it sounds like consuming processed foods is just bad for the microbiome. Can we say that categorically? For sure, yeah, yeah. - Okay. - Absolutely. - So you're a low carb person, you're a zero carb person, you're extreme vegan, no meat. Whether or not you're all meat, organ meat. Sounds to me as if the number one thing, maybe even, dare I say above Chris's point about plants, although I'm not going to challenge Chris Gardner on nutrition, I would be way outside the lane lines to do that. But is it to avoiding processed foods? - Yeah. - Is paramount. - Yeah, and I think that's completely compatible with what Christopher was saying. He was saying, if you prioritize getting a huge amount of whole, plant-based food with a lot of fiber first, you're not going to have room for eating a lot of processed food. - [Andrew Huberman] Yeah, yeah. - So it's kind of the same as avoiding processed food. So I think that those are exactly the same rule, and I think that you're exactly right. And we can break down... There's a lot of data of why different components of processed food are so bad for us, and so bad for our microbiome. And I can talk about a few examples of that. But the flip side of this is this mechanism of... And again, thinking about the spectrum of a plant-based diet versus a meat-based diet. There's a lot of data to tell us that a meat or ketogenic, or high fat diet may have big benefits in terms of short term metabolic health. That's typically how people think about that diet. There's also a lot of heart disease that's linked with that as well. There's good literature for that, which is something for people to look at and be aware of. The plant-based diet, if you're eating a bunch of complex fibers that feed your gut microbiota, your gut microbiota produces these substances called short-chain fatty acids, things like butyrate. And it's known that these short-chain fatty acids play really essential components, both in terms of fueling colonocytes, enforcing the barrier, keeping inflammation low, regulating the immune system, regulating metabolism. And so a lot of people think of dietary fiber as this inert substance that passes through, makes this feel full maybe for a little bit, but we get hungry afterwards right away. If you're eating a lot of fiber that's feeding your gut microbiota, your gut microbiota is just producing this vast array of fermentation end products that then get absorbed into our bloodstream, and have all of these tremendous, cascading effects that appear to be largely beneficial on our biology. And so to think about that paradigm of simple carbs, versus complex carbs, in the case of simple carbs, you end up with high blood sugar, something that will spike your insulin, and have all kinds of weird, metabolic effects. In the case of complex carbohydrates, you'll end up with very low blood sugar, because most of those have low glycemic index and a bunch of short-chain fatty acids that are having regulatory roles. So just to round out that topic, I think there is a reason to think that, maybe not appropriate for absolutely everyone out there, but I think the vast majority of people, particularly given the statistics of what we know people eat in the United States and in industrialized countries, most people would reap tremendous health benefits from eating more whole, plant-based dietary fiber. Now, processed foods, I think, is this other dimension where you have all of these weird chemicals, artificial sweeteners, weird fats, a lot of refined, simple nutrients. The simple nutrients we've talked about, but we know that for instance, artificial sweeteners can have a massive negative impact on the gut microbiome and can lead us towards metabolic syndrome, actually. There's been beautiful work out of the Weizmann Institute on this. And then emulsifiers, these compounds that are put in processed foods to help them maintain shelf stability so things don't separate. And so all the the moisture content is retained appropriately. Many of these are known to disrupt the mucus layer, and as soon as you start disrupting that barrier, that can lead you in the direction of inflammation and in animal models, we know that can lead towards metabolic syndrome as well. So there's components of processed food, that are, when studied in isolation known to have a direct negative impact on gut biology in the microbiota. - Yeah, the mention of artificial sweeteners interesting. I confess it's a third rail on... Talking about artificial sweeteners, there are two camps it seems, or at least two camps. One that say artificial sweeteners are not detrimental at all. Another that says they're very detrimental, mainly based on the mouse studies. And then there are people in the middle that are... I put myself in that category. I drink the occasional diet soda, I don't consume them in large volume, but I'm sort of in the middle there. And so I just throw that out there, because I know immediately people are jumping on that, but I will just mention there's some recent data out of Diego Bohorquez's lab at Duke University that the neurons that live in the gut mucose of these neuro pod cells can actually distinguish between artificial and true sweet... Sugar versus artificial sweeteners. They send different patterns of neural signals up to the brain, and the brain circuitry seems strongly impacted. So I think that as the data emerge, we're hearing more and more of these artificial sweeteners. Either are problematic or at least are signaling different events in the gut. I do want to make sure that we distinguish artificial sweeteners from non-caloric plant-based sweeteners. - Yeah. - And this is based on a mistake that I've made over and over again on the podcast where I'll just kind of lump artificial sweeten into one big category, and then I'll mention stevia. So what about plant-based sweeteners that are not artificial, they weren't manufactured in a laboratory, like saccharin or sucralose, or aspartame? Do we know anything about plant-based, non caloric sweeteners or low caloric sweeteners? - Very little. A lot of those have a lot more bang for the buck. They're incredibly sweet, so it takes a really small amount for them to trigger a huge amount of sweetness. And so it's, depending upon the mechanism of action by which these sweeteners that are not sugar are impacting our biology. It may be that those are actually less negative or more healthy than the ones that are artificial, just because it requires less of them in the food for us to perceive that sweet taste. It may also be that because they're... I don't think that everything is that's natural is better, necessarily than things that are artificial, but it may be that because of kind of evolutionary exposure to these compounds in our diet, historically there are, I think, traditional populations that use these, for instance, to sweeten different foods, that our bodies just know how to deal with those compounds better than the ones that are synthetic. But I think the studies still need to be done. - Do you actively avoid artificial sweeteners? Sucralose, aspartame, saccharin? You personally. - Yeah. So I do, I avoid them, but I'm not... So I work closely with my wife, Erica, as you know. We were in the lab together and we wrote this book, "The Good Gut," where we kind of document our journey in changing our lifestyle, dietary habits, choices we make based on the research as we've gotten to know it in the gut microbiota over the past 15 years. And I think that one of the lessons that we've learned is that just doing things in moderation makes it a lot easier, and doing things slowly makes it a lot easier. So there are very few rules that I have that are hard and fast. I'm a pretty flexible eater. I don't believe that having a diet Coke will somehow cascade into some terrible disease or something like that. I try to avoid them, I don't really like the flavor of them. I'm super sensitive to the nuances of the flavor, even with the stevia and mogrosides from monk fruit and stuff like that. The off flavors are really hard for me to deal with. But also in this journey of changing our diet... Like when we started off in microbiome research, I was in the habit of in the afternoons having a sweet, a muffin or a cookie, or something like that. And when we started to realize that we should be eating less sweets and eating more dietary fiber, this was an incredibly difficult change for me to make. I was just wired to kind of crave this- - Classic scientist. Scientists love the pastry in the afternoon and the coffee. - Yeah, yeah. - And in the old days it used to be a cigarette too. - Right, exactly. - When I started my training, a lot of people still smoked - Yeah, right. - And it was only during my post-doctoral training that they eliminate smoking on campuses, and productivity took a trough for a while, until these people developed other tools to focus their attention. - Exactly, exactly. So there is this kind of need, and then once you have an ingrained behavior, and maybe things that are addictive, it becomes incredibly difficult to break that habit. And so I would say, gradually over the course of like, five or more years, we have migrated our diet away from sweet foods to things that are less sweet. And it's been a journey, it's been a slow process, but we've gotten to the point now where we've just retrained our pallets. And it's amazing how this happens now, where I'll have something that is something that I would've used to have like daily. And it's unpalatable. I just can't deal with the sweetness of it. And I certainly avoid artificial sweeteners, but I also avoid just sweet things in general that have sugar in them, just because they now, was originally, I was trying to be disciplined and trying to change my diet, but now they just don't taste good to me. - Yeah, likewise, I completely lost my appetite for sugar at the turn of the last year, and I don't know how to explain it, but the way I... Even though I don't have a mechanistic explanation, I say I like sweet people, I don't like sweet food anymore. I just don't. I have not lost my appetite for fatty foods. I love cheese and certain meats for me, I blame my Argentine lineage is, is I gravitate towards them. But in any case, avoiding processed foods, probably avoiding sugars, emulsifiers, these kinds of things. And for people listening or watching, we're not setting up strict guidelines. We're just bouncing around the carnival that is the microbiome and nutrition, because I think that we hear this everywhere, eat this, don't eat that, or this is best for microbiome, or worse for microbiome. But I'm hearing fiber again and again, so we're going to come back to fiber, but I want to make sure that we close the hatch on this issue of fasting and cleansing. Based on your answer earlier, it sounds to me like it is not necessary to do a cleanse or fast prior to an attempt to repopulate the microbiome. In other words, if I want to make my microbiome healthier, it sounds like I don't have to try and flush all the current microbiota out of there first, is that correct? - Yeah, it's a very good question, and I don't mean to suggest that those things are known to be terrible. Or I would just say, the studies haven't been done. And to me, wiping out this microbial community, unless it's done with some sort of... Unless it's done in an informed way, and we don't really have the information for how that would be done. It just seems like playing the lottery a little bit. - Okay. - And so I think... I don't want to say that those are... It may be that when the study is done, those are shown to be amazing, but I just don't think we have the data to know that yet. So it's somewhat of an arbitrary thing. If somebody out there feels way better when they do this, and are not experiencing problems with it, then maybe it's the right thing for them. But I certainly can't say that it's something great to do. I can't imagine a future where as the microbiome gets incorporated into this emerging paradigm of precision health, you go into a clinic, somebody types your microbiome and says, oh, there's this huge, massive misconfiguration. You have all these engrafted bacteria that are residents in your gut microbiome that are sending out molecules that are not good for your health. It would be good if we do a mass-reprogramming of it. The way that we do that is we flush your gut, and we actually give a light antibiotic treatment to try to kill everything that's there. And then we repopulate with this other consortium of microbes that we've studied and know are healthy, know are compatible with your human genome, and can be reinforced with a diet that we know is good for you. We'll install those microbes, we'll help you along in the diet so you know how to nourish those microbes, and that will be the way that will reconfigure your gut microbiome. So I can't imagine a future where that sort of flushing, or cleansing is part of something for repopulating the gut. But right now it seems a little half-baked to me. Yeah. - Great. I'd love to talk about fiber and fermented foods, because you and Chris had a really, what I think is a really interesting and exciting paper at the end of last year about comparing the inflammatome, so inflammatory markers of people who ate a certain amount of fiber, or a certain amount of these fermented foods. This study is amazing for several reasons, but almost as amazing as how diverse the interpretation of this study was in the media. If ever there was a study that was kind of hijacked by different priority schemes out there- - Yeah. - It's this study. So you performed the study with Chris, and your postdocs, and graduate students and staff. What are the major conclusions and what sorts of directives, if any, emerged from this study? And I'll just preface this again by saying, if I wasn't clear, some news report said, "Ah, this means fiber is not important." - Yeah. - And then others said, this means fermented foods and fiber are important. And others said, fermented foods are the thing, and the only thing. It was all over the place. - Yep. - And one of the reasons for doing this podcast at all is so that we can go straight to the people who perform the work. - Fantastic. - And even though I'm certainly not an expert in microbiome, to give you the opportunity to share with me, and me to ask the kinds of questions that have... I have zero agenda. I do like sauerkraut, I do drink the occasional kombucha. I do like low sugar, not so sweet forms of fermented foods. So I would be delighted if fermented foods are good for me, but I have no stake in the fermented and food industry. - Yeah, absolutely. - Yeah. - Yeah, yeah. Great. Yeah, wonderful, and an important note there is the one you pointed out, that this is an incredible collaboration with Christopher Gardner's lab, and a bunch of people. Erica Sonnenburg helped lead this study, and then tons of, like you were saying, postdoc staff and other people at Stanford, and then wonderful participants that were part of this study. So a huge team effort. Let me tell you, before I dive into that study, let me take a step back, because I think the reason that we did this study, and kind of Christopher's group, and our group has started to pursue this line of looking at dietary interventions and how they impact our microbiome, how they impact human biology, goes back to this kind of epiphany that we we had while studying the gut microbiome. Because I think when we started studying it at Stanford, we were thinking about it as this kind of newly appreciated aspect of our biology, almost like finding an organ that we didn't know was there, and starting to think about like all the drug targets that were there. Can we go in with small molecule drugs, and think of ways to manipulate this community to ameliorate disease? And this is largely the mindset of Western medicine, and largely born out of the era of infectious disease. You wait for an infection to start a bacterial infection, you treat with antibiotics, and that's the way medicine is practiced, and that's become less successful over time, as we've moved into this era of inflammatory, Western diseases, and with the exception of the current pandemic that's sweeping the world, largely moved out of the era of infectious diseases, at least infectious bacterial diseases, that this paradigm of waiting for diseases to appear, and come into the clinic is not really very effective in the context of inflammatory, Western diseases, autoimmune diseases, metabolic syndrome, heart diseases, and inflammatory disease. The list goes on and on. And so we started to think a lot about like, how can we get out in front of this? How can we think about preventative ways of dealing with this crisis of metabolic and inflammatory diseases? And this tremendous, beautiful body of literature started to come forward in the field about 10 years ago that showed that the gut microbiome is absolutely critical to modulating our immune status. So if you change the microbiome, you can fundamentally change how the immune system operates. And we know that the immune system is at the basis of a lot of these disease, inflammatory, chronic diseases. And so it brought up this possibility that maybe the fact that we're not nourishing this community well enough, maybe the fact that it's deteriorated over time due to all of the things that go along with an industrialized lifestyle, antibiotics and so forth. Maybe we have a microbiome right now in the industrialized world that is setting our immune system at a set point, simmering inflammation that's driving us towards these inflammatory diseases. And wouldn't it be wonderful if we could figure out how to use diet specifically, but just kind of learn the rules of how to reconfigure both the composition and function of our gut microbiome, so that inflammation was different in our bodies, so that each one of us was less likely to go on and to develop an inflammatory disease, leading to better longevity and health over the course of our life. And so we were studying this in actually in mouse models, and realizing that we really needed to start doing human studies. We needed to start studying microbiome in humans, and because we were studying diet, we knew that this was something we could go in and do right away. We didn't have to apply for FDA approval for a drug before we could do a human study, we could just start doing human dietary interventions, longitudinally monitoring the immune system, and the microbiome, and starting to put the pieces together of what is it in diet that can change our microbiome in a healthy way, help us define what a healthy microbiome is, and monitor the immune system in great detail. And so there were really two critical components of this, in addition to our microbiome expertise. One was Christopher Gardner's group. We wanted to do these human studies, but we're absolutely terrified of humans. We work with mice. Humans are terrifying in many ways. - But they house themselves, you don't have to pay- - That's true. - You don't have to pay for their housing. - That's true. - For those that can afford housing, of course, yeah. - Yeah, sadly, just for that portion of the population. So Christopher's group were, they were our masters at working with human populations. And then the other wonderful thing that we have at Stanford is this Human Immune Monitoring Center run by Mark Davis and Holden Maecker. They started this beautiful center for allowing people to do immunology in humans. Critical element, because a lot of the mouse studies don't translate well to humans. So if you can do the studies in humans, similar to how we were thinking about the microbiome, you learn something that you know is relevant to humans. And so having that immune profiling capability where we can monitor hundreds to thousands of different parameters in the immune system, longitudinally in people, from a blood draw, and not just know if CRP goes up or if interleukin-6 goes up or down, but to be able to see all these facets of the immune system change in concert, as we're changing the microbiome with diet was really a key component of this. And so our flagship study, supported by wonderful donors. So this actually isn't funded by typical foundations and national institutes of health, it was funded by philanthropy. We wanted to understand if we put people on a high fiber diet, how would that affect their microbiome immune system? And if we put them on a high food diet, a diet rich in live microbes and all the metabolites that are present from fermentation and foods, how would that change microbiome in immune system? - Could you give us some examples of what those diets look like? And were you changing their basal diet, or were you just adding things on top of what they were already eating? 'Cause it's hard to change people's diets. - It's very hard. - And then you have to trust that they actually do it and they're not sneaking, and- - Totally, yeah. We started this center for human microbiome studies at Stanford for doing a lot of these studies, and a portion of the studies, we do focus on supplements, probiotics, microbes delivered in pill form. Prebiotics, which are purified forms of fiber. And in those cases, we actually can have placebo groups, because it's more like a drug study, and we don't change people's diets. So we can just administer this on top of what they're doing. So in a way, they're a lot more controlled, but it's not food. When you start doing food studies, you can't do a placebo group, 'cause people know what they're eating. And the other problem is that it's really hard to just change one thing, because as soon as you start adding something, people usually eliminate something else. So the idea was to basically give these people simple instructions for in the case of the high fiber diet, just increasing plant-based fiber. So can you eat more whole grains, more legumes, more vegetables, nuts, get the fiber up in the range of, from 15 to 20 grams per day, up to over 40 grams per day. So can you double or more the amount of fiber that you eat per day, knowing that that would have a tremendous impact on a lot of other facets of their diet. They eat less meat, animal-based protein, less animal-based fats as a product of this. I will say that getting back to Christopher's rule for a healthy diet, a lot of the macro nutrient changes that we saw in their diet were consistent with healthy changes in diet. Less saturated fat, less animal-based protein, more plant-based protein. So a lot of changes that are known to be beneficial came in concert with just telling people, eat a high fiber diet, high plant-based fiber diet. The people that were eating the high fermented food diet, they were instructed to basically eat foods that you could buy at a grocery store that were naturally fermented and contain live microbes. And so this largely consisted of yogurt, kefir, sauerkraut, kimchi, some fermented vegetables, brined, fermented vegetables. - Pickles. - Pickles, things like that. One of the things that I think is a pitfall in choosing fermented foods is, you can go down the canned food aisle and there's this huge section of pickles, and jars that are canned. Those are not fermented foods. Those are are cucumbers that they've put in a acidic acid and vinegar to reconstitute that fermented flavor, but there's no live microbes involved in that. And even sauerkrauts in the canned food aisle, even if they were naturally fermented, quite often they're not. Quite often they're just brined in vinegar. But even if they are naturally fermented, all the microbes are killed prior to canning or during the process of canning. So what we use for this study and if you want to have live fermented foods that contain live microbes, you need to buy those out of the refrigerated section, essentially. - And I'm really glad you pointed this out, because you can find sauerkraut on the non-refrigerated shelf, that is indeed non fermented. A lot of fermented that are available in the US can be high in sugar. So was there any instruction as to getting people to make sure that they were consuming yogurts that weren't loaded with sugar? - Yep. - Or did you let them just select for the stuff in the cold section that is fermented? - No, super important point. We instructed people to eat non-sweetened yogurts. I think a huge pitfall in this area is you can have a yogurt loaded with bacteria, kind of the base of what's healthy, and then a ton of like artificial flavoring and sugar loaded on top of that. Manufacturers put a ton of sugar in after the fact to kind of mask the sour taste fermented foods, which is hard for some people to become accustomed to. When we were switching to more fermented foods, our daughters were young at that point, we would take plain yogurt, which they didn't like just neat, we would mix in a little maple syrup or honey, just a little bit, and gradually we would reduced that over time to the point where they're pallet adjusted, and now they just really like plain yogurt. But it is, I think, getting used to that sour flavor is difficult, but people really should try to stay away from those fermented foods that are loaded with sugar. And that's what we instructed people in this study. - And beer was not included. - Right. - The number of people that asked, when I did a brief thing on social media about this study, and hopefully I got it right. I think I did. But people just ask about beer. I'm not a drinker, so for me, beer has no appeal anyway. But beer is fermented, correct? But were they instructed to avoid beer or to drink beer? - Just to go with their normal dietary habits, but that did not count as a fermented food. - And kombucha was, as I recall- - Kombucha was, and kombucha can have small amounts of alcohol in it. Yeah, kombucha actually was one of the major things that people drank during, or consumed during the fermented food phase. And the deal with beer is that there may be beneficial properties of the microbial communities in naturally fermented beer, but most of the beer that we buy, again, is canned and filtered, and there's no live microbes there. So very different than if you siphon it off of your home brew and drink it, probably, than if you buy it in a store. - I will get to the results of the study in just one moment. But I want to say, a lot of people shy away from the high quality fermented foods, because they can be quite costly. And I'll just refer people to a resource in Tim Ferriss's book, "The 4-Hour Chef," he actually gives an excellent recipe for making your own sauerkraut, which basically involves cabbage and water and salt, but you have to do it properly, because you can grow some, not necessarily lethal, but some somewhat dangerous bacteria if you don't scrape off the top layer properly, but he gives beautiful instructions for how to do this in vats. We've started doing this at home now, actually, is we got a, just ceramic vat. And you can make large amounts of truly fermented sauerkraut just from cabbage water and salt, if you're willing to follow the protocol. And if you're interested in science, that protocol looks a lot like what you'll do for most of your graduate career, except maybe some sequencing too. So anyway, just to refer people to a source that's very low cost. - Yeah. - Compared to buying the high quality, fermented foods. Even kombuchas, for some people, it's like $5 a bottle- - Totally. - Only this much. And if you consume liquids the way I consume them, that's just the the start, so- - Yeah. But if you can get your hands on a SCOBY, kombucha is another one that's super simple. - You can grow your own. - You can just make your own, and it's super easy to do. I make it, I constantly have a batch of kombucha going at home. It's a SCOBY, a symbiotic community of bacteria and yeast. You brew tea, you add sugar to it, and you put the SCOBY in, and you wait a week or two, depending upon the temperature, and then you just move the SCOBY or over to a new batch, and you your old, what the SCOBY was in is kombucha, and it's wonderful. - I love it, I would love it if members of this audience would start to make their own kombucha and sauerkraut. I've been having so much fun. I don't do it, but it's done in our home. I don't go anywhere near the food production, and it's for everyone's benefit. So how much fermented food were they consuming? 'Cause you mentioned the number of grams approximately of fiber, but was it in servings, ounces? How many times a day? Early day, late day? - Right, yeah. So we had a wonderful dietician instructing people for this, and her name's Dalia Perelman, and she really was the key and is the key for many of our studies for getting people to eat differently. And the general instructions were for people to eat as much fermented foods as possible, more is better. And the reason is that with this initial study, we really wanted to maximize our chance of seeing a signal if there was something biological going on, with the idea that if the dose was excessive and not easily achievable by a lot of people in the end, we can go back and and say, okay, this is the point at which we lose the biological signal. But people during the height of the intervention phase, the intervention phase was six weeks, during the height of that, were up over six servings, on average, per day of fermented foods. So kind of two servings at each meal. And the ounces or weight or size, it really depended on what the fermented food was. And we just told them to stick to what was a recommended dose on the package that they were buying, For kombucha, it'd be like a six to eight ounce glass. Sauerkraut like a half cup, or something like that, and same with yogurt. - Great. So what were the results? - Yeah, so the results astounded us in a way, but then thinking more deeply, and it'll be evident even after I explain it in the context of this conversation, likely why we saw the results we saw. The results were astounding because our hypothesis going into this was that the high fiber diet was going to give the massive signal. We know that this is the big deficiency in the Western diet. All the mouse studies have told us that high fiber really leads to a much healthier microbiota, it can lead to positive changes in the immune system. And in fact, even when we had a limited... We had wonderful donor support, but still a limited amount of money when we started this study. My lab was really very eager to do the high fiber part of this really well, and Christopher kind of had to twist our arms to do the fermented food side of it. And we thought it was kind of quirky and neat, live microbes should be exciting, let's try it. So we put that in and it turns out that we were very thankful that he twisted our arms, because it was that high fermented food arm that really gave us the big signal. Even though our hypothesis was that the high fiber was going to lead to more short-chain fatty acids produced in the gut, more diverse microbiota, less inflammation in the immune system, we didn't see that across the cohort. We actually saw very individualized responses to the dietary fiber, and I'll come back to what those responses were. The big signal really was in the fermented food group. We saw all the things that you would hope to see in a Western microbiota in western human. We saw this increase in microbiota diversity over the course of the six weeks while they were consuming the fermented foods. And we can't always say that higher diversity is better when it comes to our microbial communities. We know there are cases for instance, bacterial vaginosis, where higher diversity is actually indicative of a disease state, but we know in the context of the gut, and for people living in the industrialized world, higher diversity is generally better. We know that there's a spectrum of diversity. People with higher diversity generally are healthier. If you can push your diversity higher, you're in better shape. And so we saw that increase in diversity. And then the major question is, what happened to the immune system as these people were increasing their gut microbiota diversity through the fermented foods? So we did this massive immune profiling, and we see a couple dozen immune markers, inflammatory markers decrease over the course of the study. So we measured these at multiple time points throughout the course of the study, and there's kind of this set stepwise reduction in things like interleukin-6, and interleukin-12, a variety of famous inflammatory mediators. And then even if you go into the immune cells and you start looking at their signaling cascades, we see that those signaling cascades are less activated at the end of the study compared to the beginning of the study, indicating in attenuation of inflammation. So kind of exactly what we would hypothesize would lead to less propensity for inflammatory disease over time. That's a huge extension of a very short study and- - How long was this study again? - So the complete protocol I think was 14 to 17 weeks, or something like that. The actual intervention phase consisted of a four week ramp and then a six week maintenance period. So the intervention itself was 10 weeks, but there were six weeks of really kind of hardcore, high levels of fiber or fermented foods. - Yeah, and I'm glad you mentioned the ramp, 'cause my experience with fermented foods is that you, it can be beneficial to give the system an opportunity to act acclimate. I mean, if you consume a giant bowl of sauerkraut, it's not going to be the worst day and night of your life, but you'll know you did. - Totally. - We'll just leave it at that. And so you want to kind of acclimate to it. - Absolutely. - I'm at the point now where, some people might think this is gross, but after I exercise, I've been sweating a lot, I like the saltiness of the... I actually drink the liquid that the sauerkraut has been stewing in, and I get, I like to think that I consume some fermentation that way, it's salty, it as kind of a post-training replenishment. But if I had done that six months ago, straight off, I think it would've been pretty rough on my system. I started taking little bits of it and then adding it each day. - Totally, and so both with the fermented foods and the fiber, it's well known that this kind of gradual ramping is a really important way of mitigating bloating, and other digestive discomfort that can happen when your microbiome reconfigures and starts fermenting more, and changing community members. So you should take that ramp at your own pace. If something seems to be going wrong, just kind of level off, stay there. We did this in a very delicate way to get people up to the high dose. The brine, just a tangent here for a second, that was actually one of the products that we had people use in the fermented food phase. There's actually a product called Gut Shots, which is just bring that they've marketed. We actually are now studying it in the lab. I just actually, before this came from a lab meeting where a GI fellow in my lab is actually putting Gut Shots, sterilized gut microbe, or the fermentation microbes removed or present into mice and looking at changes in their mucosal immune system. So we're studying this in detail now, because it's a rich source of lactate and a bunch of other interesting metabolites. - I love that my weird behavior is inadvertently being studied at Stanford Medicine. I want to just mention something about the Gut Shots. Those are sold as a drink. Those also, just for certain listeners in different budgets, they can be very expensive if you really think about... Some of them are exceedingly expensive. But what I described before with making your own kombuchas, it's not quite brining, but the homemade sour sauerkraut, that protocol is out there, as I mentioned in Tim's book, "The 4-Hour Chef." And you get a lot of the brining from that, an almost endless amount. A cautionary note, I once went into the refrigerator and saw something similar to Gut Shot, it wasn't Gut Shot. And I drank the whole 12 ounce bottle, and realized that it was 24 servings. And that's where I got my initial experience with what it is to not do a ramp up phase. - Yeah. I do not recommend doing that. Some of these, it's very potent, it seems, and you can consume even a half an ounce or an ounce. - Yeah, I mean, very potent from the standpoint of fermentation, but also very salty. So there's a lot of effects that can.... Yeah. - Yeah, don't do what I do, - Yeah. - At least not at the outset. So that is an experienced warning. So they did this, as I recall, there was a swap condition or there was a halt condition. So you did controls, right? It wasn't just comparing groups. You had individuals in who were initially in one group or the other moved to a different group, correct? Or to stop and then return. - Yeah, we actually just did a stop and followed them during a washout phase. And the ideal situation for dietary interventions like this are to do crossover studies, as you're suggesting. We've recently completed a ketogenic versus Mediterranean diet intervention- - Are those data published yet? - Not yet, but Christopher's been Tweeting a lot of these data and there's a paper in revision right now. So if you go to Christopher Gardner's Twitter feed, you'll be able to find him reporting some of the early results of this study. - Can you give us a snippet of, was there a superior... Just give us a, you don't have to tell us which one, but was there a superior condition of either Mediterranean versus ketogenic? - So the metabolic effects of these, it's a beautiful study. I should let his group comment on that. The microbiota data we actually are just generating now. So the study that his group has put together from this is largely independent of the microbiota data. - Right. - And now we're doing a more in depth analysis, and I'll have more to say about that the future. - We'll return to that, yeah. - But it's a super exciting study, because it is one of these where people eat a certain way. And what's really beautiful about this is we even got food delivered for part of the intervention. So we had complete control over what they at least had available to eat. And then the second phase, they make the food on their own. And then we cross over and do the same thing. And so that's really like, if you have a good enough budget, the right way to do a study like this. For this, we didn't have the time or money to do a crossover, but we did do a washout phase where people, we didn't make them stop eating, whatever, if they were enjoying it, but we monitored. And there was some recidivism where there was a decrease in fiber fermented food. And we could see, for instance, diversity start to plateau and reverse in many of these people. So there does appear to be a need for maintenance of the intervention to maintain the perceived health benefits that we were measuring. - Great. We will provide a link to the study in the caption, and thank you for that very clear and thorough description, from one of the investigators involved in the study. It's great to go direct to the source. Anecdotally, were there movements in mood, in resistance to colds and infection during the course of the study? And this is kind of a prelude to where I'm headed next, which is there is a tremendous amount of interest in the so-called gut-brain axis. But also I want to make sure that we talk about how these microbes and the conditions they're establishing in the gut are creating positive or negative health effects. I mean, basically how signals get out of the gut. - Totally. Yeah. - So I certainly notice that when I'm eating more fermented foods, or there's probiotics in drinks I consume and so forth, that I feel quote, unquote, air quotes, completely subjective, I feel better. - Yeah. - I wish there was an objective measure of feeling better. But I seem to think more clearly, sleep better, mood, et cetera, and I know I'm not alone in that. And any time I've taken harsh antibiotics, I feel worse, but then again, I'm usually taking them because I'm feeling bad about something else, right? I don't take them just because. So did people say they were feeling better in any way? And if so, what did you have observe? And again, we're highlighting these as anecdata. - Yeah, totally. We, as part of this effort to look at how dietary interventions affect our health and wellbeing, and so forth, and microbiome immune system, we interact with a lot of people who have read our book, or kind of have become microbiome enthusiasts. And have implemented a lot of these changes in their personal life. And I hear the same thing that you're saying, Andrew, that tons of people say they have more energy. They think more clearly, they sleep better, their family is nicer to each other, like the number of crazy things. And it's really hard to uncouple, like, is this because these people have taken charge now of what they're eating and just feel better in general for being in control of what they're doing, or is there this cascading set of effects that are actually impacting our... Kind of emanating from the gut-brain axis. And so we actually implemented a bunch of questionnaires and even a cognitive test to try to get at some of this. And I should say, the list of this goes on and on. There are people who claim that their complexion improves, and that their allergies... And there's probably all sorts of ripple effects. If you can affect your inflammation, we know that you can affect your cognition, we know that you can affect your skin and inflammation that's occurring on your skin. So I really think that there is a basis for a lot of those anecdotes. It may just be hard to see in a short study and in a small cohort of people over a short period of time, but we didn't really see significant things associated with cognition and moods and all of the things that we were testing for which, yeah, there could be a variety of explanations for that. We also have a standardized stool measure that people use, and there was less constipation, better bowel movements over the course of both of these interventions. So it did seem like bowel habits improved, which a lot of times can lead to better moods, but that we weren't able to measure. - That the classic psychoanalyst would have a few field day with that. What sorts of interesting things did you observe in the fiber group? Because it's clear that that group yielded some unexpected findings in both directions. Things you expected to see, you didn't see to the same amplitude as you did in the fermented food group, but I'm guessing you also saw some very interesting things in the fiber group. - Totally, yeah. So we started looking at the data in more detail when we didn't see the cohort-wide response. And one of the things we observed is that in measuring all these immune parameters, there appeared to be three different groups of immune responses that we were seeing. One group that got overall less inflammatory, and then two other groups that kind of had a mixed result, partly more inflammatory, partly less inflammatory in all these markers that we were looking at. And when we started digging into like, what aspect of the biology of those people dictated or predicted which group they fell into, the really interesting part is the people with highest diversity gut microbiomes to start the study were the ones that were most likely to have the decreases in inflammation. And so data seemed to be telling us that if you start off with a diverse microbiota, maybe one that's better equipped to degrade a wide variety of dietary fiber, you're more likely to respond positively to it. If you have a very depleted gut microbiome, you're not as likely to be able to respond to it. And thinking back to that experiment that we talked about before with the multi-generational loss of fiber-fermenting microbes in mice that were fed a Western diet, it may be that many of us in the industrialized world have a microbiome that's so depleted now, that even if we consume a high fiber diet, at least for a short period of time, we don't have the right microbes in our gut to degrade that fiber. And this has actually been observed by other groups, beautiful study out of University of Minnesota, looking at immigrants, coming to the United States. And within nine months, but certainly over the course of years, immigrants that come here lose a lot of the diversity in their gut microbiome, but a lot of the fiber-degrading capacity in their gut microbiome too. So it could be that over time, this becomes a one way street, and it's hard for us to recover microbes that actually can degrade the fiber. And I think that this probably intersects with sanitation in our environment, and the fact that we don't have access to new microbes that might help us degrade the fiber. That we actually have lost these microbes, and they're in some ways irrecoverable without deliberate reintroduction of fiber-degrading microbes. - I can recall from childhood, there were kids that would eat dirt. - Yeah. - And snails and stuff. That just sounds totally disgusting, bu kids covered with mud maybe not so much anymore. And certainly during the pandemic, there's been and a lot more use of these hand sanitizers, that prior to that, people seemed pretty spooked about, but then obviously they prioritized them. Well, you have children. Do you encourage them to... When they were young, did you encourage them to interact with pets and dirt and- - Absolutely, yeah. - Stuff in the environment, provided that stuff wasn't immediately toxic? - Exactly. So this is really... It's a continual cost-benefit analysis, I think. I will say that with the pandemic now, and certainly just with infectious diseases in general, it's really important to be aware of the possibility for compromising your health through the spread of germs. And so that is just, hand washing is important, and we have to be careful with the spread of germs. But I do think that the sanitization of our environment has gone overboard with various things being impregnated with antibiotics, shopping carts and things like that, and toothbrushes. It's like antibiotics and things for killing microbes are everywhere. And when we were raising... When our daughters were young and we were making these decisions, the calculations that we would make were really one, how likely are they to encounter a disease-causing microbe? If we've been out on a hike or in our garden, just kind of working in the dirt or whatever, maybe it's not as important to wash your hands before you have lunch, even if there's a little bit of dirt on them. If they've been in a public playground where maybe other kids with germs, or maybe even chemicals like pesticides and herbicides that are being used, maybe it's more important than to wash your hands. Certainly if you've been in the grocery store or on the subway, probably a good idea to wash your hands. So I think you really need to think about kind of the context of it. Exposure to microbes from the environment is likely an important part of educating our immune system, and keeping the proper balance in our immune system. And it's just a matter of figuring out the right way to do that safely. And it may be the fermented food result that we saw is a way of tapping into those same pathways, kind of an environmental exposure to microbes that's safe. - Interesting. I'd like to touch on how signals get from the gut to the rest of the body. And we probably don't have time to go into all the systems that benefit from having a diverse microbiome or healthy microbiome. But we talked about the immune system. There's active signaling and transport from the gut, all along its length, as far as I know, into the bloodstream, into other organs and tissues. So for the immune system, it seems straightforward. It could reduce the amount or number of inflammatory cytokines, like IL-6 and so forth, maybe increase the anti-inflammatory cytokines, like IL-10 and others. But we know there's a gut-brain access of neurons that literally talk in both directions between brain and gut. But let's say I'm eating my fermented foods, I'm doing all the right things, and my gut is diverse and I have all the goodies at all the right places. How is it that fact that those microbiota are thriving is conveyed to the rest of the body? Because they're in there doing their thing, and I don't know that they have a mind, but they're probably not thinking of taking care of me, Andrew. But I feel better, or I might get sick less often, or combat any illness more quickly. How is that actually happening? Is it that the microbiomes stay restricted to the gut, but the signaling molecules are all downstream, in a downstream way, are making good or bad things happen? Or is there some sort of direct recognition at the body level, or are there cells in the body that are responding to, ah, the gut microbiome is healthy, and therefore I can make more of the good stuff, and less of the bad stuff, so to speak. - Yeah, great. You're right, it's super complex. There's a huge array of ways that our body perceives both the microbes and the molecules that they produce in our gut, and the molecules they produce are, of course, a product of what microbes are there, and then what they receive as kind of metabolic inputs, what we're eating and what other microbes are present in the environment, providing molecules to them. So, it's this complex matrix, but we... Probably the simplest place to start is just the immune system. We have an immune system that, the vast majority of immune cells in our body are located in our gut, just because there's such a dense population of microbes there that have... We consider them beneficial microbes, but they're only beneficial if they're in the right spot in the gut. As soon as they mislocalize, we know that they can become opportunistic pathogens. And so the immune system really playing an important role to keep with them in place is essential for this system not moving into a disease space. The immune system has a variety of ways of monitoring what microbes are there. They're actually specialized to structures in the gut known as peyer's patches that actually take up microbes. They actually allow microbes to transit into this population of immune cells in a very controlled way, so that that set of immune cells becomes educated as to what microbes are just on the other side of the barrier. - Wow, kind of like a border patrol. - Exactly, yeah. So they bring them in, they fingerprint them, and then have kind of this set of responses ready to go if needed. - [Andrew Huberman] Amazing. - There are other cells known as dendritic cells, special type types that actually send long arms, these processes out into the lumen of the gut, and do the same thing, take up microbes, bring them back in and sample them. In addition to these direct sampling mechanisms, the cells that line the gut have a huge array of receptors, specialized proteins, that perceive patterns, molecular patterns that the microbes make. So things like endotoxin lipopolysaccharide, just the cell wall of the bacteria. We have specialized receptors that recognize those. If those signals become too profound, or if they're perceived in the wrong place, that can stimulate an inflammatory response. So there's all these ways of monitoring the membership, and where it is and how close it is. But then there's this whole other set of ways of perceiving metabolic activity, and what's happening in the gut. And you mentioned before, these cell types, that express taste receptors in the gut and have ways of sampling dietary components. They're the same types of, or analogous cells in our gut that are perceiving metabolites produced by the microbiota so that our bodies can perceive what sort of metabolic activity is going on. And then in addition to that, there's this tremendously important nervous system that's sending signals back to the brain, dictating things like motility. Do I get rid of what's in here? Do I move it along quickly? What actually is happening? Do I need to interact with immune cells? So there's this really complex array of interactions between the different cell types. And then a lot of the cells that are in the gut, perceiving all of these signals, a lot of the immune cells can actually get up and leave. They can get into the blood, cycle through, and then home to other regions of the mucosal surfaces, so that mucosal surfaces are educated broadly against what's passing through our gut. So there's a variety of ways of cells communicating, and then a lot of the molecules that the microbiota makes can actually make their way into the bloodstream directly. And so the array of molecules is still being defined, we're trying to figure out what all these chemicals are. We've mentioned the short-chain fatty acids, but those are just the tip of the iceberg. They are really interesting compounds like indole derivatives and phenols, derived from amino acids, metabolized by gut microbes, taken up into the bloodstream. And then we further metabolize these, they become kind of co-microbe host metabolites, and then they can go on and bind to different receptors throughout our body, anywhere our bloodstream has access to, and start to trigger signaling cascades. - Is it known whether or not any of those molecules are small enough to cross the blood-brain barrier? Because the hypothesis it and the current thinking is that neurotransmitters manufactured in the gut, and signaling along the gut-brain axis, literally neurons talking back and forth electrically from brain to gut and gut to brain is what regulates things like mood, or at least in animal models. And there are some emerging human studies, improvement of symptoms in autism spectrum disorders, maybe even in ADHD. What I'm basically saying here is there is some evidence emerging that improving the gut microbiome can improve outcomes in psychiatric and developmental disorders. But what you're telling me is that the microbiota themselves are manufacturing chemicals that can make into the bloodstream. And therefore I'm asking if those chemicals can move from the bloodstream into the brain directly. It may not be a gut-brain axis via neurons. It actually could just be seepage of serotonin into the brain, or acetylcholine into the brain for that matter. - Totally, yeah. The biology of most of these molecules is not well understood, but certainly in like cerebral spinal fluid that's been analyzed, you can perceive these microbial metabolites, so they are there. - That's the answer, yeah. Some of them are getting across the barrier. - But so a really interesting thing is, I think a lot of these molecules are, if they're experienced at high enough doses, are toxic or have toxic properties. We know that a lot of these metabolites, when they make their way into the bloodstream, eventually are excreted through the kidneys in urine. So actually we can monitor the metabolism that's going on in your gut by actually looking at the metabolites that are present in your urine, because many of those originated in your gut, from your gut microbes. But people with kidney disease, whose kidneys' filtering processes is not functioning properly, actually build up high levels of many of these metabolites into the bloodstream, and that can lead to more of these molecules making it across the blood-brain barrier. And in fact, some of the transporters in the kidney that are responsible for shuttling these molecules out into urine, are also founded the blood-brain barrier for shuttling the molecules back into the bloodstream if they do get across. - Incredible. - And we know that mental fog one of the big symptoms of kidney disease, potentially because a lot of these metabolites accumulate in blood, and then make their way across the blood-brain barrier into, yeah, the central nervous system. - Amazing. I'm glad you mentioned mental fog. A few years back, there were some reports, some scientific reports and as a consequence in the media, that excessive intake of pill-form probiotics could create mental fog. I don't know if that ever took hold. And it raises a general question about pill form probiotics. I took them for a few years, just thinking that would be good for my gut microbiome, and then I switched to the fermented food thing, largely there's a consequence of the work that you and Chris published. But what what's the thought about probiotics for the typical person that's not recovering from a round of antibiotics or that has been prescribed them? I've heard that the species of microbiota that they proliferate might not be the species that we want to proliferate, but I've also heard that maybe that doesn't matter. So what's your general stance? They can be quite expensive. - Yeah. - Also, I know I've been talking about expense a lot today, but I always want to take into account that people are showing up to the table with a variety of budgets, and probiotics are one of the more expensive supplements out there. You can quickly get into the several hundreds of dollars per month if you're getting the quote, unquote, best quality ones. - Right. - And if they're actually causing brain fog, then I'm not sure I'd want to use them. - No, completely. And there's a ton of snake oil out there. People know that they... I think many of these companies are aware that they can prey off of people's fears and get a lot of money from them with absolutely no data to back up that their probiotic is doing anything. So I think the first thing to say is buyer beware, because it's a supplement market, it's largely unregulated. And that means that there are a lot of bad products out there, and a lot of products that even though they're not intended to be bad, just don't have great quality control. There have been several studies that have taken off the over the counter, just kind of off the shelf probiotics, surveyed what's in there based on sequencing and shown what is in there does not match what's on the label. - And that's true of many supplements, and unfortunately supplement companies. This is something we get into on the podcast a lot. There are reputable brands and they go through a lot of work to get things right, and there are many that just for whatever reason, it just doesn't match what's listed. - Exactly, and so there are places that probiotic companies can send their product to have it independently validated. So you want to look for that sort of validation on a product. There also are names that are just very well-known, and their reputations are on the line, so they probably invest a little bit more in quality control than maybe some of the other, lesser-known names. But there's a huge range of data on probiotics. And I think, the thing that we kind of recommend is, try to find good products and then experiment for yourself and see if you can find something that works for you. I know people who have experienced constipation and don't want to change their diet, and have found a probiotic that helps them with that. If you can find that right mix, great. That's wonderful. I would say that the data right now is not overwhelmingly positive for what probiotics do to the gut microbiota. So there have been some nice studies looking at the impact of probiotics on recovery after antibiotic treatment. And it appears to slow down the recovery of the mucosal microbiota. And some other studies that have where the big signal isn't seen, as you might hope, with a probiotic that's supposed to treat a different disease. There have been metaanalysis that do suggest in certain instances, recovery from antibiotics that there, even though it may cause your microbiome to recover more slowly, that it may actually prevent diarrheal disease, recovery from viral diarrheas, probiotics may help. But because there's such a huge range of products, and because each person is their own little caper when it comes to the microbiome, it's really hard to know whether there are great products for a given indication. The really good advice that I've heard is try to find a study that supports in... A really well designed study, and this is very hard for people who aren't scientists to evaluate. But so if you're experiencing a medical problem, or want to consult a doctor, that that might be helpful. But finding a study where a specific probiotic has successfully done whatever it is you're looking for, and then sticking with that probiotic is really the best recipe as a place to start in this space, I think. - And what about prebiotics? Is there are a number of reasons why, I can imagine, that prebiotics would be beneficial? Which essentially it's, you're pushing the fiber system, which we've talked a lot about today. - Yeah, yeah, absolutely. The studies that have been done on prebiotics, it's really kind of a mixed bag of results. There have been studies done with purified fibers where you actually see micro biodiversity plummet over the course of the study, because you get a very specific bloom in a small number of bacteria that are good at using that one type of fiber. And that's at the expense of all the other microbes that are in the gut. And so it's really hard to replicate with purified fiber what you'd get, for instance, at a salad bar, in terms of the array of complex carbohydrates that you would be exposing your microbiota to. And I think the kind of broad view of this in the field is that consuming a broad variety of plants, and all the diverse fiber that comes with that is probably better in fostering diversity in your microbiota than purified fibers. Now, there are, again, a lot of people who benefit from purified fibers, either for GI motility or for other aspects of GI health, problems that they've been experiencing. Again, I think it's the type of thing where you have to try to find the thing that's right for you. But there also are studies that suggest that if you layer rapidly fermentable fibers on top of a Western diet, you actually can result in weird metabolism happening in your liver, because you have this incredibly rapid fermentation of fiber along with a lot of fat coming into the system. At least that's the theory. And in a mouse study that was published a few years ago, they actually see that a subset of the mice develop hepatocellular carcinoma when they're fed a high dose prebiotic- - Liver cancer. - Liver cancer, a on top of a Western diet. So whether that's representative of human biology, we don't know, but purified fibers are definitely very different, both in terms of the diversity of structures, but also in terms of how rapidly they're fermented in the gut. Because if you are eating plants, the complex structures there really slow the microbes down in terms of fermentation, and you end up with a slow rate of fermentation over the length of your colon, as opposed to this big burst of fermentation that can happen if you eat something that is highly soluble and easily accessed by the microbes. - Interesting, so I guess, is it fair to come back to this idea? Try and avoid processed foods, the highly palatable foods, they're all sometimes super highly palatable foods. They're now called, that are packed with hidden sugars, emulsifiers. So it sounds like some fiber is good, and despite the outcome of the study, you identified that if you have the appropriate microbiota background, then one will even better to the fiber, maybe a longer ramp up phase for those folks, and then the fermented foods. 'Cause there's no reason why you can't do both. And as we've talked about before, a lot of fermented foods have fiber. So you can kill two birds with one stone. - Totally. And it could be that the diversity increase that we saw in the high fermented food group could be something that would aid the high fiber group. And so now we're planning another study coming up where we're doing high fiber, high fermented food, and then fiber plus fermented food, just to see if there's a synergistic effect there. - Great, I want to enroll, seriously. Although I guess I'm biased, 'cause I was sort of know where you're trying to.. Well, is it blood draws that you use to measure the inflammatome? - Exactly, so we do blood draws- - [Andrew Huberman] Blood draws don't lie, so that's good. - Yep, yep, right. - So you've covered a tremendous amount of information, and I'm incredibly grateful. This was a area of biology, that despite having learned a lot about through papers and going to talks and reading articles in the media has remained somewhat mysterious to me until today. You've given us a very vivid picture of how this system works. Where can people find out more about the work that you're doing? We can certainly provide links, and your wife who co-run your lab, you have a book on this topic. So could you tell us about the book, where we can learn more about Sonnennburg Lab and the work that you're doing? Maybe people will even try and enroll in some of these studies. - Yeah, fantastic, yeah. It'd be great if we could get people to enroll. We're always looking for willing participants. Yeah, so Erica, my wife and I wrote a book called "The Good Gut," and that really was a response to how we were changing our lives in response to being in the field, being very familiar with the research. Seeing that a lot of our friends that weren't studying that got microbiome, but were very well informed, many of them scientists, were not doing the same things we were doing. And it was very clear that it was just the lack of information funneling out of the field to other people. And so we were wanted to make that accessible to people who are not microbiome scientists. There's also a really interesting story. We were at a conference site that just has scientific conferences all summer long, week after week, after week, different fields. And so it's people that work there that are just dealing with these new groups coming in week after week and the week, we were there for a microbiome conference, people that work in the dining comments came up to us and they said, "What group is this? This is weird." And we're like, "What's weird?" And they said, "We can't keep the salad bar stocked." And it was very clear that nobody was doing what we were doing until we'd go to a microbiome conference and then everybody was doing the same stuff that we were doing. And so anyway, we wrote this book to talk about our personal journey and the science in the field, and yeah, just to lay a foundation for people if they want to start thinking about these changes. And then in terms of connecting with our research, certainly there's the Center for Human Microbiome Studies at Stanford, which is kind of our home base for doing a lot of these dietary and interventions. We list the studies there, give more information on what we're doing. And then we have a lab website too that people can go to and read more about our research. Yeah, and we're always looking for participants for our studies. - Great, well, we will provide links to all of those sources. And I just want to say, thank you so much for sharing with us your knowledge for the incredible work that you and Erica, your wife and Chris do, and are continuing to do. I think this is an area that, when I started my training, I heard a little bit about microbiota, and I always just thought that are people that work on infectious disease and all the bad stuff. So it's interesting and, and really important that people realize that we're carrying all this vital cargo and we need to take care of the cargo so it can take care of us. So thank you so much for your time and for the work you do, and I hope we can do it again. - Thanks Andrew. This was a great conversation. - Terrific. Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. Justin Sonnenburg, all about the gut microbiome and how to optimize your gut microbiome for health. Please check out the Sonnenburg Lab webpage, that's Sonnenburg, spelled S-O-N-N-E-N-B-U-R-G-L-A-B .stanford.edu. That's sonnenburglab.stanford.edu. They often recruit for studies exploring how different aspects of nutrition impact the got microbiome, much as we discussed during today's episode. Please also check out the book that he and his wife, Dr. Erica Sonnenburg wrote, called "The Good Gut." It's readily available on all the usual sites, such as Amazon and so forth. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. You can also leave a comment on Apple, if you like. The best place to leave us comments and feedback, however, is on our YouTube channel in the comment section. There you can suggest topics that you'd like us to cover in future episodes, guests that you'd like us to interview, and give us feedback about any of the material that you've heard or watched on this podcast. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. On many episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, including today, we discuss supplements. While supplements are certainly not necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and focus, and indeed gut microbiome support. The one issue with supplements, however, is that many of the supplement companies out there do not independently test their supplements. So there isn't tremendous confidence in all supplements that they contain the amounts of the ingredients that are listed on the bottle, and that the quality of the ingredients is where it should be. For that reason we've partnered with Thorne, that's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are known to have the very highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of the supplements and the amounts of the supplements listed on their bottles list what's actually in the containers, which is essential. If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, .com/u/huberman, and you can get 20% off any of the Thorne supplements that are listed there. Also, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. There I cover topics about science and science-based tools, some of which overlap with the content of this podcast, much of which is separate and unique from the content of this podcast. We also have a newsletter, it is called The Neural Network Newsletter. Once a month, we put out short summaries of podcast episodes and key takeaways, actionable takeaways in particular. You can sign up for that by going to hubermanlab.com. You can look in the menu, look for Neural Network Newsletter. You can download previous newsletters to take a look at what those are like and about even before signing up. If you subscribe, we don't share your information with anybody. The privacy policy is made very clear at hubermanlab.com. So thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about the gut microbiome, and last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 286 ---
Video ID: 15R2pMqU2ok
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=15R2pMqU2ok
Title: How to Enhance Your Gut Microbiome for Brain & Overall Health
Published: 2022-02-28 13:00:00 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the profound effect the gut has on the nervous system. I cover the structure and function of the gut-brain axis and the role of the gut microbiome in the brain and overall health. I describe how the gut controls hunger or satiety by affecting neurons in our brain. I also contrast the many pathways by which the gut influences the brain: direct vs. indirect pathways, chemical vs. mechanical, and fast vs. slow signaling. Additionally, I discuss what defines a healthy microbiome and how your lifestyle impacts the gut microbiome, including the effects of stress, fasting, antibiotics, pets, environment, prebiotics and probiotics. I address how different foods shape the gut microbiome, in particular, the emerging data that fermented foods can increase the diversity of healthy gut microbiota.  Throughout the episode, I explain peer-reviewed and textbook findings that reveal the critical role of the gut microbiome in supporting mental and physical health and I outline simple tools that anyone can use in order to enhance their gut microbiome health.

#HubermanLab #GutHealth #Microbiome

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Article Links
"The Emerging Biology of Gut-Brain Sensory Transduction": https://bit.ly/3HruBiE
"Mechanisms Underlying Microbial-Mediated Changes in Social Behavior in Mouse Models of Autism Spectrum Disorder": https://bit.ly/3hmq5Y2
"Association of Loneliness and Wisdom With Gut Microbial Diversity and Composition: An Exploratory Study": https://bit.ly/3spfYs2
"Emotional well-being and gut microbiome profiles by enterotype": https://go.nature.com/3tcLKYp
"Brain fogginess, gas and bloating: a link between SIBO, probiotics and metabolic acidosis": https://bit.ly/33YlsR9
"Gut-microbiota-targeted diets modulate human immune status": https://bit.ly/3vlkQQD
"The preference for sugar over sweetener depends on a gut sensor cell": https://go.nature.com/33X9zuA

Book Links
"The 4-Hour Chef: The Simple Path to Cooking Like a Pro, Learning Anything and Living the Good Life": https://amzn.to/3hqxkP0

Timestamps
00:00:00 Gut Microbiome  
00:03:02 AG1 (Athletic Greens), LMNT, InsideTracker 
00:06:55 Your Gut-Brain Axis 
00:09:44 Gut-Brain Anatomy
00:15:32 Microbiota vs. Gut Microbiome 
00:20:01 Roles of Gut Microbiome 
00:23:03 Neuropod Cells: (Subconscious) Tasting with Your Stomach 
00:34:13 Ghrelin: Slow Modulation of Your Brain in Hunger
00:38:02 Glucagon Like Peptide 1; GLP-1 
00:42:22 Tools: ‘Free Will’ & Food Cravings 
00:44:46 Mechanical Cues from Gut to Brain
00:49:05 Dopamines, Vomiting 
00:52:06 Indirect Signals from Gut Microbiota
00:59:30 Gut Microbiome “Critical Periods”  
01:03:08 How Gut Health Controls Overall Health 
01:12:25 What is a Healthy Gut Microbiome?
01:15:00 Tools: Enhance Your Gut Microbiome
01:23:49 Foods to Enhance Microbiota Diversity; Fermented Foods 
01:37:07 High-Fiber Diets & Inflammation
01:40:58 Artificial & Non-Caloric Sweeteners 
01:44:27 Structure & Function of Gut-Brain Axis 
01:49:47 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify, Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
[upbeat music] - Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to discuss the gut and the brain, and we are going to discuss how your gut influences your brain and your brain influences your gut. As many of you probably know, there is a phenomenon called your gut feeling, which tends to be something that you seem to know without really knowing how you know it. That's one version of the gut feeling. The other is that you sense something in your actual gut, in your body, and that somehow drives you to think or feel or act in a particular way, maybe to move towards something or to move away from something. Now, today, we aren't going to focus so much on the psychology of gut feelings but on the biology of gut feelings and how the gut and brain interact. Because indeed your gut is communicating to your brain both directly by way of neurons, nerve cells, and indirectly by changing the chemistry of your body, which permeates up to your brain and impacts various aspects of brain function. But it works in the other direction, too. Your brain is influencing your entire gut. And when I say entire gut, I don't just mean your stomach, I mean, your entire digestive tract. Your brain is impacting things like how quickly your food is digesting, the chemistry of your gut, if you happen to be stressed or not stressed. Whether or not you are under a particular social challenge or whether or not you're particularly happy will in fact adjust the chemistry of your gut and the chemistry of your gut in turn will change the way that your brain works. I'll put all that together for you in the context of what we call the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome are the trillions of little bacteria that live all the way along your digestive tract and that strongly impact the way that your entire body works at the level of metabolism, immune system, and brain function. And of course, we will discuss to tools, things that you can do in order to maintain or improve your gut health. Because as you'll also soon see, gut health is immensely important for all aspects of our wellbeing at the level of our brain, at the level of our body, And there are simple, actionable things that we can all do in order to optimize our gut health in ways that optimize our overall nervous system functioning. So we will be sure to review those today. This episode also serves as a bit of a primer for our guest episode that's coming up next week with Dr. Justin Sonnenburg from Stanford University. Dr. Sonnenburg is a world expert in the gut microbiome and so we will dive really deep into the gut microbiome in all its complexity. We'll make it all very simple for you. We will also talk about actionable tools in that episode. This episode is a standalone episode, so you'll get a lot of information and tools, but if you have the opportunity to see this episode first, I think it will serve as a nice primer for the conversation with Dr. Sonnenburg. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens, which is now called AG1, since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is that it covers all of my foundational vitamin and mineral needs and also because it contains high quality probiotics and prebiotics, which is a topic that we're going to talk a lot about today. With Athletic Greens, I can be sure that I'm getting all the vitamins and minerals that I need. So if I'm missing anything in my diet, I can compensate for that with the Athletic Greens. Plus it has the probiotics and prebiotics that can also compensate for any deficiencies that I might have in creating the right environment for my gut microbiome. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're in the car or on a plane or otherwise on the move, and they'll give year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. While not everyone needs additional vitamin D3, many people do even if they're getting sufficient sunlight. So you get the year's supply of vitamin D3, and it also has K2 in there. K2 has been shown to be important for various aspects of calcium regulation, cardiovascular health, and so on. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim this special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that contains no sugar. It does however contain sodium, magnesium, and potassium. I've talked about sodium on the podcast before. I think sodium can indeed be problematic for some people with hypertension or pre-hypertension, but for many people, sodium is a great thing. It can increase blood volume in ways that can be helpful to them. It can improve nerve cell function in ways that can be helpful to them, and for me, anytime I'm exercising and sweating a lot, I want to replace my electrolytes and that means replacing sodium for adequate neuron function, muscle function, and so on. LMNT is formulated to help anyone with their electrolyte needs and is perfectly suited for people who are following a ketogenic, low carbohydrate, or paleo diet. LMNT contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of 1000 milligrams of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium, and 60 milligrams of magnesium. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack. You only pay the cost of shipping. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the things that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed with a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insights into, for instance, what your biological age is and how that compares to your chronological age. Now, one of the major problems with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there is that you get numbers back, they'll tell you if those numbers are in range and out of range but they don't tell you anything about what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they make everything very simple in terms of directing you towards particular protocols. So these could be nutrition protocols, supplementation protocols, or lifestyle behavioral protocols to help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are best for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off. Okay, let's talk about the gut and the brain and how your gut and your brain communicate in both directions. Because as I mentioned before, your gut is communicating all the time with your brain and your brain is communicating all the time with your gut. And so the two are in this ongoing dance with one another, that ordinarily is below your conscious detection although you're probably familiar with the experience of every once in a while getting a stomach ache or of eating something that doesn't agree with you, or conversely eating something that you find particularly delicious and that sensation or that experience rather being a whole body experience. Your mind is excited about what you're eating or just ate, your gut is excited about what you're eating or just ate, and it seems to be a kind of unified perception of both brain and body. Today, we're going to talk about how that comes about in the negative sense. Like, you know, when you meet someone you really dislike or when you have a stomach ache, and in the positive sense, when you interact with somebody that you really, really like and you'd like to spend more time with them, for instance, or when you eat something that you really, really like and you'd like to spend more time with that food, so to speak. Now, the gut and the brain represent what we call a biological circuit, meaning they include different stations. So station A communicates with station B, which communicates with station C, and so on. And as I mentioned earlier, it is bidirectional. It's a two-way street between gut and brain. I want to make the important point at the outset that when I say the word gut, when I refer to the gut, I am not just referring to the stomach. Most of us think that the gut equates to the stomach because we think of having a gut or not having a gut or having a gut feeling of some sort. But in the context of gut-brain signaling and the related microbiome, the gut includes the entire digestive tract. That's right, from start to finish the entire digestive tract so much so that today we're going to talk about, for instance, the presence of neurons, nerve cells, that reside in your gut that communicate to specific locations in the brain and cause the release of specific neurochemicals, such as the neurochemical dopamine or serotonin, that can motivate you to seek more of a particular food or type of interaction or behavior, or to avoid particular foods, interactions, and behaviors. And some of those neurons, many of those neurons, in fact, reside in your intestines, not in your stomach. They can be in the small intestine or the large intestine. In fact, you actually have taste receptors and neurons located all along your digestive tract. You have neurons that are located all along your digestive tract and they are communicating to your brain to impact what you think, what you feel, and what you do. Okay, so for the gut-brain axis, we need to deal with the brain part and then we need to deal with the gut part. Let's just quickly talk about the brain part because there the word brain is also a bit of a misnomer in that when we say the gut-brain axis, it does include the brain but includes a lot of other things as well. So as many of you probably know by now, if you're listeners of this podcast, and if you don't, that's fine, your nervous system includes your brain and your spinal cord and those together constitute what's called the central nervous system. Your neural retinas, which are lining the back of your eyes and are the light sensing portion of your eyes are also part of your central nervous system. So actually your eyes are part of your brain. They're the only parts of your brain that are outside the cranial vault. So your retinas, your brain proper, and your spinal cord make up the central nervous system. The other parts of your nervous system constitute what's called the peripheral nervous system, which are the components of your nervous system that reside outside the retinas, brain, and spinal cord. Now, this is very important because today we're going to talk a lot about how the gut communicates with the brain. And it does that by way of peripheral nervous system components, meaning nerve cells that reside in the gut and elsewhere in the body that communicate to the brain and cross into the central nervous system to influence what you think and what you feel, okay? So that's the nervous system part of what we call the gut-brain axis, brain, again, just being a shorthand for including all the elements I just described. Gut, as you now know, includes all the elements of the digestive tract. Let's talk about the architecture or the structure of the gut of your digestive system. Now, not surprisingly your digestive system, aka your gut, begins at your mouth and ends at your anus. And all along its length, there are a series of sphincters that cut off certain chambers of the digestive tract from the other chambers. Now, also along this tube that we call the digestive tract, there's great variation in the degree of acidity, or pH as it's sometimes called. That variation in acidity turns out to give rise to different little microenvironments in which particular microbiota, microbacteria, can thrive or fail to thrive. And so the way I'd like you to think about the digestive tract, this gut component of the gut-brain axis, is that it's not just one component. It's not just your stomach with a particular acidity and a bunch of microorganisms that work particularly well to make you feel good and make your digestive pathways work well. It's a series of chambers, little microenvironments, in which particular microbiota thrive and other microbiota do not. And certain behaviors that you undertake and certain experiences that you have will adjust those microenvironments in ways that make particular microbiota, certain bacteria, more likely to thrive and others less likely to thrive. We'll talk about how that was set up for you early in life. Actually from the moment that you came into the world, that microbiome was being established. It was actually strongly impacted depending on whether or not you were born by C-section or by vaginal birth. And it was strongly impacted by who handled you when you came into the world, literally the hands that were on you. How much skin contact you had, whether or not you were a preemie baby or not, whether or not you had pets at home, whether or not you were allowed to play in the dirt, whether or not you were allowed to eat snails or whether or not you were kept in a very antiseptic environment. All of those experiences shaped these little microenvironments and shaped what constitutes best or worst for those microenvironments, okay? So you have this long tube that we call the digestive tract and it's very, very long. In fact, if we were to splay it out, we were to take all the curves and turns out of the intestine, we would find that it is very long. It's approximately nine meters long. Now, the structure of that digestive tract turns out to be very important in terms of gut-brain signaling. Once again, it's a tube and the hollow of that tube is called the lumen, L-U-M-E-N. But the walls of the tube are not necessarily smooth, at least not for significant portions of the digestive tract. For much of the digestive tract, there are bumps and grooves that look very much like the folds in the brain, but these bumps and grooves are made up of other tissues. They're made up of what's called a mucosal lining, so there's a lot of mucus there. And if we were to look really closely, what we'd find is that there are little hairy-like cellular processes that we call microvilli that are able to push things along the digestive tract. The microbiota reside everywhere along the lumen of the digestive tract, starting at the mouth and all the way to the other end. And they reside within those microvilli and they reside within the lumen. And if we were to look really closely at the bumps and grooves along the digestive tract, what we would find is that there are little niches, little areas in which particular things can grow and reside best. Now, that might sound kind of gross, but it actually is a good thing, especially what's growing and residing there are microbacterial organisms that are good for your gut and that signal good things to your brain. And we will talk about what that signaling looks like and how that's done and accomplished in just a few moments. But I want you to get a clear mental picture of your gut, something that we don't often see. And often when we think about the gut, again, we just think about the hollow of the stomach, food going in there, and getting digested, but it's far more complex and actually far more interesting than that. Now, I've been referring to the gut microbiome and to the microbiota and these bacteria. Let me define those terms a little bit more specifically just to avoid any confusion. The microbiota are the actual bacteria. The microbiome is used to refer to the bacteria but also all the genes as bacteria make, because it turns out that they make some important genes that actually impact all of us. You have loads and loads of these little microbiota, these bacteria. In fact, right now you are carrying with you about two to three kilograms, so that's more than six pounds, of these microbiota, these bacteria. And if we were to look at them under a microscope, what we would see is these are relatively simple little organisms. Some remain stationary so they might plop down into the mucosal lining or they might hang out on a particular microvilli or they might be in one of those little niches, and others can move about, but they basically fill the entire lumen. They surround and kind of coat the surface of the microvilli and they're tucked up into any of those little niches that are available to them to tuck into. If you were to take the head of a pin and look at it under the microscope, you could fit many, many hundreds, if not thousands or more of these little microbacteria. And the reason I say many, many thousands or more, I'm giving a kind of broad range there, is that they do vary in size and, again, they vary as to whether or not they can move or they don't move. Now, they're constantly turning over in your gut, meaning they're being born so to speak and they're dying off. And some will stay there for very long periods of time within your gut and others will get excreted. About 60% of your stool, as unpleasant as that might be to think about, is made up of live and dead microbacteria. So you're constantly making and excreting these microbacteria. And which microbacteria you make and how many stay inside your gut and how many leave, meaning how many are excreted, depends a lot on the chemistry of your gut and depends very strongly on the foods that you eat and the foods that you do not eat. Now, just because what we eat strongly influences our microbiome, meaning our microbacteria, does not mean that there are not other influences on what constitutes our microbiome. Our microbiome is also made up by microbacteria that access our digestive tract through our mouth, through breathing, through kissing, and through skin contact. In fact, one of the major determinants of our microbiome is who we interact with and the environment that we happen to be in. And that actually includes whether or not we interact with animals. In a little bit, I'll talk about some data as to whether or not you grew up in a home that had animals, whether or not you grew up in the home, whether or not there was a lot of social contact, meaning skin contact, or whether or not you grew up in a more animal sparse, contact sparse environment and how that shapes your microbiome. But the simple point is that what you eat influences your microbiome, but also what you do, what you think, and what you feel, and many of the low microbacteria that get into your digestive tract do so by way of social interactions. In fact, if you ask a neurobiologist what the role of the microbiome is, they'll tell you almost certainly that it's there to impact brain function. But if you have friends that are microbiologists, such as I do, they'll tell you, well, maybe the brain and nervous system are there to support the microbiome. It's the other way around. You have all these little microorganisms that are taking residence in our body. They don't really know what they're doing as far as we know. We don't know that they have consciousness or they don't. We can't rule that out, but it seems pretty unlikely. Nonetheless, they are taking advantage of the different environments all along your digestive tract. They are taking advantage of the sorts of social interactions, for instance, the people you talk to and that breathe on you, the people that you shake hands with, the people that you kiss or don't kiss, the people that you happen to be romantically involved with or not, your dog, your cat, your lizard, your rat, whatever pet you happen to own is impacting your microbiome. There's absolutely no question about that. So hopefully now you have some sense of the architecture of the digestive pathway and you have some sense of the trillions of little microbacteria that are living all along the different components of that digestive pathway. But what we haven't talked about yet, and what I'd like to talk about now, is what those little microbiota are actually doing in your digestive tract. In addition to just living there for their own intents and purposes, they are contributing, for instance, to your digestion. Many of the genes that those microbiota make are genes that are involved in fermentation and genes that are involved in digestion of particular types of nutrients. And in a little bit, we will talk about how what you eat can actually change the enzymes that those microbiome components make, enzymes largely being things that are responsible for digestion. They catalyze other sorts of cellular events but in the context of the digestive pathway, we're talking about enzymes that help digest your food. So those microbiota are indeed helping you in many ways. And if you lack certain microbiota that can help you digest, it stands to reason that you would have challenges digesting certain types of foods. The other amazing thing that these microbiota do is they change the way that your brain functions by way of metabolizing or facilitating the metabolism of particular neurotransmitters. So one of the ways that having certain microbiota present in your gut can improve your mood or degrade your mood, for instance, is by way of certain microbiota being converted into or facilitating the conversion of chemicals, such as GABA. GABA is what we call an inhibitory neurotransmitter. It's involved in suppressing the action of other neurons. And that might sound like a bad thing, but all types of sedatives, for instance, alcohol, and a lot of neurons that naturally make GABA can help quiet certain circuits in the brain, for instance, circuits responsible for anxiety. In people who have epilepsy, the GABAergic neurons, as they're called, can all often be disrupted in their signaling, meaning they're not cranking out as much GABA and therefore the excitatory neurons, which typically release other molecules like glutamate can engage in what's called runaway excitation and that can give rise to seizures. So the simple message here is that the microbiota by way of making neurochemicals can influence the way that your brain functions. So you want to support those microbiota and we will give you tools to support those microbiota. But the takeaway at this point is that those microbiota are making things locally to help digest food. Other microbiota are helping to make certain neurotransmitters like GABA, and we'll also talk about dopamine and serotonin. And so the very specific microbiota that reside in your gut have a profound influence on many, many biological functions, especially immune system function, brain function, and digestion. So that should give you a fairly complete picture of your gut microbiome. Now I'd like to talk about how your microbiome and your brain communicate, or more accurately, how your microbiome and the rest of your nervous system communicate. Neurons, which simply means nerve cells, are the cells that do most of the heavy lifting in your nervous system. There are of course other cell types that are important. Glial cell, for instance, very, very important cell types. You have endothelial cells, which are responsible for blood flow, pericytes and other types of cells, but the neurons are really doing most of the heavy lifting for most of the things we think about in terms of nervous system function. You have neurons in your gut and that should not surprise you. Neurons reside in your brain, your spinal cord, your eyes, in fact, all over your body, and you've got them on your heart and in your heart, and you've got them in your lungs, and you've got them in your spleen, and they connect to all the different organs and tissues of your body. So that's not surprising that you have neurons in your gut. What is surprising, however, is the presence of particular types of neurons that reside near or in the mucosal lining just next to that lumen of the gut and that are paying attention, and I'll explain what I mean by paying attention, to the components of the gut, both the nutrients and the microbiota, and thereby can send signals up to the brain by way of a long wire that we call an axon, and can communicate what the chemistry and what the nutritional quality and what the other aspects of the environment are at the gut at a given location up to the brain in ways that can influence the brain to, for instance, seek out more of a particular food. Let me give you a sort of action-based picture of this. Let's say like most people, you enjoy sweet foods. I don't particularly enjoy sweet foods but there are a few that I like. I'm a sucker for a really good dark chocolate or really good ice cream or I got this thing for donuts that seems to just not quit although I don't tend to indulge it very often, I do like them. If I eat that particular food, obviously digestion starts in the mouth. There are enzymes there, it gets chewed up, the food goes down into the gut. These neurons are activated, meaning that causes the neurons to be electrically active when particular components, certain nutrients in those foods are present. And for the cell types, or I should say the neuron types that matter here, the nutrients that really trigger their activation are sugar, fatty acids, and amino acids. Now, these particular neurons have the name enteroendocrine cells but more recently they've been defined as neuropod cells. Neuropod cells were discovered by Diego Bohorquez's lab at Duke University. This is a phenomenal set of discoveries made mostly in the last 10 years. These neuropod cells, as I mentioned, are activated by sugar, fatty acids, or amino acids, but have a particularly strong activation to sugars. They do seem to be part of the sweet sensing system. And even though I'm focusing on this particular example, they represent a really nice example of how a particular set of neuro cells in our gut is collecting information about what is there at a particular location in the gut, and sending that information up to our brain. Now, they do that by way of a nerve pathway called the vagus nerve. The vagus nerve is part of the peripheral nervous system. And the vagus nerve is a little bit complex to describe if you're just listening to this. If you are watching this, I'll try and use my hands as a diagram but really the best thing to do if you want really want to learn neuroanatomy is to just imagine it in your mind as best you can and if you can track down a picture of it, terrific, but here's how it works. Neurons have a cell body that we call a soma, that's where all the DNA are contained. That's where a lot of the operating machinery of the cells are contained and a lot of the instructions for that cell of what to be and how to operate are contained. The cell bodies of these neurons or the relevant neurons are actually up near the neck. So you can think of them as a clump of grapes, 'cause cell bodies tend to be round or oval-ish. And then they send a process that we call an axon in one direction out to the gut and they'll send another process up into the brain. And that little cluster near the neck that's relevant here is called the nodose ganglion, N-O-D-O-S-E. The nodose ganglion is a little cluster of neurons on either side of the neck. It has a process that goes out to the gut and a process that goes up into the brain. And again, these are just one component of the so-called vagus nerve. The vagus nerve has many, many branches, not just to the gut. There are also branches to the liver, branches to the lungs, branches to the heart, branches to the larynx, and even to the spleen, and other areas of the body that are important. But right now we're just concentrating on the neurons that are in the gut that signal up to the brain. And what the Bohorquez lab has shown is that these neuropod cells are part of network. They're sensing several different nutrients, but in particular, when they sense sugar, they send signals in the form of electrical firing up to the brain in ways that trigger activation of other brain stations that cause you to seek out more of that particular food. Now, this brings us to some classic experiments that at least to me are incredible. And these are highly reproducible findings showing, for instance, that even if you bypass taste by infusing sweet liquid or putting sweet foods into the gut, and people can never taste them with their mouth, people will seek out more of that particular food. And if you give them the option to have a sweet food infused into their gut or a bitter food infused into their gut or a sweet versus sour, or a more sweet versus less sweet food, people have a selective preference for sweet foods even if they can't taste them. Now, this is important to understand in the context of gut-brain signaling because we always think that we like sweet foods because of the way they taste. And indeed that's still true, but much of what we consider the great taste of a sweet food also has to do with a gut sensation that is below our conscious detection. How do we know that? Well, the Bohorquez lab has performed experiments using modern methods and they're classic experiments showing that animals and humans will actively seek out more of a particular sweet food even if it bypasses this taste system. And the reverse is also true. There have been experiments done in animals and in humans that have allowed animals or humans to select and eat sweet foods, and indeed that's what they do if they're given the option. And yet to somehow eliminate the activation of these neurons within the gut that can sense sweet foods. Now, there are a couple different ways that those experiments ave been done. In classic experiments that date back to the '80s, this was done by what's called subdiaphragmatic vagotomy. So this means cutting off the branch of the vagus that enervates the gut below the diaphragm so that the other organs can still function because the vagus is very important, but basically cutting off the sweet sensing in the gut, still giving people the opportunity to taste sweet foods with their mouth, and they don't actively seek out quite as much of the sweet food when they don't have this gut sensing mechanism that we now know to be dependent on these neuropod cells. More recent experiments involve selective silencing of these neuropod cells. And there have been a lot of different derivations of this sort of thing, but the takeaway from it is that our experience of and our desire for particular foods has everything to do with how those foods taste. It also has to do, as you probably know, with their texture and the sensation of those foods in our mouth, and even indeed how they go down our throat sometimes can be very pleasing or very unpleasant. And it also has to do with this subconscious processing of taste that occurs in the gut itself. And again, when I say gut, I don't just mean in the stomach. There are actually neurons, neuropod cells, further down your digestive tract which are signaling to your brain about the presence of sweet foods, as well as foods such as amino acid rich foods or foods that are rich in particular types of fatty acids signaling up to your brain and causing you to seek out more of those foods or to consume more of those foods. Now, you're probably asking, what is the signal? How does it actually make me want more of those foods without me realizing it? Well, it does that by adjusting the release of particular neuromodulators. For those of you that are not familiar with neuromodulators, these are similar to neurotransmitters, but they tend to act more broadly. They tend to impact many more neurons all at once and they go by names like dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, epinephrine, and so forth. Sometimes people refer to those as neurotransmitters. Technically they are neuromodulators. I'll refer to them almost always as neuromodulators. The neuropod cells signal by way of a particular branch of the vagus through that nodose ganglion that we talked about before and through a number of different stations in the brain stem, eventually cause the release of the neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is often associated with a sense of pleasure and reward but it is more appropriately thought of as a neuromodulator that impacts motivation, craving, and pursuit. It tends to put us into modes of action, not necessarily running and moving through space, although it can do that too, but in the context of feeding, it tends to make us look around more, chew more, reach for things more, and seek out more of whatever it is that's giving us that sensation of delight or satisfaction. And again, that sense of delight and satisfaction, you might experience only consciously as the way that something tastes on your mouth but it actually is caused again by both the sensations in your mouth but also by the activation of these neuropod cells. So this is an incredible system of gut-brain signaling, and it is but one system of gut-brain signaling. It turns out it's the system that we know the most about at this point in time. There are other components of gut-brain signaling that we'll talk about in a moment, for instance, the serotonin system. But in terms of examples of gut-brain signaling for which we know a lot of the individual elements and how they work, I think this neuropod, neuron sensing of sweet foods, fatty acids, and amino acids in the gut and communicating that up to the brain by way of the vagus and causing us to seek out more of the foods that deliver those nutrients is an incredible pathway that really delineates the beauty and the power of this gut-brain axis. Let me talk about timescales. Here I'm talking about a particular type of neuron that is signaling up to the brain using electrical signals to cause us to want to seek out a particular category of foods. That's happening relatively fast compared to the hormone pathways of the gut which also involve neurons. So your gut is also communicating to your brain by way of neurons, nerve cells. But some of those nerve cells also release hormones. And those hormones go by names like CCK, glucagon-like peptide 1, PYY, et cetera. A good example of a hormone pathway, or what's sometimes called a hormone peptide pathway, that is similar to the pathway I've talked about before but a little bit slower is the ghrelin pathway. Ghrelin, G-H-R-E-L-I-N, increases with fasting. So the longer it's been since you've eaten, or if you're just eating very little food compared to your caloric needs, ghrelin levels are going to go up in your bloodstream and they go up because of processes that include processes within the gut and include the nervous system. So it's a slow pathway driving you to seek out food generally. As far as we know, the ghrelin system is not partial to seeking out of sweet foods or fatty foods or so on. Ghrelin increases the longer it's been since you've eaten sufficient calories and it stimulates a feeling of you wanting to seek out food. Well, how does it do that? It does that again by impacting neural circuits within the brain, neural circuits that include what we call the brain stem autonomic center. So it tends to make you feel alert and quite, we say, high levels of autonomic arousal. If you haven't eaten in a while, you might think that you just get really exhausted, right? Because we all hear that food is energy and caloric energy is what we need to burn, but you actually have a lot of energy stored in your body that you would be able to use if you really needed energy. But typically if we haven't eaten in a while, we start to get agitated and we get agitated by way way of release of the neuromodulator epinephrine, which causes us to look around more, move around more, and seek out food. That all occurs in brain stem autonomic centers and in the hypothalamus. We did an entire episode on feeding behavior and metabolism as well and you can find those episodes at hubermanlab.com so I don't want to go into a lot of detail about hypothalamic and brains stem centers. But there's a particular area of the brain called the nucleus of the solitary tract, the NST as it's called, that's very strongly impacted by these circulating hormones and tends to drive us toward feeding behavior. So the important point here is that we have a fast system that is paying attention to the nutrients in our gut or the absence of nutrients in our gut, and stimulating us to seek out food or to stop eating certain foods, and we have a slower hormone-related system that also originates in the gut and impacts the brain. But all of those converge on neural circuits for feeding. The neural circuits for feeding include things like the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, they include a bunch of other neurochemicals, but the point is that you've got a fast route and a slow route to drive you to eat more or eat less, right, to seek out food and consume it or to stop eating, to essentially kickstart the satiety mechanisms as they're called, and those are operating in parallel. It's not like one happens first then stops then the other. They're always operating in parallel. And I bring this up because there's a bigger theme here which we see over and over again in biology, which is the concept of parallel pathways. You've always got multiple accelerators and multiple brakes on a system. It's very, very rare to have just one accelerator and one brake on the system. And this will become important later when we talk about tools for optimizing your gut microbiome for healthy eating and for health healthy digestion and for healthy brain function. I want to take a moment and talk about glucagon-like peptide 1, which is also called GLP-1. GLP-1 is made by neurons in the gut and by neurons in the brain. This is a fairly recent discovery but it's an important one. GLP-1 tends to inhibit feeding and tends to reduce appetite. There are a number of drugs released on the market now, one for instance goes by the name semaglutide, which is essentially an GLP-1 agonist. It causes the release of more GLP-1. It's being used to treat type II diabetes, which is insulin resistant diabetes. This is different than type I diabetes where people don't actually make insulin. It's also being used as a drug to reduce obesity. And it seems pretty effective at least in certain populations. There are certain foods and substances that increase GLP-1. I've talked about a few of these on the podcast. One that I'm a particular fan of for entirely other reasons is yerba mate tea can stimulate the release of GLP-1. In South America, it's often used as an appetite suppressant, probably in large part because of its effect on GLP-1 release, but probably also because it does contain caffeine, which is a bit of a stimulant, which also can be involved in lipolysis, which is the utilization of fat stores for energy and so forth. A brief mention about yerba mate. There are some reports out there that yerba mate can increase certain types of cancers. The data that I've seen on this is that it tends to relate to whether or not those are smoked versions of the yerba mate tea, the amount of consumption, and the debate is still out. So I invite you to look at those papers. You can search for those online. Nonetheless, yerba mate is one source of GLP-1 stimulation. Semaglutide is another source. It also can be stimulated by various foods, nuts, avocados, eggs, and so forth. Certain high fiber complex grains will also stimulate GLP-1. I raise this as not necessarily a route that you want to take in order to reduce food intake. I don't even know that that's your goal. But that GLP-1 is another one of these gut-to-brain signaling mechanisms that adjusts appetite that is dependent on diet, depends on what you eat or drink, and that the GLP-1 pathway does seem particularly sensitive to the constituents of diet. There's at least one quality study I was able to find showing that the ketogenic diet for instance, which almost always involves ingestion of very low levels of carbohydrate can increase GLP-1. Although, as I mentioned before, there are other foods that fall outside the range of what we would consider ketogenic that can also stimulate GLP-1, and as I mentioned, there are prescription drugs, like semaglutide, there are other ones as well now, that stimulate GLP-1. So how does GLP-1 reduce appetite? It does that, in part, by changing the activity of neurons in the hypothalamus, this cluster of neurons just above the roof of our mouth, that themselves make GLP-1 and that cause the activation of motor circuits for reaching, chewing, all the things that we associate with feeding behavior. So I use GLP-1 as an example of a pathway that you might choose to tap into by ingestion of yerba mate or by ingestion of the foods I mentioned, or if it's something that interests you, ketogenic diet. But I also mention it simply because it's another beautiful example of how a hormone pathway can impact the activity of brain circuits that are directly involved in a particular behavior. So yet another example of how gut is communicating to brain in order to change what we think we want or to change what our actual behaviors are. So the next time you find yourself reaching for food, or you find yourself wanting a particular sweet thing or fatty thing or something that contains a lot of amino acids, a protein rich food, keep in mind that that's not just about the taste of the food, and it's not even necessarily about the nutrients that you need or don't need. It could be, but it's also about this subconscious signaling that's coming from your body all the time, waves of hormones, waves of nerve cell signals, electrical signals that are changing the way that your brain works. And this raises for me a memory of the episode that I did with Dr. Robert Sapolsky, who's a world expert colleague of mine at Stanford, who is expert on things like hormones and behavior. But we got into the topic of free will, which is a bit of a barbed wire topic as many of you know. It gets into the realm of philosophy, et cetera. And we were kind of batting back and forth the idea, I was saying, "Well, I think there's free will, and can't there certainly be free will or certainly the idea that we can avoid certain choices?" And Robert was saying, "No." In fact, he said, "Nah," he doesn't believe that we have any free will. He thinks that events in our brain are determined by biological events that are below our conscious detection and that occur seconds to milliseconds before we make decisions or assessments and, therefore, we just can't control what we do, what we think, and what we feel. And at the time I sort of didn't buy it. I thought, I don't know. I just, I guess I really wanted to believe in free will. And to some extent I still do but as we talk about how these neurons in our gut and these hormones in our gut are influencing our brain and the decisions that we are making, at the level of circuits, like the hypothalamus and the nucleus of the solitary tract, these are areas of the brain way below our frontal cortex and our conscious perception. Think these are examples that really fall in favor of what Dr. Sapolsky was arguing, which is that events that are happening within our body are actually changing the way our brain works. So we might think that we want the cupcake. We might think that we don't need to eat something or do need to eat something and that is entirely on the basis of prior knowledge and decision-making that we're making with our head, but in fact, it's very clear to me based on the work from the Bohorquez lab, classic work over the years dating back to the '80s, and indeed back to the '50s that we'll talk about in a moment, that our body is shaping the decisions that our brain is making and we're not aware of it at all. Now, the good news is that whether or not you believe in free will or not, the simple knowledge that this whole process is happening can perhaps be a benefit to you. You can perhaps leverage it to get some insight and understanding and perhaps even a wedge into your own behavior. You might think, ah, I think I want that particular food, or I think I want to avoid that particular food, but actually that's not a decision that I'm making on a purely rational basis. Has a lot to do with what my gut is telling my brain. So we've largely been talking about chemical communication between the gut and the brain. Chemical because even though these neuropod cells are communicating with the brain by way of electrical activity, what we call action potentials, and in neural language we call those spikes, spikes of action potentials, spikes of action potentials, meaning those neural signals, cause the release of chemicals in the brain like dopamine. So it's chemical transmission. Similarly, hormones, even though they act more slowly, hormones like neuropeptide Y like CCK, like ghrelin, they are signaling chemically. They're moving through the body, they're going in there affecting the chemical output of different cells, and they're changing the chemistry of those cells and the chemistry of the cells that those cells talk to. So that gives us one particular category of signaling from gut to brain, which is chemical signaling. But of course there are other forms of signals and those fall under the category of mechanical signaling. You're probably familiar with this. If you've ever eaten a very large meal or consumed a lot of fluid, you experience that as distension of the gut and that doesn't just have to be distension of the stomach, but distension of your intestines as well. That distension is registered by neurons that reside in your gut, the signals go up to your brain, and communicate with areas of the brain that are responsible for suppressing further consumption of food and/or fluid, and, under certain circumstances, can also be associated with the activation of neural circuits that cause vomiting or the desire to vomit. So if ever you've eaten too much or you've eaten something that doesn't agree with you, that information is communicated by way of mechanosensors that sense the mechanics of your gut, possibly also the chemistry of your gut, but mostly the mechanics of your gut, signal up to the brain, and activate brain centers that are involved in stopping the eating behavior, and activation of an area of the brain stem that is affectionately referred to as the vomit center among neuroanatomists. This is a area that more appropriately is called the chemoreceptor trigger zone, the CTZ, or area postrema and neurons in this area actually will trigger the vomiting reflex. So the way that the gut and the brain communicate is both chemical and mechanical, and it can be both for sake of increasing certain types of behavior. Today, we're talking mainly about feeding behavior up until now anyway but also ceasing to eat, closing your mouth, moving away from food, turning away from food, all behaviors that we're familiar with anytime we feel kind of sick on the basis of activation of this mechanosensor for gastric distress. So we've got chemical signaling and mechanical signaling. And I also want to emphasize that we have direct and indirect signaling from the gut to the brain. Direct signaling is the kind of signaling of the sort I've been talking about mainly up until now, which is neurons in the gut communicating with neurons in the brain stem that communicate with neurons in the hypothalamus. And, of course, those are also going to interact with neurons of the prefrontal cortex which is the area of a brain involved in decision making the, you know, I think it was the shrimp that made me sick. I'm going to, I just don't want any more of that. Or I'm never going back to that restaurant again because after I ate there about an hour later, I started feeling really not well. I felt, you know, kind of feverish, but my gut didn't feel well, my digestion was really off. All of that kind of information is handled in the prefrontal cortex at a conscious level, but the immediate decision to stop eating or to eat more of something to move towards something or away from it, that's made by neural circuits that reside at the, we would say, the subconscious level but what we really mean is below the level of the neocortex. Below the cortex means essentially below our level of conscious awareness. So we talked about two types of information within the gut that are communicated to the brain, chemical information, meaning information about the nutrients that happen to be there, and mechanical information, distention of the gut or lack of distention and so forth. And we talked about how these neuropod cells can signal the release of dopamine and circuits within the brain to cause you to seek out more of something. Now, in a very logically consistent way, dopamine is also involved in the whole business of vomiting. You might think, well, that doesn't make any sense. I thought dopamine was always a good thing. It's involved in moderation and reward, et cetera. But it turns out the area postrema, this vomit center in the brain stem, is chockablock full of dopamine receptors. And if dopamine levels go too high, it can actually trigger vomiting. And this we see in the context of various drugs that are used to treat things like Parkinson's. Parkinson's is a deficiency in dopamine or a lack of dopamine neurons typically that causes a resting tremor, difficulty in movement, because dopamine's also associated with a lot of the neural circuits for movement. Many drugs that are used to treat Parkinson's like L-DOPA increase levels of dopamine so much, or at least activate dopamine receptors to such a great degree in certain areas of the brain that they can cause activation of things like the trigger to vomit. Now, this should also make sense in the natural context of if you gorge yourself with food, gorge yourself with food, gorge yourself with food, the neurons in your gut that respond to that are simply detecting the presence of nutrients but they don't really make decisions themselves. They don't know to stop eating. Your brain knows to stop eating or to eject that food. And so it's a wonderful thing that those neurons are communicating with areas of the brain not just that stimulate consuming more food but that are communicating with areas of the brain, for instance, area postrema, that when dopamine levels get too high, cause us to either stop eating that food or in the case of vomiting to eject that food. So I raise this not to give you a kind of a disgusting counterexample to what we call appetitive behaviors, the things that we like to do more of, but simply to give you a sense of just how strongly even these reflexes that we think of as feeling sick and vomiting or the desire to seek out more food are really being controlled by a kind of push-pull system, by parallel pathways that are arriving from our gut and the same neurochemicals, in this case dopamine, are being used to create two opposite type behaviors, one behavior to consume more, one behavior to get rid of everything you've already consumed. So our brain is actually sensitive to the amount of signaling coming from our gut not just the path by which that signal arrives. Our brain is very carefully paying attention to whether or not the levels of dopamine that are being triggered are within a normal range for typical eating behavior or whether or not we've gorged ourselves to the point where enough already. Now, of course, mechanical signals will also play into area postrema and into the vomiting reflex. If we have a very distended gut, we feel lousy. It just, it actually can hurt very badly, and we will have the desire to vomit, or we will just simply vomit. Mechanical and chemical signals are always arriving in parallel. They never work in unison. And so now we have chemical signals, mechanical signals, and now I'd like to talk about direct and indirect signals because almost everything I've talked about up until now are direct signals, a neural pathway that converges in the brain to create a particular feeling, thought, or behavior, but there are also indirect pathways. And that's what takes us back to the gut microbiome and to these little microbiota. And to just give you the takeaway message at the front here and then I'll give you a little more detail as to how it comes about, you have neurotransmitters in your brain and in your spinal cord and in your eyes and in your peripheral nervous system. They cause the activation or the suppression of nerve activity, meaning they either electrically activate other nerve cells or they cause other nerve cells to be less electrically active. And they do that by way of neurotransmitters. But as it turns out, the gut microbiota are capable of influencing metabolic events and in some cases are capable of synthesizing neurotransmitters themselves. So what that means is that these little bugs, these little microbiota that are cargo in your gut, the six pounds of cargo, they actually can make neurochemicals that can pass into the bloodstream and into your brain and actually impact the other cells of your body and brain indirectly, so without involving these very intricate nerve pathways that we've been talking about. In other words, the foods you eat, the environment of your gut microbiome, can actually create the chemical substrates that allow your brain to feel one way or the other, to feel great or to feel lousy, to seek out more of a particular type of behavior or to avoid that behavior. And that would constitute indirect signaling. So I've been talking a lot about the structure and function of the gut-to-brain pathway, focusing mainly on feeding behaviors and in some cases avoiding feeding or even ejecting food from the digestive tract, I'd like to drill a little bit deeper into this indirect signaling pathway from the gut to the brain because it bridges us nicely from neuronal signals in the gut to the brain, hormonal signals from the gut to the brain, to what also includes the microbiome, which is what we started talking about at the beginning of the episode. As I mentioned a couple of minutes ago, certain gut microbiota can actually synthesize certain neurotransmitters that can go impact the brain. And we actually have some knowledge about which microbiota can synthesize particular neurotransmitters. For instance, the neuromodulator dopamine can be synthesized by or from bacillus and serratia. Now, these are just names of microbiota. I don't expect that any of you would necessarily recognize them. These aren't the sorts of things that you necessarily would run out and buy to get more dopamine. But the point is that particular gut microbiota can create dopamine in our gut that can get into our bloodstream and can generally change our baseline levels of dopamine within the brain and other areas of the body. I mentioned baseline levels of dopamine because as I talked about on an episode all about dopamine but I'll just repeat the basics here now, we have baseline levels of transmitters or neuromodulators that act as sort of the level of the tide, the overall level, and then we can have peaks of dopamine that are created by behaviors or by ingestion of particular foods or drugs, et cetera. So bacillus and serratia tend to increase our baseline levels of dopamine. So if it turns out that we are creating the right gut microbiome environment that these particular gut microbiota can thrive in, well, then our baseline levels of dopamine will be elevated and in general, that leads to enhancement of mood. Similarly, there are other gut microbiota, for instance, candida, streptococus, various enterococcus, these always have these kind of strange and not so attractive names, at least to me as a neurobiologist. Nonetheless, those particular microbiota support the production of or can even be metabolized into serotonin, which is a neuromodulator associated with mood, with social interactions, with a huge number of different types of events and behaviors. Again, these gut microbiota when present and allowed to thrive in our gut will increase our overall levels of serotonin and riding on top of that level of serotonin will be the serotonin that's specifically released in response to certain behaviors. And I really want to drive home this point of baselines and peaks. The baseline level of serotonin might set our overall mood, whether or not we wake up feeling pretty good or really lousy if our serotonin levels happen to be very, very low, whether or not we tend to be in a kind of a calm space or whether or not we tend to be somewhat irritable. But then of course individual events as we go about our day, maybe a compliment that we get or maybe somebody says something irritating to us, whatever it may be will also influence levels of serotonin, but those serotonin events are going to be related to events at particular neural circuits in the brain. And this is an important topic because I think that a lot of people hear quite accurately, oh, 90 to 95% of our serotonin is manufactured in the gut. And indeed that's true. It's manufactured from the sorts of microbiota that I just described. And there are many, many experiments now, mostly in animal models, but also some in humans that show that if the gut microbiome is deficient in some way to these particular bacteria, that serotonin levels drop and people's mood suffers, maybe even their immune system functions, maybe even it exacerbates certain psychiatric illnesses. However, a lot of people take that to mean that the serotonin of the brain all comes from the gut or mostly comes from the gut. That's not the case. It's still the case that you have neurons in the brain that are responsible for releasing serotonin directly in response to certain things like social touch or through other types of positive social experiences. So we've got gut microbiota that can literally be turned into dopamine and raise our baseline levels of dopamine. We've got gut microbiota that can literally raise our baseline levels of serotonin. And indeed there are other gut microbiota like lactobacillus or bifidobacterium, excuse me, hard complex names to pronounce, bifidobacterium that can give rise to increases in GABA levels, this inhibitory neurotransmitter that can act as a little bit of a mild sedative, can reduce irritability, et cetera, but that's just the baseline, the kind of tide of those neuromodulators. Again, I want to emphasize that we still have neurocircuits within the brain and body that are specifically releasing in a very potent way dopamine, serotonin, and GABA. So the two things act in concert. Even though the gut and the brain are acting both in parallel and directly influencing one another, it is a powerful synergistic effect. And there are now hundreds of studies, maybe even thousands by this point, mostly performed in animal models, typically mice, but also some studies in humans that show that creating the correct environment for these gut microbiota to thrive really does enhance mood and wellbeing. And that when our gut microbiome is not healthy, that it really can deplete our mood and sense of wellbeing. Now, there are two major phases to creating a healthy gut microbiome. One you can control and the other one is less under your control. I get into this in a lot of detail in the episode with Dr. Sonnenburg, which is coming out immediately after this one, the following Monday, that is. But for now I want to just capture a few of the main points about the early establishment of the gut microbiome. It turns out that the environment that we are exposed to, the things that come into contact with our skin and digestive tract and any other mucosal lining, even the urethra, the nasal passages, any opening to the outside world that brings in certain, excuse me, certain microbiota in the first three years of life is going to have a profound impact on the overall menu of microbiota that we will be able to carry within our body. And it really does seem that getting exposure to and building a diverse microbiome in those first three years is critical. There's a lot of speculation and some data as to cesarean delivered babies having less diverse microbiomes compared to vaginally delivered babies. There have been attempts, although not conclusive attempts, to link that to the presence of autism spectrum disorders, which at least by some statistics seem to be of higher probability in cesarean deliveries although there are other studies that refute that, and I want to make that clear. However, it's clear that babies do not get much, if any, exposure to microbiota inside of the womb, maybe a little bit, but not much. But that is during the birth process and in the days and weeks immediately after they arrive in the world that their gut microbiome is established, that those gut microbiota take residence within the gut. So it will depend on whether or not they were breastfed or bottle fed. It'll depend on whether or not they were exposed to a household pet or not, whether or not they were held by multiple caregivers or just by one, whether or not they were a preemie baby and were contained in a particularly restrictive environment in order to encourage their further development before they could be brought home or not. I don't want to give the picture that if you were isolated or you were delivered by C-section, that you're somehow doomed to have a poor microbiome. That's simply not the case. However, it is the case that the more diversity of microbiota that one can create early in life is really helpful for long-term outcomes in terms of brain-to-gut signaling, gut-to-brain signaling, and for sake of the immune system. There are some decent studies showing that if children are exposed to a lot of antibiotic treatment early in life, that can be very detrimental to establishment of a healthy gut microbiome. And fortunately that reestablishing a healthy gut microbiome can help rescue some of those deficits. So doctors nowadays are much more cautious about the prescription of antibiotic drugs to children in their early years, not just up to three years, but extending out to five and seven and 10 years. And even in adults, they're very, very careful about that, or they ought to be. One reason is the existence, or I would say, the proliferation of antibiotic-resistant bacteria that are becoming more common in hospitals and elsewhere and that can cause serious problems. But in addition to that, because of this understanding that the gut microbiome is influencing and actually creating neurotransmitters that can impact mood and mental health, impact immune health, and so on. As I mentioned earlier, there are hundreds if not thousands of studies emphasizing the key role of the microbiome on brain health, psychiatric health, et cetera. I want to just highlight a few of those studies and in particular, some recent studies that come from labs that have been working on this sort of thing for a very long time. One of the more exciting studies comes from the work of Mauro Costa-Mattioli's lab, which is at Baylor College of Medicine. Mauro's lab has been working on mouse models of autism spectrum disorder for a long time, and looking at social behavior using a mouse model for a long time. And they've been able to identify particular types of microbiota that when they take resonance in the gut can help offset some of the symptoms of autism, at least the symptoms of autism that exist in these mouse models, okay? So again, this is not human work. This is work being done on mouse models for the simple reason that you can do these kinds of manipulations, where basically they took mice that were in germ free-environments or non-germ-free environments, or they exposed mice to particular microbiota and not other microbiota and they discovered that a particular microbiota called L. reuteri, it's L. R-E-U-T-E-R-I. Treatment with L. reuteri corrects the social deficits present in these autism models and it does so by way of activating our old friend the vagus nerve, but not simply because the vagus nerve triggers the release of dopamine, but it turns out that this particular gut microbiota L. reuteri can correct the social deficits in this autism spectrum disorder model. It does that by way of a vagal nerve pathway that stimulates both dopamine release and oxytocin release. And they establish this really mechanistically by showing, for instance, if you get rid of the oxytocin receptor, you don't see this rescue. Now, those are mouse models so we have to take those with the appropriate grain of salt, but they're really exciting. And they come to us in parallel with other studies that are being done, taking the microbiomes of people who have one condition or lack of condition, and putting it into people who have one condition or another condition. Let me explain what I mean by that. The early discovery of the gut microbiome and its potential to impact health was not in the context of the gut-to-brain pathway but rather it was in the context of colitis. This dates back to studies in the '50s, whereby people with very severe intractable colitis for which no other treatment was going to work received fecal transplants. So yes, that's exactly as it sounds. Taking the stool of healthy people who do not have colitis, transplanting those stools into the lower digestive tract of people who do have colitis, and they saw significant improvement, if not rescue of the colitis. That was one of the first indications that something within stool, of all things, could actually rescue another individual from disease, which sounds kind of wild and crazy, and may even sound disgusting to some of you, but as I mentioned at the beginning of the episode, almost 60% of stool is live or dead bacteria, microbiota, and it really opened up this entire field of exploring how different microbiota might have therapeutic effects. And indeed, that has been shown to be the case also in fecal transplants for certain psychiatric illnesses. These are still ongoing studies. They vary in quality. These are hard studies to do for all sorts of reasons, getting the appropriate patient populations, getting agreement, et cetera, making sure that everything's handled properly. But what this involves is fecal transplants from individuals that lack a particular psychiatric condition or metabolic condition into people who have a particular metabolic condition and there has been tremendous success in some cases. One of the more powerful and salient examples is for obesity. There's some people for which even if they ingest very low numbers of calories, even if they go on a liquid protein diet, simply can't lose weight. These are somewhat rare disorders but these are people that would either get gastric bypass surgery. Some people are now getting these fecal transplants from people that have healthy weight and they take the stool from them, they put it into lower digestive tract, and they can see substantial improvement in weight loss in people that were otherwise unable to do that. In some cases, actually they can start eating relatively normal levels of food and still lose weight. So pretty remarkable and that tells us there's something in these microbiota that's really powerful. Now, how those effects are generated isn't clear. One idea is that it's impacting the metabolome, components of the metabolism, almost certainly that's going to be the case. Another idea is that it's impacting neurotransmitters which change behavior and food choices within the brain. Although, as I mentioned, some of these people are already eating very little food to begin with so that's a little bit harder of an argument to create. There are also some somewhat famous examples now of how fecal transplants can lead to negative outcomes. But those negative outcomes further underscore the power of the microbiome in impacting bodily health. One key example of this, for instance, is transfer of fecal matter into another person in order to treat something like colitis and it effectively does that, but if the donor of the stool, of the fecal matter happened to be obese or have some other metabolic syndrome, it's been observed that the recipient can also develop that metabolic syndrome simply by way of receiving that donor's particular microbiota. So these microbiota can create positive outcomes or they can create negative outcomes. Now, most of us of course, are not interested in or pursuing fecal transplants. Most people are interested in just creating a healthy gut microbiome environment for sake of immune system and brain function. And we will talk about how to do that in just a few minutes. But I just want to further underscore the power of the microbiota in shaping brain chemistry and in shaping things like mood or other aspects of mental health that typically we don't associate with our gut. There are several studies published in recent years, one that I'll just highlight now, first author is Tonya Nguyen, N-G-U-Y-E-N. The title of the paper is "Association of Loneliness and Wisdom with Gut Microbial Diversity and Composition, an Exploratory Study". It's an interesting study. Looked at 184 community dwelling adults, excuse me, ranging from 28 to 97 years old. They explored whether or not having enhanced microbial diversity somehow related to these variables that they refer to as loneliness and wisdom. They used a number of different tests to evaluate those. Those are common tests in the psychology literature, not so much in the biology literature, but nonetheless, there are ways of measuring things like loneliness and wisdom, wisdom in this case, being the opposite of loneliness, at least in the context of this study. And what they found was the more microbial diversity, the more diverse one's microbiome was, the lower incidence of loneliness. And they did this by taking fecal samples, profiling them for RNA. So essentially doing gene sequencing of the stool of these individuals, getting ratings of how lonely or not lonely they felt, and correlating those. And that's just but one study. I point it out because it's particularly recent and it looked like it was particularly well done. There is another study that I'll just refer you to. This was a study published in 2020 in "Scientific Reports". The title of the study is "Emotional Wellbeing and Gut Microbiome Profiles by Enterotype". What I particularly like about this study is that they were able to correlate the presence of certain microbiota with feelings of subjective wellbeing and lack of or presence of depressive symptoms. They did high-throughput gene sequencing of the microbiomes of individuals. So that meant measuring the microbiota, figuring out which microbiota were present, how diverse their microbiome was in general. Gut microbiome diversity is a good thing. And then to correlate that with what's called the PANAS score. PANAS stands for positive affect negative affect schedule. This is a test that my lab has used extensively, that other labs to use to evaluate mood and wellbeing. And they defined what were called three enterotypes, three different categories of people that ate very different diets that tended to fall into categories of having more or fewer emotional symptoms that were negative or more fewer emotional symptoms that were positive and whether or not they tend to be more depressed, anxious, or have more stress-related behaviors, et cetera. And what they were able to derive from this study was some strong indications about what types of things we should ingest in our diet, maybe even certain things that we should avoid, but certainly the types of things that we should ingest, that can enhance mood and wellbeing and can tend to shift people away from more depressive-like anxiety and stress-related symptoms. Before we get into what the particular food items were that lend themselves to a healthy microbiome, I want to raise a bigger and perhaps more important issue, which is what is a healthy microbiome. I think if you asked any number of world experts, and I certainly ask this of Dr. Sonnenburg, what is a healthy microbiome, they're all going to tell you it's a microbiome that has a lot of diversity, that includes a lot of different types of bacteria. And that makes sense because it logically would include the bacteria that produce GABA and dopamine and serotonin, and that support the immune system, and do a number of different things. But is it simply the case that adding microbiota diversity is always a good thing? Well, that doesn't seem to be the case. Probiotics and prebiotics, both of which can enhance microbiotal diversity, can improve mood, digestion, immune system, and so on. That's been established but it's mainly been established in the context of post-antibiotic treatment or people that are recovering from illness or people that have been very stressed or have been dealing with all sorts of challenges, mental or physical, and they are an attempt to replenish the gut microbiome. However, it's also clear that excessive microbiota brought about by excessive intake of probiotics can lead to things like brain fog. There's actually some good studies that point to the fact that certain metabolites of the microbiome, certain chemicals produced in the gut and in the body can actually lead to brain fog states. This is thought to come about through the lactate pathways of the gut that can then impact the brain. If you want to look more into this issue of whether or not probiotics taken in excess perhaps can lead to brain fog, I'd encourage you to look at a particular paper. This is a paper published in "Clinical and Translational Gastroenterology". And the title of the paper is "Brain Fogginess, Gas, and Bloating, a Link Between SIBO Probiotics and Metabolic Acidosis". It was published in 2018. We can provide a link to this study. And there are several other studies in the references that point to the fact that in some cases, excessive intake of probiotics and excessive proliferation of gut microbiota can actually be problematic. I mention this not to confuse you but because it is confusing out there. We all would think that just increasing microbiotal diversity is always a good thing but there are thresholds beyond which excessive microbiotal diversity might be problematic. I think everyone agrees that having too few microbial species living in us is not a good idea. Now, none of that answers the questions that I think everyone really wants answers to, which are, what should we do, what should we not do to improve our gut microbiome? I mean, clearly we can't time travel back to when we were zero to three years old and get a dog if we didn't have a dog, get breastfed if we weren't breastfed, be delivered vaginally as opposed to by C-section if we didn't have that opportunity. We just can't time travel and do that. All of us, however, should be seeking to improve the conditions of our gut microbiome because of the critical ways in which it impacts the rest of our brain and bodily health. So what should we do, what shouldn't we do? Clearly we know that stress can negatively impact the gut microbiome. However, some forms of stress that can quote unquote negatively impact the microbiome include fasting, long periods of fasts, which makes sense because a lot of microbiota need food in order to thrive. In fact, many if not all of them do at some point. There are other questions such as should we eat particular foods and how often should we eat those foods? We've all been told that fiber is incredibly important because of the presence of prebiotic fiber, which can essentially feed the microbiome, but is fiber really necessary and how necessary is it to encourage a healthy microbiome? Clearly, there are a number of people following relatively low fiber diets, such as ketogenic diets, and those can have, in some cases, anti-inflammatory effects and can sometimes also improve certain microbiota species. So it can all be rather confusing. And for that matter, I asked our resident expert, Dr. Justin Sonnenburg at Stanford, all of these questions. And he answers them very systematically in the episode that comes out after this one. But I don't want to withhold anything from you so I'll just give a very top contour version of those answers and then you'll get more in-depth answers during that episode. I asked about fasting. And the reason I asked about fasting is that years ago, I was at a meeting as part of the Pew Biomedical Scholars Meeting and one of the other Pew Biomedical Scholars was an expert in gut microbiome and I said, "Hey, are probiotics good for the microbiome? And if so, which ones should I take?" And his answer was very interesting. He said, "You know, in certain cases they can be, especially if you're traveling or you're stressed, but it turns out that the particular bacteria that they put in most probiotics don't actually replenish the microbiota that you need most." And I thought, "Oh, well, why don't they make ones that replenish the microbiota that you need most?" And his answer was, "Well, they don't replenish those but they replenish other ones that then in turn encourage the development of the microbiota that you do want once you start eating the appropriate foods. So they change the environment which makes the environment better, which indirectly supports the proliferation of quote unquote good microbiota." Okay, so that was a somewhat convoluted answer but I did appreciate his answer. Then I asked him about fasting. I said, "Well, a lot of people are getting interested in intermittent fasting now. People are spending a significant portion of each 24-hour cycle avoiding food for sake of time restrictive feeding. What does that do to the gut microbiome? Does it make it healthier or does it make it unhealthier?" Well, my colleague from Yale and Dr. Sonnenburg both confirmed that during periods of fasting, especially prolonged periods of fasting, we actually start to digest away much of our digestive tract. Now, the whole thing doesn't start to disappear but there's thinning of the mucosal lining or the least disruption of the mucosal lining. A lot of the microbiota species can start to die off. And so it was surprising to me, but nonetheless interesting that fasting may actually cause a disruption to certain healthy elements of the gut microbiome. But again, there's a caveat. The caveat is that when people eat after a period of fast, there may be a compensatory proliferation, meaning an increase in healthy gut microbiota. So you start to get the picture that fasting is neither good nor bad. You start to get the picture that particular diets, meaning certain restriction diets or macronutrient-rich diets may not be good or bad for the microbiome. And yet there are some answers that arrive to us from Dr. Sonnenburg, but from other experts in the field, that there are certain foods and certain things that we can ingest which definitely enhance the microbiome and make it healthier than it would be were we to not ingest those foods. So next I'd like to talk about what I think is a really pioneering and important study in this area. This is a study that was carried out by the Sonnenburg lab in collaboration with Chris Gardner's lab, also at Stanford, where they compared two general types of diets in humans, diets that were fiber rich, which has been proposed time and time again to enhance microbiota diversity and to enhance gut-brain signaling even and to enhance the immune system perhaps, and diets that were enriched in so-called low-sugar fermented foods. Before I dive into that study and what the conclusions were because they are very interesting and very actionable for all of us, I do want to touch on probiotics because I want to avoid confusion. It is not the case that ingestion of probiotics will always lead to brain fog. I want to make that clear. It is the case that ingestion of probiotics, even if those probiotics don't directly contain the microbiota species that one is trying to proliferate, can be useful for improving microbiotal diversity. In general, it seems that maintaining a healthy gut microbiome involves ingesting certain types of foods, and we'll talk about those in a moment, but perhaps also augmenting the microbiota system through prebiotics or probiotics at a fairly low level on a consistent basis. So these are not high dose probiotics except under conditions of dysbiosis where, for instance, if somebody has done a round of antibiotics and they need to replenish their gut microbiome, there are foods and there are pill form and powder form prebiotics and probiotics that can be very useful. Or in cases where people have been very stressed or are undergoing excessive travel or have shifted their diet radically, maybe that's due to travel, maybe that's due to illness, maybe that's due to stress. But when there are a number of different converging events that are stressing or depleting microbiotal diversity, that's when at least I believe it can be useful to support the gut microbiome through the ingestion of quality probiotics or prebiotics. So it would be under conditions where people are stressed or their system is generally stressed for environmental or illness-related reasons that it might be useful to lean towards higher doses of prebiotics or probiotics than one might normally use but that under normal conditions, that one would focus on quality nutrients through diet and focus on ingestion of probiotics at a fairly low to moderate level, and/or prebiotics at a fairly low to moderate level. That just seems like the logical approach based on the experts that I've spoken to. But certainly if your doctor prescribes or suggests that you take high levels of probiotics for any reason, you should definitely pay attention to your physician, and you should obviously pay attention to your physician in any a case. You should never add or remove anything from your nutritional plan or supplementation plan without consulting a physician. So what should we do in order to maximize the health of our gut-brain axis as it's called? How should we support the diversity of the good microbiota that help us create all these neurotransmitters that we want, improve our immune system function, and so on and so forth? Well, some of that is going to be through the basics. When I say the basics, I mean the foundational things that really set us up for overall health. So this is going to be getting deep sleep of sufficient duration 80 plus percent of the time. I mean, if you could get a hundred percent of the time, that'd be great but very few people accomplish that. It's going to be proper hydration. It's going to be proper social interactions. It's going to be proper nutrition. And we'll talk more about nutrition in a moment. It's going to be limiting excessive, prolonged stressors or stress. And indeed we've done episodes about, just about all of those things but certainly about stress we have an episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast that you can find at hubermanlab.com all about mastering stress, how to avoid long periods of intense stress, what to do to offset those. Given that stress can disrupt the microbiome, whether or not you're fasting or not, those tools ought to be useful. Now, in what I consider to be a landmark study exploring the relationship between the gut microbiome, food intake, and overall health is this paper from Justin Sonnenburg's lab and Chris Gardner's lab, both of which are at Stanford. And the paper entitled "Gut Microbiome-Targeted Diets Modulate Human Immune Status" was published in the journal "Cell", which is among the three top journals perhaps in the world, "Nature", "Science", and "Cell" really being the apex journals for overall science, and especially for biomedical sciences. Now, this is a very interesting study. It was done on humans. There were two major groups. One group of humans was instructed to increase the amount of fiber in their diet and in fact ate a high fiber diet. The other group was instructed to eat a high fermented food diet. Now, both groups started off not having eaten a lot of fiber or a lot of fermented foods and were told to increase the amount of either fiber or fermented foods that they were ingesting over a four-week ramp up period and that was to avoid any major gastric distress. It turns out that if you're not already accustomed to eating a lot of fiber, increasing your amount of fiber dramatically can cause some gastric distress but if you ease into it over time, as we'll see, there's a mechanism behind this, which was unveiled in this study, but if you ease into it over time, then the system can tolerate it. Likewise high fermented foods can be readily tolerated if there's a ramp up phase of ingesting maybe one serving a day, then maybe two servings, and ramping up in this case as high as six servings per day. However, after this ramp up period, the group assigned to the high fiber condition maintained high fiber intake for six weeks and the high fermented food group maintained high fermented food intake for six weeks after which they went off either the high fiber or the high fermented food diet and there was a four-week follow up period during which they gradually returned to baseline. Throughout the study their gut microbiome was evaluated for the diversity of gut microbiota. And there were also a number of measures of immune system function, in particular measures of the so-called inflammatome. The immune system has a lot of different molecules involved. I did a whole episode about the immune system if you're interested in learning what some of those molecules are, various cytokines and signaling molecules that reflect either high inflammation states or reduced inflammation states in the brain and body. You're welcome to check that episode. It's also at hubermanlab.com. Regardless, in this study, they explored the sorts of immune markers that were expressed in either of the two groups and compared those. The basic takeaway of this paper was that contrary to what they predicted, the high fiber diet did not lead to increased microbiota diversity, at least not in all cases. And that was somewhat surprising. You know, the idea is that prebiotic fiber and a lot of the material in fruits and vegetables and grains and so forth are supposed to support microbiotal diversity and the proliferation of existing microbiota. And that is not what they observed, although I want to be very clear in pointing out that the results do not indicate that fiber is not useful for health overall, but it does point to the fact that increasing fiber intake did not increase microbiota diversity, which in general, as I mentioned before, is associated with improvements in microbiota function, health, and overall wellbeing. Now, the high fermented food diet condition was very interesting. It resulted in increased microbiome diversity and decrease inflammatory signals and activity. So there was a twofer. Basically by ingesting high fermented foods in fair abundance, right? You know, four to six servings or more per day is a lot of fermented food intake. We'll talk about what some of those foods were. But the outcome was very positive. There was a clear increase in microbiome diversity and decreased inflammatory signals. So things like interleukin-6, a number of other interleukins and cytokines that are associated with increased inflammation in the brain and body were reduced significantly. Now, let's talk a little bit about this notion of number of servings, et cetera. One somewhat minor point of the study, but I think is useful in terms of taking an actionable stance with this is that the number of servings of fermented foods was not as strong a predictor of improvements in the inflammatome, meaning reduced inflammation and improvements in microbiota diversity, as was the duration of time that the individuals were ingesting fermented foods. In other words, the longer that one is consistently ingesting fermented foods on a daily basis, the better the outcomes in terms of the gut microbiome and for reducing inflammation. So I think that's an important point. And I make that point, especially because for a lot of people, even if you do this ramp up phase, six servings per day of fermented foods can seem like quite a lot. So what are these fermented foods? I think many of us are familiar with certain cheeses and being fermented and beer being fermented and kombucha is fermented. In this study, they focus specifically on low-sugar fermented foods. So this would be plain yogurt, in some cases, kimchi or sauerkraut. An important consideration, however, is that it needs to contain what are called live active cultures, which means there actually have to be microbiota that are alive inside the sauerkraut. One way you know whether or not that's happening is if you purchase sauerkraut or pickles or kimchi from a jar or a container that's on the non-refrigerated shelf or the non-refrigerated section of your grocery store, it is not going to contain live active cultures of microbiota. And likewise, if you consume yogurt that has a lot of sugar or other components added to it, it's not going to have the same positive effect on the microbiome, at least that's the prediction given some of the relationship between the sorts of microbiota that live in sugar versus plain type yogurts. They gave people the option of consuming any number of different low-sugar fermented food. So that again that could be sauerkraut, kimchi, things like kefir, natto. In Japan, they consume natto which is a fermented food. Beer was not one of the fermented foods that was included in the fermented food list. And when we say six servings per day, that is indeed six, six ounce servings, or six, four to six ounce servings. It was not six servings of what's listed on the package. So again, that turns out to be a fair amount of fermented foods. How should you gauge whether or not you're getting enough of this? Well, if you decide to take on this protocol of ingesting more fermented foods, which at least by my read of this study and some of the follow up work that's being done, sounds like a terrific idea if you want to improve your gut microbiome for all the great reasons that one would want to, brain-body health, reduced inflammation, and on and on, well then you definitely want to focus on fermented foods that you enjoy consuming. So for you if that's kefir, or for you that's plain yogurt, or for you that's sauerkraut, which happens to be my personal favorite, then you want to make sure that it's going to be something that you are going to enjoy ingesting quite a lot of and that you're going to be okay with ingesting probably throughout the day. Now, people follow different meal schedules, of course, but this does require not just eating all the fermented foods just before bedtime or at one meal. I suppose you could do that, but in general, it's going to work best in terms of limiting gastric distress by spreading it out throughout the day. I also want to mention brine. Brine is the liquid that surrounds sauerkraut. It's that very salty fluid. And that contains a lot of active live cultures. And they did include or they allowed people to include brine in this study. And in discussions with Dr. Sonnenburg, which we'll go into in more detail on the episode that comes out next week, we talk a lot about the particular value that brine might hold in terms of bringing about microbiota diversity because of the richness of live cultures that it contains. I do want to focus for a moment on the high fiber condition because there were some interesting observations about the people that were placed into that condition. First of all, increasing the amount of fiber definitely increased the number of enzymes that can be used to digest fiber. This is in keeping with this idea of this ramp up phase where accumulation of more fiber intake can over time lead to less gastric distress but also to more utilization of fiber which overall should be a good thing. So while they didn't observe an increase in immune system function or an increase in microbiota diversity, there was an increase in these fiber digesting enzymes. They also observed what they called personalized immune responses. There were some subgroups within the high fiber group that had interesting changes in terms of their reactions to, or I should say their inflammatome, meaning the inflammatory markers they expressed, as well as their microbiota diversity. So there were essentially three groups. One group actually showed an increase in inflammatory markers. So that was quite surprising and probably not wonderful for the message that fiber is always good for us but that was a small cohort within the fiber intake group. Another group and still another group, both showed reductions in baseline microbiota diversity although to varying degrees. So I don't want to paint the picture that fiber is bad but fiber certainly did not have the positive effects on microbiota diversity that the high fermented food diet did. So my read of this study, and I think the stance that many others have taken as a consequence of these data, is that we should be increasing our fermented food intake, that that's simply a good thing to do in order to support our gut microbiome and to reduce inflammatory signals in our brain and body. And there are a number of different ways to do that. I mentioned some of the particular foods. However, anytime you're talking about ingesting fermented foods, especially the high quality ones that come from the refrigerated section of the grocery store, and that have low sugar content, et cetera, we do have to be considerate of cost because certain things like kombuchas, for instance, can be quite costly. I should also mention some kombuchas actually contain alcohol, some do not, or contain very little amounts of alcohol. One way to avoid the high cost of fermented foods while still being able to accumulate a lot of fermented food intake is to simply make those fermented foods yourself. And this is something that we've started exploring and experimenting with in our home. One simple way to do this is to just make your own sauerkraut. It involves very few ingredients. It basically involves cabbage, water, and salt, but there's a specific process that you need to follow in order to create these large volumes of sauerkraut at home using that low cost method. The best resource that I know of in order to follow a great recipe to make homemade sauerkraut would be the recipe for homemade sauerkraut that's contained in Tim Ferriss's book, "The 4-Hour Chef". There's an excellent protocol there. It involves chopping up the cabbage, putting into a bowl, mashing it up with your hands, which can be fun, putting water in there, some salt, covering it, and then keeping it in a particular environment, and then routinely scraping off some of the material from the surface. You have to do that in order to make sure that you're not getting microbes and things growing in it that are bad for you. So you definitely want to pay careful attention to the protocol, but that's a very, very low cost way of generating lots and lots of fermented foods so you don't go broke trying to improve your microbiome. The other thing that you can do if you're really obsessed with kombucha or something like that, to avoid the high cost of kombucha is there are ways that you can get the scoby, which basically allows you to make your own kombucha at home. I've never tried this, but when I was a post doc, there was an undergraduate in the lab, I think, well, I won't out him, but he's now gone on to medical school and I think he's passed his residency and is a practicing doctor, but nonetheless, he was always making kombucha at home. He told me it was exceedingly easy, but then again, he had a number of other skills and attributes that made me think that he could do pretty much anything with ease, whereas I tend to struggle with even basic cooking. So maybe if you're feeling a little more adventurous, you could explore making your own kombucha. But there are a number of different protocols and recipes out there for making your own low-sugar fermented foods. So you needn't run out and buy fresh sauerkraut all the time. I should also mention for those of you that are interested in getting your fermented intake from pickles, jarred pickles rarely if ever contain ferment. Mostly they're just soaked in vinegar, water, and with some spices, but there are some that contain ferment. You actually have to look for that on the container. And I don't know, maybe someone out there knows how to make natto and knows how to make kimchi well and things of that sort. It certainly is the case based on the data from the study that ingesting more servings of fermented food per day ought to be beneficial for our gut microbiome. And since this is an episode not just about gut microbiome but gut-brain health, I should mention that one form of signaling between the gut microbiome and the brain which we did not discuss and I'll just touch on briefly is that when the inflammatome or the genes and markers of inflammation are kept in a healthy range, there's an active signaling of that immune system status to the brain. There's an intermediate cell type that communicates immune status to the brain. And that cell type is the microglial cell. It's a type of glia as the name suggests. When there's a lot of inflammation in the body, these microglia actually get activated and can start eating away at various components of the brain and nervous system. And I don't mean massive eating away. They're not going to digest the whole brain but these microglia are sort of the resident macrophages of the brain. Macrophages are in the periphery and they gobble up debris and things of that sort. The microglia on a regular basis are eating up debris that accumulates across waking cycles and in response to micro-damage to the brain that occurs on a daily basis. So they have a lot of important basic everyday what we call housekeeping functions. But when there's a lot of inflammation in the body, when there's a massive immune response, the microglia can be hyperactivated and that's thought to lead to any number of different cognitive defects or challenges thinking, or maybe even some forms of neurodegeneration over time, although that last point is more of a hypothesis than a well tamped down fact at this point. There's still a lot of investigation to be done in humans. The animal data, however, are very, very strong that when the immune system is activated or chronically activated or hyperactivated that neural tissue, meaning brain tissue and other central nervous system tissue can suffer. So there are a lot of reasons to want to not just improve microbiome diversity, but to also improve immune system function and to limit the number of inflammatory markers that are present in the body because of the way those inflammatory markers can signal deleterious events in the brain. And while eating fermented foods and making your own fermented foods and buying high quality fermented foods might seem like an inconvenience, I would say that from the perspective of cost-benefit or effort-benefit, it's actually quite a good situation where if you can just ramp up the number of fermented foods or servings of fermented foods that you're eating per day over a period of a few weeks so that you're tolerating that well, that ought to have a very positive effect on your microbiome diversity and indeed on gut-brain function. And I'll be the last to suggest that people completely forego on fiber. I think there's some debate out there as to how much fiber we need and whether or not certain forms of fiber are better than others. I'm not going to get into that debate. It's barbed wire enough without me injecting my own views into that debate. But I think there's ample evidence to support the fact that for most people ingesting a fair amount of fiber is going to be a good idea. I would just say that make sure that you're also ingesting a fair amount of fermented foods. And along the lines of fiber, in an accompanying article published in "Cell", which was sort of a what we call a news and views piece about the Sonnenburg and Gardner paper, they make a quite good point, which is that the increase in fiber intake that led to the increase in carbohydrate active enzymes, these CAZymes as they're called, these are enzymes that help digest fiber, quote, "indicating an enhanced capacity for the microbiome to degrade complex carbohydrates present in fibrous foods". So in other words, eating more fiber and fibrous foods allowed for an increase in these enzymes that allow you to eat still more fibrous foods or to better digest fibrous foods that are coming in through other sources. So there is at least one utility for increasing fiber even though it's separate from the gut microbiotal diversity and reducing inflammation. And I'd be remiss if I didn't touch on some of the data and controversy about artificial sweeteners and the gut microbiome. I want to be very clear that what I'm about to tell you has only been established in animal models, in a mouse model, at least to my knowledge. What the studies have shown, and there were several, but one published in the journal "Nature" a few years back is the one that got the most amount of attention is that animals that consume large amounts of artificial sweeteners. in particular things like saccharin or sucralose show disruptions in their gut microbiome. I'm not aware of any studies in humans that show the equivalent effect. And I'm not aware of any studies in humans that show the equivalent effect for things like plant-based, low-calorie sweeteners, things like Stevia, monk fruit, and things of that sort. And at least by my exploration, I couldn't find any data specifically related to the sweetener aspartame. So right now it's somewhat controversial and actually this is kind of a third rail topic out there. When one group will come out saying that artificial sweeteners are bad because they disrupt the gut microbiome, the response generally from a number of people as well, that's only been shown in animal models. And indeed that's true. So right now I don't think that there's a strong case one way or the other. I think that people should basically ask themselves whether or not they like artificial sweeteners or not, whether or not they're willing to risk it or not, and obviously that's an individual choice. I also want to point out a recent study from Diego Bohorquez's lab, which actually shows, however, that neurons in the gut, those neuropod cells, are actually capable of distinguishing between real sugars and artificial sweeteners. This is a really interesting body of work. It was published just now, just recently, I should say, February 2022. The title of the paper is "The Preference for Sugar over Sweetener Depends on a Gut Sensor Cell". And to make a long story short, what they showed was there's a category of neuropod cells that recognize sugar in the gut and signal that information about the presence of sugar in the gut to the brain via the pathways we talked about before, the nodose ganglia, the vagus, dopamine, et cetera, et cetera. Interestingly, the very same category of neurons can respond to artificial sweeteners and signal that information to the brain, but the pattern of signaling and indeed the signature pattern that is conveyed to the brain and received by the brain is actually quite a bit different when these same neurons are responding to artificial sweeteners versus actual sugar. And this is very interesting because what it means is first of all that neurons have incredible specificity in terms of what they are signaling from the gut to the brain. And it also means that there may be a particular signal that the brain receives that says I'm receiving some intake of food or drink that tastes sweet but doesn't actually offer much nutrients in the direction of sweetness, meaning that it doesn't have calories despite being sweet. Now, again, this is all subconscious processing. And like with the previous studies we were just discussing about artificial sweeteners generally and the gut microbiome generally, it's unclear how this relates to humans at this point in time. But given the similarity of cellular processes and molecular processes at the level of gut-brain in mice, I think it stands to reason that these neuropod cells very likely are capable of signaling sweet presence of real sweetener versus artificial sweetener in humans as well, although that still remains to be determined empirically. So I'd like to just briefly recap what I've covered today. I started off by talking about the structure and function of the gut-brain axis. I described the basic structure and function of the digestive pathway, and how that digestive pathway harbors microbiotal species, meaning many, many little bacteria that can signal all sorts of things to the rest of the brain and body. And indeed, we talked about the various ways they do that. We talked about direct pathways, literally nerve networks that extend from the gut up to the brain and from the brain back to the gut. And we talked about indirect pathways, how some of the gut microbiota can actually synthesize neurotransmitters that get out into the bloodstream, can impact the body, can impact the immune system, and can get into the brain and act as neurotransmitters in the brain just as would neurotransmitters that originate from within the brain. We also talked about what constitutes a healthy versus unhealthy microbiome. And it's very clear that having a diverse microbiome is healthier than having a non-diverse microbiome. But as I pointed out, there's still a lot of questions as to exactly what microbiota species you want to enhance and which ones you want to suppress in the gut in order to achieve the best gut-brain axis function. We talked about how things like fasting might impact the microbiome and how some of that might be a little bit counterintuitive based on some of the other positive effects of fasting, or if we're not just discussing fasting, some other types of somewhat restrictive diets either restrictive in time or restrictive in terms of macronutrient intake, how those may or may not improve the health of gut microbiome. And the basic takeaway was that because we don't know exactly how specific diets impact the gut microbiome, and we don't know how fasting either promotes or degrades the microbiome, we really can't say whether or not they are improving or degrading the microbiome at this time. However, it is clear that stress, in particular chronic stress, can disrupt the gut microbiome. It's also clear, of course, that antibiotics can disrupt the gut microbiome. And that brings us to the topic of prebiotics and probiotics. And I emphasized the fact that for most people, ingesting high quality non-processed foods that includes some prebiotic fiber but also that includes some probiotics will probably be healthy but not excessive levels of probiotics. High levels of supplemented probiotics of the sort that would come in a probiotic pill or even prescription probiotics would probably lend themselves best to when people were under severe chronic stress or had just come off a serious round or an ongoing or repeated rounds of antibiotics. That does not mean that ingesting probiotics in any form or any kind is not good. It just means that the very high dose probiotics, again, typically found in prescription form or capsule pill form probably are best reserved to cases where of course your doctor prescribes them. You should always follow your doctor's advice. But in cases where perhaps you are jetlagged, you're traveling excessively for any reason, or working excessively, you're not getting enough sleep, or your diet is radically changed from normal. And we talked about how increasing the amount of fiber in your diet might be useful for increasing fiber digesting enzymes and the assimilation of fibrous foods but that it's really the ingestion of fermented foods and, in fact, getting anywhere from four or even up to six servings a day of fermented foods can be immensely beneficial for reducing inflammatory markers in the body and for improving microbiota diversity all along the gut and thereby improving signaling and outcomes along the gut-brain axis. So we went all the way from structure to function to the four kinds of signaling, mechanical, chemical, indirect, direct, probiotics, fiber, and fermented foods. And I tossed in a little bit at the end there also about ways that you can make your own fermented foods at home in order to try and offset some of the costs. Also, it's just kind of fun to do. And some of those actually taste quite good. I've actually found that the fermented sauerkraut that we're making at home actually rivals the sauerkraut that you can buy out of the refrigerated section at the grocery store. And I am by no means a skilled cook or chef and basically have no culinary skill whatsoever. So if I can do it, you can do it. I hope you found this information useful and perhaps also actionable. One of my motivations for doing this episode was, again, as a primer for the episode with Dr. Justin Sonnenburg where we go really deep into the gut microbiome, less so into the gut-brain axis, but really deep into the gut microbiome, what it is, what it does, what it doesn't do, and some of the emerging findings from his lab that are yet to be published. And I also was excited to do this episode because I think many of us have heard about the gut microbiome. We hear about these bacteria that live in our gut. We hear about the gut-brain axis or that 90% or more of the serotonin that we make is made in our gut. We hear about the gut as a second brain and so forth. But I think for many people, they don't really have a clear picture of what the gut microbiome is and the pathways and mechanisms by which it can signal to the brain and to the other parts of the body. So I hope that today's information at least improved the clarity around that topic and leaves you with a more vivid picture of this incredible system that is our gut-brain axis. If you're enjoying and/or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific, zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. On YouTube, we have a comment section, please, of course, give us feedback in comments but please also make suggestions about topics and guests that you would like us to include on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We do read those comments. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's perhaps the best way to support this podcast. And we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. On many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. One of the key issues with supplements, however, is that the quality of supplements can vary tremendously and oftentimes that relates to the precision, or I should say the lack of precision, with which companies put different amounts of supplements in the capsules and tablets that are listed on the bottle. For that reason, we partner with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements have the highest degree of stringency in terms of the quality of ingredients and the specificity of the amounts of the ingredients. That is, what is listed on the bottle is actually what is contained in the capsules and tablets and powders. If you'd like to see the Thorne supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's thorne.com/u/huberman and there you can see the Thorne supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, you can get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. That's thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, it's Huberman Lab on Instagram. It's also Huberman Lab on Twitter, and there I cover science and science-related tools, some of which overlap with the material covered on the podcast and some of which is distinct from the material covered on the podcast. Please also subscribe to our "Neural Network Newsletter". The "Neural Network Newsletter" is a completely zero-cost newsletter that comes out once a month. You can sign up by going to hubermanlab.com. We don't share your email with anybody and our privacy policy is there and very clear. The newsletter includes actionable protocols and summaries from the podcast as well as new information entirely. And last but certainly not least, thank you [upbeat music] for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 287 ---
Video ID: PctD-ki8dCc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PctD-ki8dCc
Title: Dr. David Spiegel: Using Hypnosis to Enhance Health & Performance
Published: 2022-02-21 13:00:11 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. David Spiegel MD, Associate Chair of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Director of the Center on Stress and Health and Director of the Center for Integrative Medicine at Stanford University School of Medicine. Dr. Spiegel has more than 40 years of clinical and research experience with hypnosis, stress physiology, and psychotherapy. In this episode, we examine the role of clinical hypnosis for the treatment of trauma, chronic pain, anxiety and more. Dr. Spiegel explains how to determine your level of ‘hypnotizability’ and provides case studies of incredible successes with hypnosis to treat a variety of ailments. We also discuss how breathing, vision and directed mental focus can modulate internal states and enhance performance. Additionally, we discuss how the adoption of self-hypnosis techniques can reduce stress and enhance sleep in anyone. Dr. Spiegel teaches us how hypnosis works at the neural circuit level to enhance cognitive flexibility. Throughout the episode, Dr. Spiegel summarizes key clinical trials and peer-reviewed findings and resources to work with a trained clinical professional or to do guided self-hypnosis.  

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Hypnosis 

Watch Andrew’s Hypnosis Session with Dr. Spiegel: https://youtu.be/tlTzVB6TGT0

Thank you to our sponsors:
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
ROKA -  https://roka.com - code "huberman"

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. David Spiegel Links:
Stanford Center for Stress and Health: https://stresshealthcenter.stanford.edu
Support Dr. Spiegel’s Research at Stanford (tax-deductible): https://stan.md/3p36Yqd
Dr. Spiegel’s Published Work: https://stanford.io/3GYzL5C
Email: david@reveri.com

Article Links:
Posthypnotic Amnesia in Hypnotizability Assessment: Validation of a New Scoring System for the Hypnotic Induction Profile: https://bit.ly/3uYrlsC
Post-traumatic stress disorder and cancer: https://bit.ly/3h36vzX
Association between Anterior Cingulate Neurochemical Concentration and Individual Differences in Hypnotizability: https://bit.ly/33BvMyj
Hypnosis reduces distress and duration of an invasive medical procedure for children: https://bit.ly/3p3wOuf

Other Links:
Society for Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis: https://www.sceh.us
American Society for Clinical Hypnosis: https://bit.ly/3JHU88Y
Watch Andrew’s Hypnosis Session with Dr. Spiegel: https://youtu.be/tlTzVB6TGT0
Reveri website: https://www.reveri.com 
Reveri app (iOS): https://apple.co/3sT5RL8
Join the Waitlist for Reveri for Android: https://bit.ly/3JB2wa0

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Dr. David Spiegel MD, Hypnosis  
00:04:16 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Thesis, ROKA
00:09:09 Clinical Hypnosis
00:16:45 Stage Hypnosis 
00:20:25 Neurobiology of Hypnosis
00:26:04 ADHD
00:28:22 Hypnosis for Stress & Sleep 
00:32:12 Hypnosis to Strengthen Neural Connections 
00:37:19 Restructuring Trauma Narratives
00:45:14 Ketamine Therapy
00:50:07 Self-directed Hypnosis, Reveri 
00:56:53 Eliminating Obsessive Thoughts, Superstitions  
01:01:50 ‘Hypnotizability’, the Spiegel Eye-roll Test  
01:15:36 EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization Reprocessing)
01:21:43 Confronting Stress & Trauma
01:27:56 The Mind-Body Connection 
01:31:35 Dealing with Grief 
01:35:45 Hypnosis in Children & Groups
01:40:06 Drug Therapies & Hypnosis
01:42:39 Breathing Patterns, Peak Performance 
01:50:00 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, [upbeat music] where we discuss science, and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology, at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, my guest is Dr. David Spiegel. Dr. Spiegel is the associate chair of psychiatry, and behavioral neurosciences, at Stanford University School of Medicine. He is also the director, of the Stanford Center on Stress and Health. Dr. Spiegel is both a researcher and a clinician, meaning he runs a laboratory that studies the brain, and the body. And neural mechanisms of how the brain and body interact. And he sees patients as a psychiatrist at Stanford. His work is incredibly unique, in that it bridges mind and body, but it also has a particular focus on the clinical applications of hypnosis. As you'll learn today, hypnosis is a unique brain state, in which neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience, may be heightened and indeed the use of clinical hypnosis, by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues has been shown to improve symptoms of stress, chronic anxiety, chronic pain and various other illnesses, including many psychiatric illnesses and even outcomes in cancer. Today, we discuss hypnosis in the context of what's called, self-hypnosis to distinguish it from stage hypnosis. Many of you are probably familiar with stage hypnosis, which is really about a hypnotist getting a person to do things they would not otherwise do, in contrast, clinical hypnosis, and the use of hypnosis for the treatment of various ailments of mind and body is vastly different. It involves getting people to change their brain state and to use that brain state as a portal to make adjustments in their brain and body, and other aspects of their biology and psychology that benefit them. And it's been shown over and over again, in studies by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues that those changes can occur extremely quickly. Now, not everybody can be hypnotized as readily as the next. And so today we also discuss a simple test, developed by Dr. Spiegel. The it can help you determine, whether or not you have a high, medium or low degree, of what we call hypnotizability. Dr. Spiegel is truly an expert in this area. He has published over 480 journal articles, 170 book chapters on hypnosis, and on things like psychosocial oncology, which is the interaction of mind and body in the treatment of cancer and cancer outcomes, on stress physiology, trauma and other aspects of psychotherapy. He's published 13 books. So, he's truly the world expert in hypnosis and clinical applications of hypnosis for mind and body. I'm certain that in listening to today's episode, you're going to learn a tremendous amount about how the brain and body interact, about various treatments for all sorts of common ailments of mind and body. And you are going to get access to tools, in particular, a tool that was developed by Dr. Spiegel, which is the Reveri app, R-E-V-E-R-I, the Reveri app is currently only available for Apple, but will soon also be available for Android. It does carry a nominal cost, but there is a seven day free trial. If you'd like to try it, we're providing a link in the show notes. The Reveri app is special, in that it is based on clinical studies and research done in the Spiegel lab at Stanford. So, unlike a lot of hypnosis apps out there and resources for hypnosis, it was developed with clinical treatments in mind. Today, we also discuss the use of breathwork and I'm very fortunate that my research lab at Stanford, has been collaborating very closely with Dr. Spiegel in testing and developing specific breathwork protocols to adjust mind and body for things like anxiety, improving mood and improving sleep. Based on his incredible and unique expertise, and the clarity with which, Dr. Spiegel communicates information. I anticipate that you will really enjoy today's episode and that you'll come away from it, with a lot of actionable tools. Some of you might be curious, what a clinical hypnosis session looks like. And for that reason, we had Dr. Spiegel hypnotize me. A clip of that hypnosis session, is going to be posted to the Huberman Lab Clips channel, which is available on YouTube. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public, in keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one, vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012. So, I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens, once or twice a day, is that it covers all of my foundational, vitamin, mineral, probiotic needs. There is now ample evidence that probiotics can be very helpful for supporting what is called the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome is an aspect of our biology in which, little gut microbiota live all along our digestive pathway and help support various aspects of our biology, including our immune system, our metabolic system, our hormone or endocrine system, as well as what's called the gut brain access, which is literally communication between the gut and the brain to support things like mood, motivation and various other aspects of brain health. With Athletic Greens, I get the probiotics that I need to support a healthy gut microbiome and the vitamins and minerals tap off, any deficiencies I might have, based on lack of certain foods and lack of certain nutrients in my diet. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They give you five free travel packs, plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. There's a lot of evidence now that vitamin D3 is critically important for various aspects of immediate and long term health. And while many people get enough vitamin D3, many people do not. So, the year supply of vitamin D3, ought to be very useful for many people, and K2 has been shown to be important for, calcium regulation, various aspects of metabolic health and so forth. So again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens and get that special offer of the five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3 K2, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman Today's episode is also brought to us by Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics, a nootropic is a smart drug. And personally, I'm not a big fan of the concept of a smart drug. At least not the way that most people talk about, smart drugs or nootropics, for the following reason, being smart involves various things. There is creativity, there's focus, there's task switching and so on. And each one of those involves different operations in the brain, different neural circuits, different neurochemicals have to be deployed, in order for us to, for instance, be very focused or for us to be very creative or for us to be able to switch tasks easily. Thesis understands this and for that reason, they've developed custom nootropics, that are aimed at getting your brain and body into particular states for particular types of work or physical activity. In order to accomplish that, they created unique blends of high quality ingredients. And each of those blends is designed to get your brain and body into a particular mode, such as focus, clarity or motivation. I've been using Thesis nootropics for over six months now. And I have to say it's been a total game changer and very unique from the experience of using, sort of what I call, catchall nootropics. So with Thesis, it's really directed toward particular brain-body states. I should also mention that they tailor those custom blends to you. So, by taking a quiz on their site, they will tailor the blend to you and your specific needs and the things you don't want. So, if you want to try your own, personalized nootropics starter kit, you can go online to takethesis.com/huberman you'll take a three minute quiz and thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. And then based on the outcomes with those, they can update your formulations for you. That's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout, to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that I believe are of the utmost quality. The company was found by, two All-American Swimmers from Stanford and everything about the design of ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, was created with performance in mind. There are a number of things about, ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses that I particularly like, first of all, they're extremely lightweight. You basically forget that you're wearing them. Second of all, you can wear them for work, for going out to dinner, et cetera. They have great aesthetics, so you can wear them anywhere, but also for exercise. You can wear them when running or cycling, and even if you get sweaty, they're designed so that they don't slip off your face. Another terrific feature of ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, is that they were designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. We all have the experience of being in a shaded area and then going to a bright area, it takes some time for your eyes to adjust or to adapt. Many sunglasses make it hard to see as you move from one environment to the next and therefore, you have to take on and off your sunglasses, with ROKA sunglasses, you don't have to do that. You don't even notice the transitions between those bright areas and those dimer areas. So, you can wear them anywhere, anytime. And again, most of the time, you don't even realize that they're on your face. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, go to roka.com, that's roka.com and enter the code "huberman" to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, roka.com and enter the code "huberman" at checkout. And now, for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel, David, thank you so much for being here. - Andrew, my pleasure. - Can you tell us, what is hypnosis? - Hypnosis is a state of highly focused attention. It's something like looking through the telephoto lens of a camera in consciousness, what you see, you see with great detail, but devoid of context. If you've had the experience of getting so caught up in a good movie, that you forget you're watching a movie and a enter the imaginary world. You're part of the movie, not part of the audience, you're experiencing it, you're not evaluating it. That's a hypnotic like experience that many people have in their everyday lives. - So, is any experience that really draws us in, hypnotic in that sense? Or let me give a different example. If I'm watching a sports game and I'm really wrapped up in the game, but I'm also in touch with how it makes me feel in my body kind of registering the excitement or the anticipation. Is that a state of hypnosis also, because you mentioned there's kind of, a narrowing of context. - Right. - But a kind of losing of the self, or is it, do I have that right? - Yes, it is true that you're- [indistinct] to the extent that you're somatic, your body experience is a part of the sport event that you're engaged with. I'd say that is a self altering hypnotic experience. If your physical reactions are distracting you or make you think about something else, that's when it's less hypnotic like, and more, just one of a series of experiences. - Okay. So I have to ask, how did you get into this business of hypnosis? Because, I think for most people, when they hear hypnosis or they think about hypnosis, they think of stage hypnosis. - Right. - They think of somebody with a pendant going back and forth or people up on a stage, behaving abnormally for the entertainment of others. - Yeah. - How did you get into hypnosis as an interest, as a practice? And if you would, could you contrast the sort of hypnosis that you do in the clinical setting with a sort of hypnosis that a stage hypnotist does? - Sure. Well, it is something of a genetic illness in my family. Both of my parents were psychiatrists and psychoanalysts and they told me I was free to be any kind of psychiatrist I wanted to be. So, here I am. My father was training to be a psychoanalyst in 1943. And, he ran into a Vietnamese refugee, who couldn't serve in the army, but who had studied hypnosis. And actually it would interest you, doing your ophthalmological research. He had a smallpox scar right in the middle of his forehead, and he did forensic examinations. And he noticed that some of the prisoners, would focus on that spot on his forehead and then close their eyes and seem to go to sleep. But they were in some altered state. So he got interested in hypnosis. He used it forensically and his name was Gustav von Aschaffenburg. And he offered to teach young psychiatrists, how to use hypnosis when they went off into the war. And so he trained my father and my got off the analytic couch and asked, the analyst mentioned it to him. That's how he found out about it. And my father said, did I say something wrong in analysis? Why is he talking to me [laughs] now? And he found it very useful in helping soldiers who had acute pain when they were wounded and helping people with conversion in post-traumatic stress disorders. And when he came back, he went back to his training, but he still was sort of interested in it. And he had his, one of his supervisors was Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, who was a very famous psychoanalyst. And he said that he had been told to stop doing hypnosis because it would ruin his reputation as an analyst. And she said to him, what are you so worried of about your reputation for? You're going to give a course at the institute in hypnosis, and I know you're going to do it because I'm going to take it. So he was teaching Frieda Fromm-Reichmann hypnosis, and he just kept doing it. And after a while, he discovered that he was getting better results with a few sessions of hypnosis than he was with daily psychoanalysis with his patients. And so he switched his practice. And so the dinner table conversations, were pretty interesting. And occasionally when he was making a movie of a patient, I would get to watch that. And so, when I went to medical school, I figured I'll take a course. [mumbles] Tom Hackett, who was a chair of psychiatry of mass general was teaching and it was a very interesting course. And the day that converted me was, I was doing my rotation at Children's Hospital in Boston. And the nurse is telling me, Spiegel, your next patient is an asthmatic in room 437 or something. And I'm just following, the sound of the wheezes down the hall. I go in the room, there's a 16 year old girl, knuckles white, bolt upright in bed, struggling for breath. You can hear the wheezing. She twice had subcutaneous epinephrine, didn't work. They were thinking about general anesthesia and starting her on steroids. And her mother's there crying. And I said, I don't know what else to do. So I said, you want to learn a breathing exercise? And she nods. And I got her hypnotized. And then I realized we hadn't gotten to asthma in the course yet. So, I made up something very complex. I said, each breath you take will be a little deeper and a little easier. And within five minutes, she's lying back in bed. Her knuckles aren't white, she's not wheezing. Her mother stopped crying. The nurse ran out of the room, and the intern, my intern comes to find me and I figured he is going to pat me on the back and say, nice job, Spiegel. He said, the nurse has filed a complaint with a nursing supervisor that you violated a Massachusetts law by hypnotizing, a minor without parental consent. And I thought, oh, that's nice. I doubt there is a law like this. So, the interns says, you're going to have to stop doing this with her. And I said, why? He said, it's dangerous. I said, you're going to give her general anesthesia and put her on steroids, and talking to her is dangerous? He said, well, you'll have to do it. And I said, I'll tell you what, take me off the case if you want, but I'm not going to tell a patient of mine, anything I know is not true. So, there was a battle over the weekend about what to do, and the intern, the chief resident, the attending, were all arguing about it. And on Monday they came back with a radical idea. They said, let's ask the patient. I don't think this has ever been done at children's [chuckles] hospital before. And she said, oh, I like this. She'd been hospitalized every month for three months in status asthmaticus, she did a one subsequent hospitalization but after that, went on to study to be a respiratory therapist. And I thought that anything, that can help a patient that much, violate a nonexistent Massachusetts law, frustrate the nursing supervisor, had to be worth looking into. So, I just kept doing it. I discovered that there were, all of my classmates in medical school, had just read the new issue of the New England Journal and had some new medication to suggest. And I would, you know, surgeons would say, look, if you can help this guy with his pain or his anxiety, anything above the neck, that's yours, do it, Spiegel. So, I was having fun and being able to learn how to help people in a way that just otherwise was not being done. And so, it got me thinking about the fact that, we're born with this brain but we don't have a user's manual for it. And we don't use it nearly as well as we can. And that's something your research is all about too. And so, I thought, I want to understand this better. And I want to see what we can do. Stage hypnotists drive me nuts. They make fools out of people. There was one. This is a case my father was involved. He got a call from, he was at Columbia, he got a call, Spiegel, you got to come see this woman, she's in the ER. And she's in some kind of weird upset state that happened. And it turned out she'd been on the show with a stage hypnotist who, and what they do by the way is, they cycle around, you know, The beginning of the show, they don't just grab somebody and say, we're doing this. They get a bunch of people up. They do what [indistinct] testing, to see if people- and they get the ones who are the most hypnotizable. So she was the one. And he said, there's now a little bird in your hand, and you're going to play with the bird. And she starts to cry and scream. And he just gets her off the stage, 'cause it's very upsetting. And she's wandering around New York City in the middle of the night dissociated and brought to Columbia. And that's where my father saw her. She was still in a kind of uncomfortable trance like state. And it turned out, that she was the trophy wife of a very wealthy guy. And she felt like a bird in a gilded cage. And so to her, that image just triggered all of this sense of, dissatisfaction and discomfort, fear about her life. And he was able to get her reoriented and talk with her about what she was going to of her life. But I don't like stage hypnosis. You're making fools out of people and you're using the fact, and that's what scares people about hypnosis. They think you're losing control. You're gaining control. Self-hypnosis is a way of enhancing your control, over your mind and your body. It can work very well, but because it gives you a kind of cognitive flexibility, you're able to shift sets very easily. To give up judging and evaluating the way you usually do and see something from a different point of view. That's a great therapeutic opportunity, but if misused, it could be a danger too, and that's what scares people about it. It is that very ability to suspend critical judgment and just have an experience and see what happens. That can be a great therapeutic opportunity, but if somebody's misusing it, it can be a way to harm people. And there are plenty of examples of people, having fantasies imposed on them, that they come to think are realities. It's not unusual these days. So, it's an ability that, if people learn to recognize and understand it, can be a tremendous therapeutic tool. - I've been stage hypnotized and I've been clinically hypnotized many times through a self-hypnosis app. We'll talk about later. And then I know we have plans for you to hypnotize me today. You've done it once before. - Mm-hm. - [Andrew] And I'm very hypnotizable as we both know. - Right. - We'll talk about, how one can gauge their hypnotizability. - Sure. - But the stage hypnosis, was interesting. This was in college, they brought someone out to the dormitory and, I recall being one of the people that was selected. - Mm-hm. - And engaging in very bizarre behavior, right? It wasn't thoroughly embarrassing, but it was pretty embarrassing. And then being sent off the stage, and as I was exiting, suddenly screaming something out because he had planted a suggestion of some sort. - Ah, mm-hm. - And then I was told to look in my pocket and there was, like a, I think, a torn up dollar bill. There were a bunch of things that I have vague recollection of. - Mm-hm. But it raises set of questions that really boil down to, as a biologist, I always think that, there's no events in the brain, there are processes. And so hypnosis, we know has an induction. Then one is hypnotized, I imagine. And then it sounds like this woman and this example of the bird and being distraught in New York City, is a failure to exit the hypnotic state. Do we know what sorts of brain areas are active during the induction, let's call it the deep hypnosis and then what's shutting off or changing as people exit hypnosis. - Yes, we do, we've studied that. We've been very interested in that. And so, we did a study where we selected highly and non-hypnotizable people so we could do the comparison. And then hypnotize them in the functional MRI scanner. And we found three things characterized the entry into the hypnotic state. The first is turning down activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. So the DACC is in the central front-middle part of the brain as you well know. And it's part of what we call the salience network. It's a conflict detector. So if you're engaged in work and you hear a loud noise that you think might be a gunshot, that's your anterior cingulate cortex saying, hey, wait a minute, there's some potential danger over there. You better pay attention to it. So, it compares what you're doing with what else is going on and helps you decide what to do. And as you can imagine, turning down activity in that region, make it less likely that you'll be distracted and pulled out of whatever you're in. And in another study, we found that highly hypnotizable people, even without being hypnotized, have more functional connectivity between the DACC, the anterior cingulate cortex and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. So, which is part of a key region in the executive control network. So, when you're engaging in tasks, you're enacting a plan, you're writing a paper, you're doing whatever you're doing. That's the prefrontal cortex who's doing that. And so, if that is coordinated, we found more functional connectivity. So, when one is up, the other's up and one is down, the other's down. That coordination implies that the brain is saying, okay, go ahead, I know what you're doing. Carry out that plan. And don't worry about other possibilities. So, two other things happen when people are hypnotized. One is that that DLPFC has higher functional connectivity with the insula. Another part of the salience network. It's a part of the mind-body control system, sensitive to what's happening in the body. It's part of the pain network as well, but it's also a region of the brain where, you can control things in your body that you wouldn't have think you could. For example, we did a study years ago, where we took people who were highly hypnotizable, hypnotized them and told them, we went on a imaginary culinary tour. So, they would eat their favorite foods and we found that, they increased their gastric acid secretion, like by 87%. So, their stomach was acting as though it was about to get, I mean, there was one woman, it was so vivid for her that halfway through, she said, let's stop, I'm full, [laughs] eating these imaginary- - Having never eaten- - Having never eaten anything- - Actual food? - No. - Incredible. - And then we got them to relax and think of anything but food or drink. And we got like a 40% decrease in gastric acid secretions. And that was DLPFC through the insula, telling the stomach you're getting food or you're not getting food. And even, we injected them with Pentagastrin, which triggers gastric acid release. And even then in the hypnosis condition, they had a 19% reduction in gastric acid. So, the brain has this amazing ability to control what's going on in the body in ways that we don't think we have ability to control. That's just one example. So, that's the DLPFC insula connection. The third thing that happens, and this relates to what you did on the stage, is you have inverse functional connectivity between the DLPFC and the posterior cingulate cortex. The posterior cingulate is part of the default mode network. It's in the back of the brain. And it's an area whose activity goes down for example, in meditators. And in meditation, you're supposed to be selfless. You're supposed to, [indistinct] self is an illusion, you're supposed to let it dissolve and just experience things. And when you're doing that, the posterior cingulate is decreasing in activity, the inverse connection is, I'm doing something but I'm not thinking about what it means for me. I may not even remember much of it. if I do, I don't care that much about it. And so, that is part of the dissociation that I occur with hypnosis. So, it's how you put things outside of conscious awareness, and don't worry about what it means. It also adds to cognitive flexibility. If you're thinking, well, people like me don't usually do this. That may inhibit you from, enacting a new form of psychotherapy for example, that you've never done before. But if you're having this decreased activity in the part of your brain that reflects on what it means, you're more likely to be cognitively flexible and willing to give it a try. And that's one of the therapeutic advantages of hypnosis as well. - Fascinating, and it's really, I'm going to embarrass you here a little bit. [David laughing] In the positive sense, your laboratory is really the one that's pioneered brain imaging of hypnotic states. And, it sounds like it, that's my understanding, is that correct? - Yeah, I mean, there are other people, who've done excellent research too. - Sure. Pierre Rainville in Montreal and several other people, but we're one of the leading labs in neuroimaging of hypnosis. - I have to ask about, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. I get a lot of questions about this. And I think a lot of people just struggle with holding attention nowadays, because of interference with phones and devices. And of course, there is a lot of, clinically legitimate ADHD out there, but the way that you describe, - Sure. - the dorsal anterior cingulate and the salience network and this a conflict detector of, am I focusing on something or am I splitting my attention? How distractable am I? Seems to relate to some extent to activity in the anterior cingulate cortex. Do people with ADHD, display disruptions in elements of these networks and has hypnosis ever been used to, or self-hypnosis, I should be, to distinguish from stage hypnosis, clinical and self-hypnosis been used to enhance people's ability to focus and hold attention? Because that's such a built in component of the hypnotic state. - It's a great question. There's sort of two ways to think about it, in terms of enhancing focus, yes. It has been very helpful in teaching people to just prepare your mind to narrow in and focus on something. And when you're really engaged in reading something, or you're writing a pa- I mean, I'll have that, sometimes I'm thinking, oh God, I have to do this for another hour. Other times an hour will go by and I'll think, hey, great, because when you're in that, it feels game-like to you, you're just assembling the parts of the puzzle and putting 'em together. It's fun, you just get absorbed, that for me, that's a hypnotic like experience, when I'm having trouble, when I'm struggling, sometimes doing things like self-hypnosis can help. I'm not an expert on ADHD. My impression is that you're right, that these are people who are constantly distracted and rather rigid. The other part of it is they're easily distractable. They're very upset when they get distracted and they're rather rigid in what they want to attend to and what they can. I think, as a way of controlling this, distractibility, frankly. My guess is that many people with ADHD, would not be that hypnotizable, but I haven't studied it. So, it's possible that for some people with that disorder, training in self-hypnosis might help, but we'd have to see how hypnotizable they were and take it from there. - I want to return to some of the underlying neural networks and the clinical applications but, what sorts of things aside from the asthma, have you used hypnosis successfully for or have others used clinical hypnosis for? And are there any particular areas of, psychiatric challenges or illnesses, I guess they're called, that are particularly amenable to hypnotic treatment. - Yes, there are. Hypnosis is very good as a problem focused treatment. It's the oldest western conception of a psychotherapy, and it can be used for specific problems in a way that's very helpful. We found it very helpful for stress reduction. For helping people deal, we're all dealing with stress these days. And it's helpful, that mind-body connection is very helpful because part of the problem with stress is your perception. You mentioned earlier in a sort of good sense, you're at a football game or something, and you feel the physical reaction. That can be a reinforcing thing. Wow, this is exciting, let's do it. It can also be very distracting. So, you're worried about getting COVID or you're worried about, some other physical problem you have. And you notice it in your body, your body tenses up, you start to sweat. The sympathetic nervous system goes, your heart rate goes up. And when you notice that you think, oh God, this is really bad. And then you feel worse. So, it's like a snowball rolling downhill. And then you feel worse and then your body gets worse. Hypnosis can be very helpful in dissociating somatic reaction from psychological reactions. So, we teach people to imagine their body floating somewhere safe and comfortable like a bath, a lake, a hot tub or floating in space, and then picture the problem that's stressing them on an imaginary screen, with the rule, no matter what you see on the screen, you keep your body comfortable. So, at this point, you still can't control the stress, but you can control your physical reaction to it. And that starts you feeling more in control. At least there's one thing I can manage. And then you can use it to think through or visualize through one thing you might do about that stressor. So, hypnosis is very helpful in controlling mind-body interaction in relation to stress. It's very helpful for people to get to sleep. We're having a lot of fun with that. I'm getting emails from people who said, I haven't slept right in 15 years, and now for the first time, I'm listening to your app and I can sleep at night. So it's very helpful and again, if you wake up in the middle of the night, I tell people, don't look at the clock. That's an arousal cue. You'll wake up more, but picture whatever you're thinking about or worrying about on that imaginary screen while your body is floating. So, watch your own movie, but keep your body floating. And many people can use that to get back to sleep. - I've been using self-hypnosis for sleep for a long time. And now the Reveri app, and we'll talk about our relationship to the Reveri app and its uses. I find it incredibly useful for falling back asleep in the middle of the night. And it raises a question, I've found and I think I understand this correctly, that one can do self-hypnosis during the daytime. And then if there's an issue that comes up later, like, so for instance, do self-hypnosis for stress reduction, away from the stressful event to prepare one to deal with stress better. - Right. - Or do hypnosis for improving the return to sleep. And that can be done when you actually want to go to sleep. But it's kind of a training up of these networks, right? - That's right. - So, is there evidence that, these brain networks actually form stronger connections, when people do self-hypnosis over time? - Well, there's a rule in neurobiology as you know, that neurons that fire together wire together. - Our friend, Carla Shatz. - Yes, Carla- - Not Donald Hebb, by the way. [David laughing] I keep trying to, there's a widespread myth in the world that is unfortunately, all over the internet, which is that, fire together wire together was said by, this psychologist, Donald Hebb Donald Hebb did many important things, but it is the neurobiologist Carla Shatz- - That's exactly right. - Who, Yes, is at Stanford but was also at Berkeley and Harvard. So, also decent schools. - That's exactly right. - But is at Stanford, who said, fire together wire together. And so she deserves, - Right. - the credit for that statement. Yeah, so with repeated use of self-hypnosis, one could imagine that these networks are getting stronger. - I would think so. We don't have evidence of that yet, but long term potentiation provides a pathway and you've described them on your program, a number of times that allow for repeated activation of a network to actually build new connections that work. And at the least, even from a learning and memory point of view, memory is all a network of associations. That's how we remember things. And the example I'd like to give is, you go back to your grade school and you see these little tiny lockers and the size is all wrong. And you suddenly have a flood of memories that were obviously stored there, but you just didn't think of. So, context and association is what memory's about. If you start to acquire memories about a problem. So, one thing we use hypnosis for is treating phobias, for example. And the problem with people who have phobias, like airplane phobias or crossing a bridge or being up high, is that the more they avoid it the more, the only source of associations and memories is their fear. They don't have any good experiences with it 'cause they avoid it. It's like get back on the horse after you fall off kind of thing. And with hypnosis, if you can start people able to manage their anxiety enough that they can have more, a wider array of experiences, they start to have a network of associations that isn't so negative and may even be positive. - So it's almost like a, sorry to interrupt, but I have to ask. - Sure - It's almost like a, exposure therapy done in the mind. - Yes. - It's always in the mind. I mean, even that exposure to, if I have a snake phobia, which I don't, I don't like snakes, but I don't think it qualifies as a full blown phobia. I think I have a healthy fear of snakes. - Yeah. - But if, let's say I had a snake phobia, the typical approach in, would be, cognitive behavioral approaches, right, would be to show a picture of a snake, then a rubber snake, then a real snake. Eventually the person is, - Yeah. - holding a boa constrictor or something like that. - [David] Right. - That's all in the mind because it's all translate into nervous system signals. But with hypnosis, sounds like you can give a number of positive experiences without having to use any props, without having bring any animals into the room. - Right, I- - Drive someone across the bridge, is that right? - Yes, I had a woman, who was a very successful business woman, high level in a corporation. I had a terrible dog phobia. And so I had her imagine that somebody brought in the dog to the room and I said, "what are you doing?" And you could see her getting tense. And she said, "Well, I'm waiting to see what the dog does." And I said, "If somebody who works for you, comes into your office, would you freeze and wait to see what they did?" And she said, "Of course not, I tell 'em what to do." [laughs] And I said, "Well, so you're immobilizing yourself, the power isn't with the dog it's with you, so, imagine what you might do to engage the dog and help control the situation." And she said, "Thanks." And this reminds me of, one of my favorite stories about hypnosis that, my father was seeing a woman who lived in Midtown Manhattan and had a horrible dog phobia. She'd dropped things, she'd spill coffee if she saw a dog. She would time her trips to the store, when she thought it was least likely that people would be walking dogs. - Now that wouldn't be possible, everyone in- - [laughs] Everyone in New York has a dog - It's like a fleet of French Bulldogs, - Right, exactly. - taking over New York City. - So, he taught her to think of dog as a friend, have a neighbor who had a dog, bring the dog over but hold the dog by the collar and make sure, and gradually she was able to stroke the dog and say, dog friend and distinguish between wild and tame animals. There are animals, you should be afraid of [murmurs]. So, she seemed to be doing better. He called back about three months later and asked for her. "Well, who's calling?" the son said. And he said, "Dr. Spiegel." And the boy said, "That's weird." And my father said, "What's weird?" He said, "Spiegel's in heat." She had bought a dog, - I love it. - and named it, Spiegel. - I love it. - Talk about transference. - I love it. [David laughing] But it really speaks to the power of this. And it brings me back to this issue. So, what is different about, what your father did in that case with this woman, in terms of what happened in hypnosis that allowed her to go from being completely terrified of dogs to owning a dog and naming it after your father? Which I find amusing. - Yeah. - But that's different than just the two of them sitting down and talking about it, right? You know, in therapy, narrative is a huge component. - Right. - And in hypnosis narrative is a huge component. - Right. - So it must be that, the brain state is what is really different. Because we'll talk about trauma in a few minutes. But I think people who have trauma or phobias, certainly could have a conversation about it. Some of them might freeze up. Some of them might lose their articulation and so forth. But what is different about that state that combines with narrative, you think to allow these underlying neural networks to engage her to change? 'Cause I find this so fascinating because we're a- Every attempt at dealing with stress or phobia in the clinical setting involves some discussion about what it is. - Yes. - But, here we're not talking about any medication being introduced, at least not in these particular circumstances. - Right. - So, I realize it's kind of an obvious question like, it has to be some difference in brain activity, but I find that to be incredible. The control variable there is the brain state. It's not, what's spoken. - You're raising a couple of very important issues, Andrew. We talked earlier about with systematic desensitization, where you sort of lay out a hierarchy of things and do it one at a time. I think of this as unsystematic desensitization, because you're changing mental states. And I think there's more and more evidence that mental state change itself has therapeutic potential. We're seeing that with ketamine treating depression, the dissociogenic drug. We know it every morning when we wake up, that problem, when you know, you made the mistake of reading a nasty email at 11:00 PM. You didn't know what to do. You wake up in the morning thinking, oh, that idiot, yeah, here's what I'm going to do. So, just changing mental state, itself has therapeutic potential. And I think we underestimate our ability to regulate and change responses to be cognitively, emotionally and somatically flexible. And so, we do things, you're right, that follow similar principles of facing a problem, seeing it from a different point of view. And you've done a really, a nice podcast on trauma and stress and how you have to expose yourself to it, not avoid it, as we talked about before. And then find some way to reconnect to it, to substitute something that can make you feel good, rather than bad, so that you activate other centers of the brain like mesolimbic reward system. And so, I that with hypnosis and you can do it much faster. People don't think they can but they can. If you are having, right now that physical experience, I'm thinking about this but I'm not feeling as bad as I used to. That can be a powerful thing and you can do it with hypnosis. So, a woman came to see me, who had suffered an attempted rape. It was getting dark, she was coming back from the grocery store and this guy grabs her and wants to get her up into her apartment. It's outside her apartment. And she starts fighting with him and she winds up with a basilar skull fracture. He runs away. The cops come, since she hadn't been raped, they left, they weren't interested. And she wanted to use hypnosis to get a better image of what this guy looked like, which is a painful, upsetting thing. So, she was quite hypnotizable. I got her floating. I say, you're safe and comfortable, now, nothing can happen that will harm your body. But on the left side of the screen, I want you to picture this guy and his approaching and what's happening. And she said, I really, the light, it was getting dark. I really can't see much of his facial features, but I do recognize something, I hadn't allowed myself to remember. If he gets me upstairs, he doesn't just want to rape me, he's going to kill me. And so, in some ways, what she was seeing was even worse. So, you're thinking, good, Spiegel, you made her even more frightened than she was before. But as you had pointed out in your PTSD stress lecture, you've got to confront the trauma, to restructure your understanding of it. So, on the other side of the screen, I had her picture, what are you doing to protect yourself? And everybody in a trauma situation engages in some strategy of self protection. That's the salience network kicking in. And she said, "You know what?" He's surprised that I'm fighting that hard. He didn't think I would. And so, she realized on the one hand that it was even worse than she thought it was. But on the other hand that she actually probably saved her life. And so, it was a way of, helping her restructure her experience of the trauma and make it more tolerable. So that helped with her- She didn't recog- She couldn't identify the guy, but it helped her restructure and understand her experience. And that's something that you can do in just talking, straight out psychotherapy. But sometimes you can do it a hell of a lot faster and more efficiently using hypnosis. And there is one randomized trial out of Israel that shows that adding hypnosis to PTSD treatment, actually improves outcome. So it's a way of accomplishing things that we understand in the broader psychotherapy world, but much more quickly and sometimes effectively. - Yeah, it sounds like going somewhat into the state that one is trying to deal with, but then dissociating from that state is key. And I could imagine, and I've been open about this on various podcasts. I've done a lot of an analysis over the years. I've experienced myself that in those sessions, depending on how I show up to them, I might just get kind of a laundry list of what happened as opposed to actually feeling anything, around what happened. - Right. - And I think people probably vary in the extent to which they can drop into feeling states and it can depend on the day. It can depend on how well you slept the night before and so on. - There's one thing I might add, Andrew, - Yes. - And that is, there's a notion to late Gordon Bower, we just had a memorial for Gordon at Stanford. He died about a year ago. Brilliant cognitive psychologist, one of the founders of cognitive psychology at Stanford and a great pitcher. He almost became a Major League pitcher but he decided to go to grad school instead, and I'm glad he did. But Gordon helped establish the concept of state dependent memory that when you're in a certain mental state, you enhance your ability to remember things about it. And sort of the bad example of that is the drunk who hides the bottle and can't remember where he put it until he gets drunk again and he's in that same mental state. People go into dissociative states when they're traumatized. So in a way, hypnosis is helping them remember and deal with the memories better because they're more in the mental state that is more like what happened. And most rape victims will tell you, I was floating above my body, feeling sorry for the woman being assaulted below. People in traumatic episodes, they just say, you know, I blank out, I don't know what's happening, I'm on autopilot and that's a kind of self hypnotic state. So, when you use hypnosis to help them deal with a traumatic memory, you're making the state they're in, right there in your office with you, more congruent to the state they were likely in, when the trauma happened. And I think that is part of what helps facilitate treatment of trauma related disorders. - I see. So that makes me have to ask, every question I have to ask, 'cause I really feel it as a almost like compulsion, then if dissociation during a traumatic episode is, it's a part of the adaptive strategy. - Right. - But it creates certain issues, it creates problems, right? Why would something like ketamine, which creates a dissociative state, be useful for the treatment of trauma? This is what I'm confused about these days because our colleague, Karl Deisseroth, who's also been on this podcast and his coworkers have figured out, okay, there's these layer one networks in the neocortex, and those are involved in dissociative state. And so we're starting to gain some understanding of how ketamine works at a neural level. - Right. - It does seem, as if for certain populations it can be a useful treatment. I don't know, I've never tried it. I don't know what the current status of that is, but it is legal. It is allowed at least in, it's FDA approved and it's in use. Why would dissociative states be useful if some element of dissociation is what gave rise to the trauma memory in the first place? - Well, yeah, and Karl had a brilliant paper in nature where he, it was from rats to humans in one paper. And he showed that there's this rhythmic discharge in the retrosplenial region, that is triggered by ketamine. And the rats actually showed dissociative like behavior, in that they would a hot pad that they ordinarily wouldn't and they didn't seem to have much pain in their paw. And he then had a male subject who had implanted electrodes- - Human, yeah. - A human subject, yeah. And the electrodes had picked up this rhythmic activity. And when they did, he would report being in a dissociative state. And his description was, it's like being a pilot of an airplane. And then I felt myself walking out of the cockpit and the plane was still flying and- - It sounds terrifying to me. [David laughing] It sounds terrify terrifying. - That's the thing- - I want to be in my body, [David laughing] most of the time, you know. - That's right but, the point is, in a way the principal, Andrew, is like, the principle you said, that you need to re-confront a traumatic situation before you can modulate your associations to it. So, you have to accept it, accept the arousal, put some boundaries around it and then figure out how you can approach that problem or how you did approach that problem from a different point of view. So, it does not surprise- In fact, we've studied, people who disassociated during the Loma Prieta earthquake and the Oakland-Berkeley firestorm. - I remember both those well. - Yeah. - Earthquakes follow me. Then I move south and then the Northridge quake- - I'm going to keep away from So, there'll be one later, this afternoon. [David laughing] - I'm starting to dissociating. So, dissociation does compartmentalize experience, but that means from the point of view of treating trauma, it's an inhibition. You don't engage it. It's like it happened over there. And I think what happens is that people, are sometimes too good at being able to separate themselves from their recollection. So it's in there somewhere. It's out of sight but it's not out of mind. It's having effects on you, but you can't deal with it. You can't reprocess it. So I do think one reason ketamine might work is that in fact, it allows you to keep, to re-approach the dissociative experience in a way that you can then start to think about and do something about it. And just the fact you can turn it on and off. And that's also where self-hypnosis is so helpful. It's not something that just comes over you and happens to you. It's something you can make happen. You can control it, you can do something with it. So, you feel less helpless and out of control. The essence of trauma is helplessness. It's not fear, it's not pain. It's helplessness. You become an object. You become just your body. You don't control what's going on. And we're not used to that. You and I have discussed this breathing paper on anticipation of breathing. And it's not whether you breathe, inhale or exhale or hold your breath, it's that if you think you can inhale and you can't, that is really upsetting, understandably. And so, the issue is control and hypnosis, which has this terrible reputation of taking away control is actually a superb way of enhancing your control over mind and body. - I love that and it reminds me that naming is so important. You almost wonder if self-hypnosis and clinical hypnosis had been called something else, that it would've been separated out from stage hypnosis in a way that would make it less scary, weird, complicated for people to embrace. But, - Yeah. - part of the reason for having this discussion is, I've had great experiences with hypnosis, that I've seen the data, we're talking about a lot of clinical examples. It's incredibly powerful and it boils right down to neural brain states. - Right. - And, I think in the years to come, it's going to become more widespread along those lines. How quickly, you've described some examples of people getting relief very quickly. - Right. - How permanent, are those changes? Is there a need for follow up and related to that, I'm sure a number of people are listening to this and thinking, wonderful, I'd love to get hypnotized for any number of different things by Dr. Spiegel or somebody else expert in clinical hypnosis, but they might not have access to you or somebody with similar training. So what is the power? So, how quickly does it work? How long lasting are those changes? And then, is it necessary to work with a clinical hypnotist? And is it better to do that than self-hypnosis and so on and so forth? Maybe you could just give us a contour of the landscape of directed and self-directed treatment. - Well, typically, most people start by coming to see a clinician like me. It's better to see someone who has licensing and training in their professional discipline, medicine, psychology, dentistry, whatever. - 'Cause there are a lot of hypnotists out there, who are just hypnotist. - Right. Just hypnotists. - Oh, okay. - And the key issue is, somebody who can really assess what your problem is and make sure that you're not, talking someone into reducing their chest pain, rather than getting their coronary artery problem- - 'Cause they could have a real issue there. - They could, right. - That hypnosis might adjust but wouldn't deal with the deeper underlying issue. - That's right. On the other hand. And typically when I use it with people, I often only see them once or twice or periodically, but not every week. And certainly not every day, if they have a pain problem and hypnosis is very helpful for pain. And so, what I'm doing is, identifying how hypnotizable they are. I give them a standard brief test of their ability to experience hypnosis, and then going through a self-hypnosis exercise with them to deal with the problem, seeing how they respond to it, and then teaching them how to do it for themselves. And in the old days, I used to have them use their iPhone and record that part of the session. So they could play back the hypnosis experience. Now we've developed an app, "Reveri," that can teach people and step them through, dealing with pain, stress, focus, insomnia and help people eat better and stop smoking. But we have elements that take about 15 minutes and elements that just take one or two minutes that people can refresh and reinforce. - Two minute hypnosis, [indistinct] one minute. - Yes. - Yeah. - And it's one to two, we're one to two minutes now, and we're finding that two thirds of the people find that even just the one minute refresher, helps them feel better. They're reporting, they feel better. So, the nice thing is, you know right away, whether it's likely to help you or not. And we've found, we've done studies, looking at hypnosis for pain relief in acute medical procedures. We did a randomized trial that we published in The Lancet, three conditions, people getting arterial cutdowns to chemoembolized tumors in the liver or visualize renal artery stenosis. You don't use general anesthesia for this. It's very uncomfortable and people are anxious and we had three conditions. One was standard care, they could push a button and get opioids, IV. - This is during the surgery? - During the surgery. The second is, they could do that, plus they had a friendly nurse, comforting them. So, we controlled for pleasant attention and support. And the third was, we taught them self-hypnosis for pain control. So, you're feeling, you can change the temperature, you're your body is cool, tingling, and numb, you're floating in ice water and feeling comfortable. Or go somewhere else, leave your body here and go to a desert island and enjoy yourself. And we found that, it's about two and a half hour procedure, that by an hour and a half, the hypnosis group had reduced their pain by 80%, compared to the standard, - Wow. care group, using half the amount of opioids, they had fewer complications and the procedure took 17 minutes less time on average to get done. Because not only was the patient more relaxed. So was the treatment staff. They weren't dealing with someone who's struggling and uncomfortable. We measured their anxiety and same thing. They hypnosis group, I was worried they were all dead. They had no anxiety after an hour and a half, they were saying, I'm fine, you know, and they were fine. And the standard care group, had 5 out of 10 anxiety scores at that point. So, we published that in The Lancet, big randomized trial. If we had a drug that did that, every hospital in the country would be using it now, but there's no industry to push it. So, that's part of what helped us decide that we needed to help people, do this with Reveri and teach them how to do it and provide interactive support for them to do it. And does it, the question, although is, does it work long term? 'Cause what we can do acutely doesn't necessarily carry on. So, we did around randomized trial of women with metastatic breast cancer. They had advancing disease. We met with them in a support group once a week and taught them self-hypnosis, for stress and anxiety and pain control at the end. And by the end of a year, the treatment group had half the pain the control group did, on the same, in very low amounts of medication. So, it lasts. And they would say, when I felt that pain in my chest and thought it was a metastasis, I just did the exercise. I got myself in a warm bath and I felt fine. So, it works because it becomes a skill that people acquire, but they can tell right away, whether it's likely to help them, working with a clinician or now using the app or other ways of helping them learn to use it as a skill. So, the nice thing is you will know very quickly, whether it's likely to help you or not. And if it is, you can learn to do it for yourself. - That's great and we will, again, there'll be a link to Reveri in the caption, it's available for Apple and Android. And I think even though there's a nominal cost there, I think that, as you mentioned, medications and other approaches to dealing with these problems are quite expensive, and have all the potential for side effects and things. Not that some of those aren't also useful. - Could I, before you get to that, - Please. - just one thing. We've worked very hard on the app. We have an iOS app for Apple. We decided to table for a moment, redoing the Android app. So, it was available, when we were working through the Alexa platform. It's not at the moment but it will be soon. So, I just don't want people to be disappointed if they're looking for it for Android, it's on our agenda but we don't have it at the moment. - Great, thanks for that clarification. So hopefully, in time for both, I get asked a lot about obsessive thoughts or intrusive thoughts. I also get asked a lot about OCD. Is there any evidence that hypnosis or self-hypnosis can be used for, dealing with obsessive thoughts? - Sometimes, there are some very obsessional people, who just turn out not to be that hypnotizable for, yeah, and it's not random. They tend to be so over controlling of thought, they're all busy evaluating rather than experiencing, so- - I know a few people like that. [David laughing] It sounds like an adaptive mindset for a lot of professions. - That's right. - And then we get trained up in that, - Yeah. - during school, how to obsess over the exam, obsess over the, - Yeah. - our social interactions. I mean, it's part of becoming a functional human being. And yet, it can take us down a different- - We sometimes overdo it. I mean, I'll tell you one example from extreme situations, that, you know, you're judging, evaluating, you're not letting yourself experience, including emotionally. I know somebody, who listens to the tapes from airplanes that go down. So, they get the black box and they listen to it. And he said to me, you know- - That's his profession or he does this recreational- - No, it's his profession. - Okay. - That's what he did. 'Cause they're trying to do accident prevention and how to handle things. And he said that you worry about people panicking, right? And here these guys know that they've got 30 seconds or some 45 seconds and they're just going through their checklist. He said, they don't panic enough. They're taught that this is what you do. And there is reason, there's good reason for it. But sometimes they overdo it. And it's painful to listen to this 'cause you know what's going to happen. So, it's kind of a balance we have to hit. And sometimes we get too emotional and too absorbed and you're not with that enough to sort of see other possibilities. That can be a problem. But on the other hand, sometimes you're too rigid and controlled and you don't let your emotions guide you to what you need to do to protect yourself or protect others. So, I would say in general that people with OCD are, on the less hypnotizable side of the spectrum, they're less likely to allow themselves to engage in any, and the typical example is the checking with OCD for example, they don't remember, whether they locked the door or turned off the gas in the oven and they keep going back and they keep checking. So, there the evaluative component of the brain, kind of overrides the experiential one and sometimes people can get some benefit, but they're not a group that I would select for being the most likely to respond to self hypnotic approaches. - Are superstitions similar? - Superstitions, I think that's more, there are people who are very hypnotizable, who keep getting caught up in things like superstitions and there, the imagination supplants the reality. And we've seen a lot of that happening recently. And so I think there, it's by possible that they could be helped by learning to sort of see it but put it in context, see it from a different point of view. - I developed a pretty vicious superstition, when I was in college and it was hard to break, actually. I always feel, when I talk to clinicians, I have to reveal certain things about my own pathology. - Please do. - And so- - You'll get my bill later. - Thank you, yes, it's part of the reason I arranged this. [David laughing] No, I'm just kidding. But yeah, I did. I had a habit of knocking on wood for things and I noticed it started to, I would sneak knocking on wood every once in a while 'cause I didn't want people to think I was doing too often. And then I started to realize that, it was becoming a little bit of a reflex. And then I saw this incredible video from Bence Olveczky's lab at Harvard. He studies motor patterns. And he has these rats that press different sequences of levers and turn dials in order to get a pellet of food. But as they do that, they'll start to introduce these behaviors that have nothing to do with the actual lever pressing, like they'll start scratching their hind quarters and things like that. And their hat, their heads, excuse me, they don't wear hats and flipping their ears. And this is just like a pitcher before throwing a baseball. That we do this, - Oh, yeah. - we start to incorporate motor behaviors that are unrelated to the outcome, but our mind somehow starts to think that they're necessary for the outcome. And so then you incorporate it. So, I decided to break it by simply forcing myself to not do it for about a week. - Mm-hm. And then it just seemed like a ridiculous, - [Both] thing to do. Yeah, well- - Knock on wood. - We call that response prevention and it works. What you do is, you set up a new context in your brain, where you get the outcome you want, devoid of the extraneous behavior. - Yeah, and I knew it was nuts, right. I knew it was illogical. - Right. - But somehow these things take on meaning. - [David] Right. - So, we talked about, the utility of hypnosis for stress reduction, phobias, pain, possibly, we don't know but for, things like ADHD and OCD, it just will depend on hypnotizability. - Right. - You talked about this beautiful study on the, metastatic breast cancer outcome or patients. Hypnotizability is clearly a key variable. - Yes. - So could you please tell us, what hypnotizability is, how it's evaluated and what The Spiegel Eye-Roll Test is? - Okay, sure. So, hypnotizability is just a capacity to have hypnotic experiences. And we have a test called the hypnotic conduction profile. Where we give a highly structured hypnotic experience. And the old tradition in clinical hypnosis was, that you try a bunch of different things, talking, walking upstairs and downstairs and other images and time what you say to the breathing of the subject and all that. And the more you change what you do as a clinician, the less you can make of variation and outcome. And it could take a long time, you know, 20 minutes, 30 minutes. And I just view that as a kind of complex, not very effective way of assessing the person's hypnotic capacity. We know that the peak period of hypnotizability in the human life, is the latency years in childhood. So, every eight year old is in a trance all the time. You call all 'em in for dinner, they don't hear ya, they're doing their thing. And that's why childhood is such a wonderful experience. Work and play are all the same thing. And we try to make them into little adults, which I think is a terrible mistake. Everything is fun for them. They enjoy learning, they enjoy everything. - So what age are they in this- - This is like 6 to 10, 6 to 11. And they're playful, they enjoy everything. Everything is sort of a game and fun and we try to make it miserable for them, but they've got it. And then when, what Piaget called, a more adult cognitive framework, where we learn abstract concepts, we learn that even if one bottle looks bigger than the other, they can have equal volume. And so, we at imposing logic, we're growing our DLPFC at that point and imposing cognitive structure on experience. Some people start to lose that hypnotic ability. By the time you're in your early 20s, your hypnotizability becomes extremely fixed. And there was a study done at Stanford, Ernest Hillard, Phil Zimbardo did this, looking at, they've tracked down students who were in psych one, had their hypnotizability measured and retested them blindly 25 years later. And the test, retest correlation was, you want to guess what it was? - I'm guessing it's, I don't know, 0.6 something. - Yeah, very close. It was 0.7, IQ would be 0.6, on the 25 year interval. - Wow. - So, it's more stable than IQ over a 25 year interval. So, once you're at that point, that's where you are. What are the factors that lead to that? Well, and so what it means is that, about a third of that adults are just not hypnotizable. Two thirds are, about 15% are extremely hypnotizable and we can measure that and give it a number from 0 to 10. And that's very useful. For some of my patients when I do it, I say, look, I'm sorry, you're not hypnotizable but we're going to do something else. Medication, systematic desensitization, mindfulness, other things or if they're very hypnotizable, I just go for it. I don't do a lot of explaining. People who are low to moderate hypnotizable, like explanations about what you're doing, but then they can still get the benefits. So, it helps me guide the nature of my treatment with these people. Now, the eye roll is, my father used to use an eye fixation induction, he used to say, look up at the ceiling and now close your eyes while you're looking up. You're very, yes, you're very- - Yeah [indistinct] [laughs]. - He noticed he had two patients back to back. And one was a woman who I'd seen him work with, who had hysterical seizures. She would just suddenly start shaking. And- - Real epileptic seizures? - No, pseudo epileptic seizures. - I see, so hysteria. - Hysteria, and although some people have both, that is the, for some people, real epilepsy becomes a framework that gets elaborated on, for when you're stressed, you have seizures. She just had pseudo epilepsy, no EEG abnormalities. And she was really something to watch. Her husband had to move his work bench near the door, so that if she started to have a seizure, he could run home and try and help her with it. It was that bad. And he noticed that when she did what you did, when she looked up, when she would have one of her seizure events, all you see is sclera, you don't see Iris anymore. And she would start to seize. So he did a great thing with her. He taught her to have seizures. Everybody else was telling her to stop. He made her have one. So he hypnotized her, [indistinct] let's go back to the last time you had one and sure enough, she'd start to shake. And gradually he'd make them smaller and smaller. So, she was learning she could control, she'd have access, it's like with PTSD, you confront, you don't avoid it, you don't suppress it. You confront it and figure out how to deal with it. The next patient he had was a rigid obsessional businessman who wanted to stop being so controlling and all this [chuckles], it reminded me, there was a New Yorker cartoon of a driver, who comes to a yield sign and he yells, "Never!" It's always [indistinct]. - That sounds about right, you're a New Yorker. - Yeah, I'm a New Yorker. And so, this guy, when he tried to look up, he couldn't keep his eyes up while he closed them. And so, my father started testing people. And it seemed that there is a rough correlation between the capacity to keep your eyes up, while you closed them and measured hypnotizability. - So that people who are listening [stutters], and watching on video. So, the Spiegel Eye-Roll Test, involves looking up at the ceiling. So, it's tilting the head back, I'm tilting my chin back and looking up at the ceiling now. But I'm also directing my eyes upward and my eyes are open. And then the eye roll test involves then, closing the eyelids while the eyes are open. - Are open. - And whether or not, the eyes roll back and as you said it, then you see sclera, the white part. - You see sclera, the white part. - That means you're, very hypnotizable or moderately hypnotizable. - Right. - Whereas if the eyes move down and you see iris, the colored part of the eye as the eyes close, less hypnotizable. - Right. - So you can look this up online there, you just put Spiegel Eye-Roll Test and you'll find it. And we are also going to do an actual example of hypnosis on video later. - Right. So, you're asking the brain to do something difficult, to keep the eyes up while closing the eyelids. And so that's contradictory signals for the third, fourth and sixth cranial nerve nuclei that control eye movement. - You said the third- - Fourth and six, - Yup. - cranial nerve nuclei. And so you're suspending one activity, while asking them to do another and eye movements have a lot to do with levels of consciousness. The periaqueductal gray, surrounds these cranial nerve nuclei. And when we close our eyes when we sleep, we have rapid eye movement when we dream. Most drugs, that affect level of consciousness, can affect eyes and eye movements, either the dilation or contraction of the pupils, depending on whether it's a stimulant or an opioid. - Stimulants, make the pupils big. - Big, right? - Yeah. Like cocaine, amphetamine. - Right, exactly. - Things that sort. - And opioids, you get constricted pupils. - This is what the parents looking at their kids coming in the door late at night, they're looking for substance abuse. - That's right. - Yeah. - So, there's something about the eyes that has a lot to do with level of consciousness. I mean, obviously, you close your eyes when you go to sleep, you have rapid eye movement when you're dreaming. So, it's not surprising. And there's an old Zen practice called, looking at the third eye. And I think part of the reason that this happens is, where you're looking up inside it's like there's a third eye between the other two in your forehead. And I think it's because we are visual creatures, we're pretty pathetic from a physical point of view. Many animals can outrun us, or outs smell us or eagles could read the newsprint at a hundred yards and we can't. So, our major defensive sensory input is vision. And that's why animals, predator animals have eyes in the front of their head, so that they have very good, detailed vision of prey. Whereas prey animals like deer, have eyes on the side of their head. So, they don't see things that well, but they have a much bigger range of potential to see threat. And we mainly use, and in fact, it's interesting, there have been social anthropologists that say, why do we gather where we do, on coastlines and at the edge of a forest or something, it's because you've got protection in the back. Something can attack you from one side and you have a big vision of what might threaten you. And we tend to be attracted to those kinds of physical situations, so- - Yeah, we love vistas. - We love vistas, that's right. - Vistas are very calming. They take us into that panoramic vision. - That's right. - I didn't know this, but it turns out that most of the scenic spots at any location in national parks and where people naturally aggregated it was- which makes sense. - Sure. - But, that those signs and locations were built up around, people's tendency and animals tendencies. - Oh, really [indistinct]? - To aggregate there. Yeah, there's a interesting book on the history of the national parks that says, that they didn't give a research study to support it, but there was no Google Maps, obviously. - That's very interesting. - Yeah, panorama and visual boundaries are really interesting. I think, so the eyes, as we both know, are two pieces of the central nervous system of the brain, outside the- - Right. I used to say that the eyes are outside the skull and a neuro-ophthalmologist wrote to me and vehemently pointed out that they are outside the cranial vault, so, you know. They're outside the cranial vault but they are two pieces of brain they're out there. And so, you mentioned cranial nerves, three, four and six. This isn't a neuroanatomy course but maybe we could go a little deeper there. So, you said there's contradictory activity, looking up is controlled by the one set of cranial nerves. And then the closing of the eyelids, is controlled by another cranial nerve. - No, it's the same one. I think it's six that when you close your eyes, you activate, no, it's the facial, I guess it's the facial nerve. It's 7, yeah. - 7, yeah. - But you're looking up, you're activating the muscles that force your eyes to look up. And closing your eyelids normally relaxes those, it relaxes that upper movement, because your eyes are closed and you don't need to do it. So you're breaking a usual customary pattern. - It's like the rubbing the, - Right. - hey, I can't even do it, see it's like the, - Right. [Andrew and David laughing] - That's exactly right. - Rubbing your tummy and patting your head. There's a bit of a conflict there, - Right. - But clinically, it's been a good probe for you, - It has. - and for your father. So, was it Spiegel senior or Spiegel junior? - That's Spiegel senior. - That developed The Spiegel Eye-Roll Test. - But the key issue is this, that normally when we close our eyes also, we're going to sleep. You're not worried about what's going on in the world anymore. Here, you're maintaining resting alertness. So, you're focusing but you're turning inward. That's an unusual state. Normally we close our eyes periodically, we have to, but when you close your eyes for some period of time, it's normally to go to sleep and you're not worried about detecting risk or threat. So, it's an interesting state because you're turning inward, basically, you're looking up, you're shutting your eyes and you're allowing whatever happens outside you to happen and focusing on what's going on inward. So, I think it's a signal to your brain to turn inward. - Very interesting. And meditation of course, could be done with eyes open but almost always is done with eyes closed. - Yes, that's right. - Very interesting. So, you can very quickly determine whether or not someone is highly hypnotizable. - Right. - not at all hypnotizable. You said about two thirds of people can be hypnotized. - Right. - Obviously a third cannot. But within the two thirds that can, there's a range, and you said 15% of people fall into this, highly hypnotizable category. - Right, that's correct. - That I seem to be a member of. - Yeah. - And, does repeated use of self-hypnosis or clinical hypnosis, increase or change hypnotizability, for those that can access it in the first place? - I would say in general, it may increase a little bit, but not a hell of a lot, and it's not worth the effort to increase your hypnotizability at that point. It's worth trying to deal with the problem, you're dealing with. So, you can get better at using it at the level that you have. There was a study done in which they tried to train people to be more hypnotizable and obviously, there're subjective and behavioral components to the test, you can learn to do a little better on them. But what we found was when we reanalyze this data, that we could account for three times the final score, based on the initial hypnotizability measurement, rather than whether or not they had been trained to do better. So, you can improve it a little but it's not worth the trouble. - Got it. Along the lines of eyes and eye movements, a lot of interest out there about EMDR, Eye Movement Desensitization Reprocessing. - Yeah. - Shapiro herself was working, she wasn't at Stanford directly, but was the local to Stanford. - Yeah. - I think in Palo Alto. - MRI, yeah. - So what are your thoughts on EMDR? Where is it useful, where do you think it's less useful? Are there things that EMDR could be combined with to make it more useful? The listeners of this podcast come to, I think, come to the podcast with a range of backgrounds and interests. To me, it makes sense why EMDR, lateralized eye movements might work, given the newer data that it can suppress amygdala activity in some animals and animal models and in humans as well. But it really hasn't been explored much, neurally. I've heard things like, it coordinates the two sides of the brain, which it, to me is just a throwaway. I don't think there's any evidence that, coordinating the two sides of the brain is better than not coordinating. I wouldn't be speaking right now if the two sides of my brain, were well correlated. - Yeah. - Because language is lateralized so, - Right, exactly. - I heard that it mimics, rapid eye movements during sleep, but actually it doesn't. So, - Right. - But I have heard people talk about their positive experiences with EMDR. What are your thoughts about EMDR? - Yeah, you had a good comment on that in one of your recent podcasts. And I'll tell you, one way I sort of think about it from a bemused point of view, is the old, you mentioned it earlier, the oldest sort of idea of a hypnotic induction, was a dangling watch, right? And [indistinct] watch. And, in fact, there was enough concern about it that when automobiles were invented, there was a movement to prevent installing windshield wipers because people were afraid that they would be hypnotized, if they watched the windshield wipers go back and forth on a car. Now, it turns out fortunately that, you tend not to look at the windshield wipers. You keep looking through the windshield. And so, we have windshield wipers today. But that movement is, what exactly used to be a hypnotic induction. I think there is a lot of hypnosis in EMDR. - Ah. - And I think, it's a combination of that with exposure based treatments, where you use EMDR to think about it. You tend not to process the experience as much and just do the physical part of it, which I personally think is a drawback. And, every study I've seen that was a dismantling study. There's no question that people who go through EMDR, many of them get better with trauma related problems and the VA has a big program using it and so on. But every program that has dismantled, going through the treatment with having the lateral eye movement, has shown that the lateral eye movement, doesn't add anything to it. And toward the end of her career, Francine was doing [indistinct] contralateral touching or something, it wasn't eye movements anymore. It was other things. So, I tend to think that, EMDR is another form of exposure based therapy for trauma, but as you've implied with the exception of this possible new data, it certainly doesn't have to do with, rapid eye movement sleep. And I don't think moving the eyes is the issue. I think it's a way of sitting down and confronting trauma. And I would rather, that the trauma itself be processed a bit more than often happens in EMDR. So, a lot of people have gotten therapy. Some of them have been helped. Francine used to originally claim that just one session would desensitize people and do it. And that's clearly not true. I see a lot of people who said, yeah, it helped for a while but I need more. So, I think it became a kind of a, overly simplistic approach to understanding brain physiology and that part is wrong. And the interesting thing, you mentioned suppressing amygdala activity. It's very interesting that, my late friend Allen Hobson, who was a brilliant sleep researcher, you know Alan- - Sleep researcher. Well, I don't know him, but I read his book when I was in college about the chemistry of sleep. - Right. And the similarities between dream states and hallucinations. - Yes. - And it's one of the reasons I got into this business. - Yes, well, I worked with him in a MacArthur mind-body network for many years. - Wow. - He was a brilliant guy, points out that we need to get into, primarily a parasympathetic state to go to sleep, that we have to shut off the sympathetic nervous system. And that's why a loud noise wakes you up, when your heart rate goes up and all this. So, he was brilliant at documenting what happens in the brain at sleep. He pointed out something also very interesting about dreams, which is that the stories in dreams, and even the images in dreams can change all over the place in crazy ways. But usually the affect is constant, he said, usually if it's a frustration dream, whatever happens, you end up frustrated. And if it's a enjoyment dream, you enjoy whatever's going on. So, there's an odd consistency and affect in dreams that you don't have in other states. And the idea of lateral eye movement, suppressing amygdala activity would kind of fit with that, that you don't allow intrusions of fear and anger and upset in dreams. It may be there all the time, but it may not be there when you think it should be. So, why is it that you can be falling off a building and somehow not that scared, you're just having this experience of flying in a dream. So, I think there may be something going on about regulating affect, but there are, we have elaborated better ways to regulate affect. - Great, so EMDR, might incorporate some elements of hypnosis, so the lateralized eye movements, perhaps by way of suppressing the amygdala, this fear associated center, might bring people into a more parasympathetic calm state. So, it might be pseudo hypnosis, and then an exposure therapy through the discussion about the issue. - Right. - Okay. More research needed on EMDR out there. And obviously, something that's come up a lot in this discussion and in our discussions that, have the great fortune of talking to you every week is, and working together is, this idea of getting close to the phobia, getting close to the trauma, re-experiencing it as a portal to then adjusting the response to it and rewiring something. So, the troubling thing or the horrible thing is no longer as horrible to us. but the repeating theme is we can't expect to get over something without getting really close to it. Maybe even experiencing it somatically. Nowadays, we hear a lot about, triggers and trigger warnings. And certainly, one can understand why those exist, but it seems like in the general population, there's this idea that we want to move away from anything that upsets us and yet, - Right. - I think it's fair to say, even though I haven't gathered the statistics that, on the whole, that human beings are becoming more and more anxious and more and more stressed, perhaps because of but certainly in parallel, with the fact that we're trying to move away from troubling things. So, I've heard you say before, that in terms of therapeutic approaches, it's not just about the state you get into, but whether or not you brought yourself there voluntarily. - That's exactly right. - So, this element of deliberate self exposure, deciding I'm going to confront the trauma, I'm going to confront the pain. I'm going to confront the insomnia. I'm going to confront the, you know, and fill in the blank. And then readjusting one's emotional response, right up next to that troubling thing. That seems to be the hallmark of this treatment. And, if I'm thinking about it correctly, of pretty much all treatments for getting over stuff. If people don't have access to a really good clinician, like yourself, how should they carry these thoughts and these ideas? I mean, I think almost everybody of any reasonable age, has memories or things that upset them, but we learn to suppress them. What does one do? Obviously, the Reveri app has approaches to dealing with some of this, inside of the app, but how does one start to think about, actually dealing with something like this and avoiding the hazards of just kind of reactivating a lot of painful experiences? Because a lot of being a functional human being is also going to work each day, interacting with people and not bringing one's trauma, and dumping it out all on the table or being able to just function is so crucial. So, how do you think about this as a clinician? - Well, the image it comes to mind is the Greek myth of Pandora's Box. That it opened and the Furies got out and you couldn't put 'em back in. And we have this kind of fantasy that once you get into these memories, they'll take you over and you'll never get them back in the box. And I think that's wrong. People who use hypnosis say that, there are ways to present things to people that will be helpful and ways that won't. And one real mistake is to tell someone, don't think about purple elephants. What are you thinking about? - Purple elephants. - It doesn't work. So, you want to find a way to feel in control of the access and to define what happened on your own terms. And so, I'm not a big fan of trigger warnings. I think we're going crazy over, this could be upsetting, that could be upsetting. Yeah, there are lots of things that are upsetting. The average kid has watched 20,000 murders, by the time he's 20 years old, watching television and movies these days. So, we see terrible things and it's not a matter of, are you exposed to something that's upsetting, but how do you handle it? What do you make of it and are you feeling in control? It's not like, what Putin is doing to his rival in Russia, forcing him to watch propaganda movies 10 hours a day, while he is in prison. It's a matter of thinking about a problem, in a way that leaves you feeling, you understand better. You're in more control, you can turn it off when you want, you can turn it on when you want. And so we have to, in life, deal with stressful things, there are studies, Karen Parker at Stanford has done some wonderful studies with primates about stress inoculation. That if you separate a baby monkey from his mother for two hours a day and then reunite them, and then you stress that baby monkey later, they actually handle stress better. There's less cortisol arousal in the face of distress, stress inoculation, that's been called. So, mere exposure to trauma or stress. It's a part of living anyway. We can't avoid it, even if we'd like to, and, it's not pleasant, it's not great but it's sometimes things you need to learn about life. And if you can find an algorithm for facing it, putting it into perspective, dealing with it, you become a stronger person not a weaker person. So, this idea that, college students are such fragile flowers, that if you talk about a sexual assault or something, you're doing something terrible to them, it's just wrong. And I think we need to build our ability to recognize and manage stress. And you can't do that without doing it. You can't ride a bicycle without taking the risk of falling off it. And so, I think that's the way, I think of dealing with stress. - Yeah, I really appreciate you saying that. You and I were both at a gathering, let's say where this issue was being discussed, and around an issue of a publicized sexual trauma. And you made an excellent case for why this stuff can't be pushed under the rug. And that actually, in my observation, led to a lot of healing for the people that and the families of people that suffered from this. I do think people are resilient. But we don't really teach how to think about feelings. We're told that we need to feel our feelings, but then again, we are also told that feelings don't hold all the information. And so, I think that as you mentioned, there's no operating or users manual for this nervous system thing. Brings me to another issue, which is the mind-body connection. Something that we're very interested in and you've done extensive work on. We all like to think that, getting more in touch with our body, would be a great thing, learning to interocept, paying attention to our internal landscape, would be a great thing. But as we often discuss, when we're feeling lousy, then being really in touch with that lousy feeling, may or may not be a good thing, right? So, how should we think about mind-body? I can see examples in hypnosis, from your descriptions of hypnosis, where you want to unify the mind-body connection. Feel what you're thinking, think what you're feeling, et cetera. But I could also point to elements within the hypnotic process in which you are actively trying to uncouple those. - That's. - So, it sounds to me like, this whole mind-body thing is a bit more like a car. You can't say that 40 miles per hour is the optimal speed. It kind of depends on the road you're on and the turn you may or may not be taking. - Right. - How should we think about mind-body in terms of, navigating daily life? What do you think is the adaptive way, to conceptualize the mind-body? It's a big question. - It is. It's a very interesting one. I guess, I think that it's a matter or not of, absolute control but more control, that we need to think of our brain as a tool and our body's signals as tools as well, to help us understand what's going on in the world, what we need, what matters, what's important, what isn't, but also something that can be managed, not simply absorbed. And so, hypnosis I think is a kind of limiting case, where you can push it about as far as we can push it in terms of regulating pain. Pain is a good example of that. Obviously, you need to pay attention. If you just broke your ankle, you better pay attention to it and get help or you're having crushing substernal chest pain. You better do something about it. But our brain, is sort of programmed to treat all pain signals as if they were novel pain signals. If it's a sudden new problem that needs to be attended to. I teach people to think of the pain and categorize it, does the pain mean that if you put weight on this, you're going to re-injure your ankle for example, or does it simply mean that your body is healing and the pain is a sign that, gradually things are getting back to normal and so, you can modify the way you process pain, based on what your brain tells you the pain means. And that's true for emotional pain as well. And particularly where I think a strategy that really helps, is if you think of an interpersonal problem or a threat of something coming as an opportunity to do something to ameliorate the situation. So, it's not just it's happening to you, but something that you can influence and do something about. So, it's blending the receptive with the active response, that I think can make a difference. So, you try and process it in a way that gives you a deeper understanding of what's happening. You face it but you also say, this is an opportunity for me to do something about it. And the minute you realistically enha- and this doesn't mean, imagine away a heart attack. It means figure out how to rehabilitate from a heart attack or a broken leg or something like that in a way that you get as much control into the situation as you can. - I love it. Grief. Grief is one of those states that is very hard to remove oneself from. And a lot of people asked me, how do I deal with grief? And I'm not a clinician so I'm deferring to you. - Mm-hm. - On the one hand, actually someone at Stanford recently came to me and said, my mother passed away and I had a sibling that passed away and they were the only people that I had. And I'm also living alone and I'm challenged with a number of things. And, they looked like they were holding it together, - Mm-hm. - very well, in fact, given what they were describing. And on the one hand, well, I certainly pointed out that I'm not a clinician, but I said on the one hand, you could imagine that it would be necessary and useful to go into the grief's state, if you want to transition through it. - Right. - On the other hand there, I've heard before that the cathartic model of just really diving into an emotion, can also be potentially hazardous. If you don't have any anchors to grab onto. What is view of psychiatry or your view of grief and how to deal with grief? Because I think grief is, one of those all encompassing emotions for many people. - Yeah, it is. And it's a very important, natural, necessary stage of life. And the reason we have all these grief rituals from burials and memorials and headstones and sitting shiva and other things that people do. It's a way of making it real, that an incomprehensible loss has to be comprehended. You have to realize that you're now going to have to live life without your loved one, your parent, your sibling, whoever. And we've all gone through this at one time or another, I certainly have. And it's very hard to just come to terms with, but one principle is to sort of say, it's never all or none, it's more or less. So yes, it's all or none that you've lost a loved one, but I ask people as part of their grieving to say to themselves, and I do this in hypnosis sometimes too. You've lost them but what have they left you with? What have they bequeathed to you even though they're gone? And I'll sometimes ask them to say, if your mother could be here right now, what would she say to you? How would she feel about your life now? What would she advise you to do? So, in our support groups for women with advanced breast cancer, we lost people. And I got to tell you that we were warned by oncologists, that we demoralized people that, I mean, they were wonderful oncologists, but there are some that were very afraid that we would harm them in some way, because the mortality rate is fairly high with metastatic breast cancer. They're going to watch people die of the same disease and you'll demoralize them. So, we actually measured their emotion and the content of speech every five minutes throughout a bunch of groups to make sure that wasn't happening. What we found was, that they talked about more serious issues, but the mood didn't actually get worse. And we found in general that expressing negative emotion on the long run helps people be less anxious and depressed over time. And we've shown this in randomized clinical trials. So, it's not just my clinical impression. And what we try to get them to do, is to face a loss, live with the emotion that comes with it but also see that the reason it hurts so much, is how much that person gave you. So, we would do a self-hypnosis exercise at the [indistinct] say, I want you to get your body floating, safe and comfortable. Now, picture Mary and sit with the feeling of sadness that she's no longer with us. And we do that for a few minutes. And then we'd say on the other side, picture one thing she left with you that you still have, that you carry on in your heart, her tradition of what she gave to you. And so just seeing it, not as a complete loss, but as a real loss, a painful loss but one that helps you to reflect on, what you gained from her and knowing her, I think can be very helpful in the grieving process. - That's very helpful way to conceptualize it. Couple quick questions. Can children be safely hypnotized or do self-hypnosis? - It's sometimes harder for them to do self-hypnosis, they need more structure to do it. You've got to share your dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with 'em a little bit, but yes, absolutely, children can be very hypnotizable. And I know pediatricians, who use it wonderfully all the time. They get them to focus on something else. So, they're going to have to give them a shot or draw blood or something. And they'll say, I'm going to press your happy button and he presses their belly button. And they start to giggle the way kids do. And meanwhile, the nurse is drawing the blood and they don't even notice it. Dentists, good dentists can use it to help kids with fear and pain. So yes, it can be very effective for children. We did a randomized trial. I have a publication in pediatrics, my late sister, who was a pediatrician, and who always used to joke that, she was the only one in our family who was a real doctor. I said, I gotcha. I got a paper in pediatrics [Andrew laughing] and the paper was children having to undergo, a voiding cystourethrogram. So, the anatomy of the kidney, if you'll forgive me, is sort of interesting in that, the ureter that goes into the bladder, normally goes into the bladder at an angle. And so that means, that when the bladder contracts to expel urine, it automatically closes off the ureter because it's sideways to the bladder. Some kids are born with it perpendicular, and then you'll get reflux into the kidney. And some children outgrow it, some need pretty complicated surgery to fix that. And so, you image them every year or so to see whether they're getting kidney damage or not. And it's a pretty miserable experience. You're a nine year old girl. You have to go and lie on a hard cold table, have strangers pull your legs apart and stick a catheter into your urethra and hold in the bladder and then expel urine. And so, you get into these struggling fights. And of course the more they struggle, the more they constrict and it makes it harder to do it. So, I was asked if we could test this. So, we did a randomized trial at children's hospital. They either got training in self-hypnosis. I would meet with them and the mother the week before, we find out from the kids where they like to be. And I'd say, you're going to play a trick on your doctors. Your body's there, you're somewhere else, go visit your friend, go to Disneyland, do something else. And the mother would work on this with me at the head of the table. And we found that these children were much easier to image. One got so relaxed that, so your guy [indistinct] he's said, normally it takes us 10 minutes to get them to pee after they're doing this. She was so relaxed, she started peeing before I could even get the bed pan under her [laughs]. And I had to clean up the table. And they also, 17 minutes shorter procedures. And that's a long 17 minutes for a little kid. So, it can be very effective with children. They're less anxious, they have less pain and get through these difficult procedures very well. - That's great. Has hypnosis ever been done for couples, like couples therapy? I'm thinking of pretty much every clinical setting here. Both people have to be hypnotizable, of course. - Mm-hm, yes. - But the reason I ask about this, is next, I'm going to ask about psychedelics and there's a lot of interest in, coordinating states through the use, of drugs of different kinds. - Mm-hm. - We actually do this when we treat depression, right? You have a depressed person with family members who are not depressed, and you say, well, let's make them all not depressed [chuckles], [David laughing] right, I mean, but and I'm only half kidding there, because that is kind of the underlying logic in some sense. But are you aware of any of any coordinated hypnosis? - That's interesting, I mean, I've done plenty of it in groups not with couples. - You can hypnotize large groups, at once? - Oh yeah. - Are we hypnotized right now? - Yeah, you are. And I hope you've been enjoying it. [Andrew laughing] But the metastatic breast cancer, there was a group of like 10 women, who would meet once a week and we would all go into hypnosis together. - I didn't realize that, you were hypnotizing them collectively. - Yes, right. - Fascinating. - And that, if anything, I think it brings out the best in people's abilities because it's a shared social experience and they would talk about it afterwards. And so, yes, that's absolutely doable, yeah. - And I don't want to focus on psychedelics specifically. Maybe that's a topic for a future episode. But is there any basis for combining hypnosis with drug therapies inside of the hypnotic episode? So, I realize that some patients of yours, might be prescribed a antidepressant or a medication for some purpose, maybe same or different than the hypnosis is being directed toward. But is there any evidence that, if people are relaxed through the use of a propranolol or one of these many things in the psychiatrist's kit, that hypnosis can be more effective? - Well, interestingly, one study that I haven't mentioned is, we did spectroscopy on people who were hypnotized. And we found that, there was a correlation between hypnotizability and GABA activity in the anterior cingulate cortex, which fits with turning down activity. To the extent that we can self-medicate and GABA receptors basically are doing what benzodiazepines do to the brain, that can happen when people are hypnotized. - So you're saying inside of the hypnosis, you have neural evidence that, there's a kind of a sedative effect of hypnosis at the chemical level. - Yeah, right. - Amazing. - The people who are more hypnotizable, have more of those GABA receptives and it's related to the degree of their hypnotizability. - Fascinating. - In terms of, there have been studies, where they give people medications as well. And the interesting thing with benzodiazepines, which activate inhibitory activity in the brain. If you are very anxious, it might improve your hypnotic response a bit. If you're just so anxious and [indistinct] you can't do it. If you're not very anxious, it actually inhibits hypnotic activity because you get sort of sedated and just out of it. And you can't focus your attention, as well. So, by and large, we don't use drugs as an adjuvant to hypnotic experience. Most of the time you don't need to. And sometimes it can make it worse rather than better. There's some evidence that, mild stimulants might enhance hypnotic responsiveness, a little reliably, but too much, Well, [indistinct] scatter attention and you'll have less control over it. So, they might be adjuvants, but I frankly think hypnosis is more of a replacement than a need of supplementation. - Your laboratory and my laboratory have, well, have sort of snuck into your lab and then trying to emerge the two, it's been a lot of fun, - It sure has, been learning a lot about, the power of respiration of breathing to shift brain states, not just during breathing protocols, but at all times. And we will do an entire episode about those protocols. I think we, - Cool. - after those are published and so on. But breathing itself is, you've described as a bridge between conscious and unconscious states. - Right. - So, I have to ask, how important is the patient's breathing pattern? How closely are you monitoring their breathing pattern? How closely do you monitor your own breathing pattern as you're inducing hypnosis? Put simply, what is the role of respiration in shifting the brain's state, during a hypnotic protocol? - Yeah, that's very interesting. You had a great show with Jack- - Yeah, Jack Feldman - Feldman. [Andrew indistinct] And he is. And the issue, I watch it, I try [stutters]. The work that we're enjoying doing together shows that there are breathing patterns that may increase sympathetic arousal or may decrease. It may [indistinct] cyclic sighing seems to, actually, where you have more time spent exhaling than inhaling. And there's reason to believe that it induces parasympathetic activity, 'cause you're increasing pressure in the chest and therefore allowing the heart to slow down because blood is being returned to the atrium more easily. I do use it. I ask people to take a deep breath as part of the induction and then slowly exhale. And partly as a result of our research together, I'm emphasizing this slow exhale more, as part of [stutters], to enhance the idea in the induction that this is a period of relaxation, 'cause I think they are inducing that and perhaps perceiving it as well. So, there there's no, you're absolutely right that breathing is very interesting 'cause it's right at the edge of conscious and Jack talked about that too, of conscious and unconscious control, that it will go on automatically but we can control it. And so, it's a kind of way for us to demonstrate to ourselves, greater ways of modulating our internal state. So, you can either do it, thinking about it, the way we do with pain control in hypnosis or you can do it to some extent, by taking charge of your breathing and doing things that will produce a change that you want to see happen in your body. So, I like it because it's right at that margin, where you can enhance, for me, I like that as a way of augmenting hypnosis, more than medication, I think this is a powerful way of doing that. - Great, I'm really excited to see where all of this goes. - Yes. - Breathing, vision, bodily states are clearly the- and directed mental focus, seem to be the key elements of hypnosis. Am I missing any other ingredients? - Yeah, I think that's right. - It's- - Breathing, vision, - Breathing, vision, how you change your vision and you don't, you know, typically you're in a physically relaxed state, but frankly there are people at the peak of performance, including physical athletic performance or musical performance when they're in hypnotic states too. I've talked to classical pianists who say, I'm not thinking, if I start thinking about what my fingers are doing now, I screw up. I'm floating above the piano, thinking about the tone that I want to feel exuding from the instrument. So that's a hypnotic like state too. And many athletes who are in peak performance, are just flowing with it. They're not thinking step by step, what am I doing? And that's when you're doing your best or when we're working or giving a talk and doing it well, we're in a hypnotic like states. So, it usually requires, but doesn't necessarily require physical comfort or quietness. It can sometimes be intense activity. - Incredible. Well, this has been an amazing discussion. I've learned so much as I always do from you. Where can people learn more about, how they can get hypnotized? We mentioned Reveri, we'll put a link to it, R-E-V-E-R-I.com is the way to access that. - Or it's the Reveri app from the app store, is the other way. reveri.com is the website, you can get to it through that or download the Reveri app from the app store. - Great. So, currently on apple, hopefully soon, also on Android, but in the meantime, what if people are interested in exploring clinical hypnosis, working with you or somebody similar? Is there a centralized resource that people can go to to find, really well-trained hypnotists? - There are two good professional organizations that will help you with that. One is the society for clinical and experimental hypnosis. And I think that's sceh.us is their- - Okay, we'll look it up and provide a link. - And the American society for clinical hypnosis, and they both provide referral services for professionals. You can look it up. I would just say in general, look for someone who is licensed and trained in their primary professional discipline, psychiatry, psychology, medicine, dentistry and who has training and interest in using hypnosis, is a way to do it. - Great and then one more question and then a comment. The question is, will you be my psychiatrist? - [laughs] I'm honored. - It's a tall task. I might be that the most stubborn patient. - I think the hardest work's already been done, Andrew. - Thank you. - You're fine, now. - I appreciate that. [David laughing] Well, and the final thing is a comment. First of all, thank you so much for being here today, for sharing your knowledge. - You're welcome. - I hope we can do it again and again. - I hope so. - I love working with your laboratory and with you. - Likewise [indistinct]. - Because when you speak, I learn and I know others do as well. - Thank you. - We will put resources to get to you but I also just want to say, thank you for doing the work that you do. - Well, thank you. - It's an incredible thing that in this world where we are discovering so much about how the body works, the mind is still rather mysterious and people are struggling with a lot of things, but also I think people are really excited about, applying tools like hypnosis to perform better, feel better mentally and physically. And so you've pointed us to a tremendous amount of resources and how these tools work and where they've already been demonstrated to work. So just, thank you. I know this is your professional commitment in life and we all benefit. So, thank you so. - Well, thank you, but it's been a real joy for me to be collaborating with you and for you to be using your precision and knowledge about neuroanatomy, neurobiology to address problems that often people who are that disciplined in the primary neurobiological end, aren't as interested in as you are. And so, it's really been a pleasure to try and bring together what we both know from these different perspectives to build something that neither of us could do alone. And so, it's been a real joy for me to do it. - Thank you, I'm honored. - Thank you. - Thank you very much, David. - You're welcome. - Thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel. I hope you found it as fascinating as I did. And if you'd like to see the video of Dr. Spiegel hypnotizing me, in what constitutes a abbreviated clinical hypnosis session, you can go to the Huberman Lab Clips channel on YouTube. Also, if you'd like to check out the Reveri app for self-hypnosis designed by Dr. Spiegel and colleagues, you can go to Reveri that's R-E-V-E-R-I.com to see the Reveri app, there's also other information there about the scientific studies that support the Reveri app. If you're enjoying and or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and or Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. Please also leave us comments and feedback, as well as suggestions for guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast, in the comment section on our YouTube channel, please also check out the sponsors, mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. On many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements, while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like enhancing sleep and focus and various other aspects of brain and body, health and performance. One issue with supplements however, is that many of the supplements out there, simply do not contain what's listed on the bottle and or the quality of the ingredients is not very high. That's why we partnered with Thorne Supplements. Thorne Supplements are used by all the major sports teams and they've partnered with the Mayo Clinic. The reason they have so many high level partners, is that Thorne Supplements, are of the very highest quality ingredients. They also are extremely precise in terms of what's listed on the bottle, is always what it's in the bottle. If you'd like to see the Thorne Supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's thorne.com/u/huberman and there, you can see the Thorne supplements that I take and get 20% off any of those supplements. Also, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please do so, it's hubermanlab on both Instagram and Twitter. And at those channels, I cover science and science related tools. Some of which overlap with the content of this podcast, other of which does not and is unique content. So, once again, thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. David Spiegel and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 288 ---
Video ID: gMRph_BvHB4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gMRph_BvHB4
Title: The Science of Love, Desire and Attachment
Published: 2022-02-14 13:00:31 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the psychology and biology of desire, love and attachment. I explain how childhood attachment types are thought to inform adult attachment styles to romantic partners, and I describe some of the major theories of human mate selection, relationships and infidelity. Additionally, I explore the neurobiology and proposed subconscious processing underlying desire, love and attachment, including the roles of empathy and “positive delusion.” I outline how self-awareness can shift one’s relationship attachment style towards securely bonded partnerships.  Finally, I describe specific tools and supplements that have been researched to increase libido and sex drive. Throughout the episode, I explain the science and key mechanisms underlying romantic love and outline tools for those seeking to find a strong, healthy relationship, or for those wanting to strengthen an existing relationship. 

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Love

Thank you to our sponsors
Thesis: https://takethesis.com/huberman
AG1 (Athletic Greens): https://athleticgreens.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Our Patreon page
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Article Links
Romantic love: an fMRI study of a neural mechanism for mate choice: https://bit.ly/34EuPWq
Relationship-specific Encoding of Social Touch in Somatosensory and Insular Cortice: https://bit.ly/3rIambT
Investigating real-life emotions in romantic couples: a mobile EEG study: https://go.nature.com/3sG4ZJs
Brain Knows Who Is on the Same Wavelength: Resting-State Connectivity Can Predict Compatibility of a Female–Male Relationship: https://bit.ly/3rMP3pO
Manipulation of Self-Expansion Alters Responses to Attractive Alternative Partners: https://bit.ly/3LuTYDA
Randomized Clinical Trial on the Use of PHYSTA Freeze-Dried Water Extract of Eurycoma longifolia for the Improvement of Quality of Life and Sexual Well-Being in Men: https://bit.ly/3gKEtJy

For additional links and resources on Maca, Tongkat Ali and Tribulus, also see links in “Human Effect Matrix” at examine.com. 

Book Links
Attached: The New Science of Adult Attachment and How It Can Help You Find and Keep Love: https://amzn.to/3HMLLZ2
Right Brain Psychotherapy: https://amzn.to/3HJjXVs
The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work: A Practical Guide from the Country’s Foremost Relationship Expert: https://amzn.to/3LzS1FN

Other Links
The Gottman Institute Love Lab: A Research-Based Approach to Relationships: https://bit.ly/3Bkrxn3
New York Times - The 36 Questions that Lead to Love (1/9/2015): https://nyti.ms/3HPAnvF

Timestamps
00:00:00 Desire, Love & Attachment 
00:02:59 Odor, Perceived Attractiveness & Birth Control
00:08:04 Thesis, AG1 (Athletic Greens), InsideTracker 
00:14:13 Romance: Balancing Love & Desire
00:19:00 Animal Studies, Vasopressin & Monogamy 
00:22:06 Strange Situation Task, Childhood Attachment Styles
00:32:52 Adult Attachment Styles
00:38:50 Secure Attachment 
00:41:23 Autonomic Arousal: The “See-Saw”
00:50:39 Tool: Self-Awareness, Healthy Interdependence
00:53:11 Neurobiology of Desire, Love & Attachment   
00:58:02 Empathy & Mating & the Autonomic Nervous System
01:10:02 Positive Delusion, Touch
01:15:20 Relationship Stability 
01:21:22 Selecting Mates, Recognition of Autonomic Tone
01:38:28  Neural Mechanisms of Romantic Attachment 
01:47:43 Autonomic Coordination in Relationships 
01:56:13 Infidelity & Cheating
02:08:56 “Chemistry”, Subconscious Processes
02:12:44 Tools: Libido & Sex Drive 
02:20:20 Maca (Maca root)   
02:25:58 Tongkat Ali (Longjack) 
02:28:56 Tribulus terrestris 
02:33:14 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube, Spotify/Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 289 ---
Video ID: BwyZIWeBpRw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwyZIWeBpRw
Title: Using Play to Rewire & Improve Your Brain
Published: 2022-02-07 13:00:13 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the transformative nature of play—how it changes our feelings, thoughts and actions and indeed, how it can rewire our brain to function better in all contexts. I explain the role of play in childhood, as well as adulthood in skill and social development and describe key characteristics of the mind and body during play. Additionally, I explore how play allows the brain to test contingencies in different roles/environments. Throughout, I discuss the underlying neurobiology of play. I also describe how low-stakes play, and tinkering can broaden and shape your future capabilities. Finally, I discuss how our childhood ‘personal play identity’ informs our adult personality. Throughout the episode, I use the science of play to outline recommendations for using play as a means to enhance neuroplasticity and explore novel situations, regardless of age.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Play

Thank you to our sponsors:
AG1 (Athletic Greens) - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Article Links
Reading on a smartphone affects sigh generation, brain activity, and comprehension - https://go.nature.com/3rycDqe
In search of the neurobiological substrates for social playfulness in mammalian brains - https://bit.ly/3rvDvXP
Is chess just a game, or is it a mirror that reflects the child's inner world? - https://bit.ly/3gsUNyr
A new structural model for the study of adult playfulness: Assessment and exploration of an understudied individual differences variable - https://bit.ly/3otwvIU
5MinuteConsult Journal Club - https://bit.ly/3sf7H8w

Book Links
Personal play identity and the fundamental elements in its development process - https://bit.ly/331oYtm
Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain - https://amzn.to/3uLnC1B
Play It Away: A Workaholic’s Cure for Anxiety - https://amzn.to/3AZFUgx

Timestamps
00:00:00 The Power of Play 
00:02:23 Tool: Reading on Smart Phones, Sighing & Learning  
00:09:14 AG1 (Athletic Greens), Roka, Helix Sleep 
00:13:57 Homeostatic Regulation of Play
00:23:53 Childhood Play & Mindsets
00:29:21 Contingency Testing  
00:32:17 The (Power of) Playful Mindset
00:36:13 Body Postures 
00:44:03 Rule Testing & Breaking 
00:48:24 Role Play
00:50:39 Neurobiology of Low-stakes Play
00:54:22 Expanding Capabilities through Tinkering 
01:00:03 Play Is THE Portal to Neuroplasticity 
01:04:44 Adulthood Play
01:10:14 Fire Together, Wire Together 
01:18:03 Trauma & Play Deficits & Recovery
01:23:25 Competition & Dynamic Movement
01:27:36 Chess, Mental Roles, Novelty  
01:32:52 Personal Play Identity 
01:37:24 Play Transforms Your Future Self  
01:40:55 Recommendations for Play
01:44:25 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify/Apple Reviews, YouTube, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [Upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to talk about the biology, psychology and utility of play. Play is something that normally we associate with children's games and indeed with being a child, much of our childhood development centers around play, whether or not it's organized play or spontaneous play, but as adults, we also need to play. And today I'm going to talk about what I like to refer to as The Power of Play. The Power of Play, resides in plays ability to change our nervous system for the better, so that we can perform many activities, not just play activities, better. Play can also function as a way to explore new ways of being in different scenarios in work, in relationships, in settings of all kind, and indeed also in the relationship to oneself. In fact, we are going to explore how assuming different identities during the same game of play or the same forms of play has been shown to be immensely powerful for allowing people to engage in more creative thinking and dynamic thinking and indeed to better leaders and more effective workers and students and learners and happier people. I'm also going to cover some data that shows that learning to play properly can enhance one's ability to focus and is an active area of research for treatment of things like ADHD, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, just as a little sneak preview of where that's headed, children who do not access enough play during certain stages of childhood are more prone to develop ADHD. The good news, is all of us regardless of whether or not we have ADHD or not, whether or not we had ample access to play during childhood or not, can engage and grow the neural circuits that allow for this incredible power of play. And this can be done again at any stage of life today. We're going to talk about the protocols, the science, we will review all of that. And I promise you'll come away with a lot of knowledge, whether or not you're a parent, whether or not you're a child, whether or not you're a person of any age, you're going to have tools and knowledge that will benefit you. Before we begin, I want to share with you the results of what I think to be an extremely exciting and certainly an actionable study that was just published in the journal Scientific Reports. This is an excellent journal Nature Press journal, Peer Reviewed, et cetera, and the finding center around what sorts of devices we happen to be reading on and accessing information on and how that's impacting our physiology and our capacity to learn. One of the more frequent questions I get is what are all these devices, phones, tablets, computers, video games et cetera, doing to our brains. And finally, there's some good Peer reviewed data to look at that and to address it directly. This study, first author Honma H O N M A Honma et al, is entitled "Reading on a smartphone affects sigh generation. That's SIGH sigh generation brain activity and comprehension." And to just summarize what they found, they ran a study on 34 healthy individuals and had them either read material on a smartphone or on regular printed paper or a book. And what they found is that comprehension on devices in particular smartphones is much poorer much worse than it is when one reads on actual paper. Now some of you may experience this yourselves. Now they compared smartphones with paper. And what they found was that when they looked at people's breathing, the normal patterns of breathing that people were engaging in did not differ between people reading on a smartphone or reading from paper. However, one particular feature of breathing did differ. And that particular feature is what we call physiological sighs. I've talked a lot about physiological sighs on this podcast, and on social media, we had a terrific guest, Professor, Jack Feldman from University of California Los Angeles. Who's a world expert in breathing and respiration and its impacts on the brain and how brain controls breathing and respiration and what you can learn from that episode. Or I'll just tell you again right now, is that every five minutes or so, whether or not we are asleep or awake, we do what's called a physiological sigh, which is a big, deep inhale, often a double inhale followed by a long exhale. It goes something like this. [Inhaling] [Sighs] Now you might think, oh, I never breathe like that, but you do, unless there's something severely wrong with your brain stem every five minutes or so you do one of these physiological sighs, which reopens all the little hundreds of millions of sacks in your lungs called alveoli that bring in more oxygen as a consequence of that big deep, double inhale. And then you are able to exhale carbon dioxide, offload carbon dioxide through that long exhale. I've also encouraged people to use the physiological sigh deliberately, not just spontaneously as a way to reduce their stress quickly. And indeed my lab works on physiological sighs and it's been exploring this and they're quite effective in reducing our stress very fast. Reading on our smartphone, seems to suppress physiological sigh. People aren't aware that it's happening, but it's happening. Some people have talked about so-called email apnea, which is the fact that people hold their breath while they email or while they text. And indeed many people do that. This is distinct from email or texting apnea. What's happening here is people are reading on the phone and for whatever reason, and I'll talk about what the likely reason is, but for whatever reason, they're suppressing their sighing And as a consequence, the brain is not getting enough oxygen and is not offloading enough carbon dioxide. And another finding in this study, was that the prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain that's involved in focus and attention and learning becomes hyperactive in a kind of desperate attempt to focus. All of this can be summarized by saying, if you happen to read on a device, whether or not it's a tablet, a standard computer screen of any kind, but in particular on a smart phone, regardless of how small or large that smartphone screen is, you want to remind yourself to engage in these physiological sighs fairly regularly. And it might even be better to just read the most or at least the key issues and things that you're trying to learn about the key information from paper, either books or printed out material of some other sort. What's the underlying mechanism here? Well, one of the reasons I like this study so much, is that it brings together two of my laboratories and my particular interests in neuroscience, which is how does our visual system and the aperture meaning the size of our visual window relate to our so-called autonomic function or our internal state. And basically what's happening here is as any of us bring our visual window in more narrowly as we contract our visual window, which is exactly what happens when we're looking at a little smartphone in front of us. It seems to suppress the breathing apparatus because we know that physiological sighs are controlled by a specific set of neurons in the brain stem called the parafacial nucleus discovered by Dr. Jack Feldman. And so there must be a mechanism whereby when we tighten our visual window, we somehow, and we don't know yet how this happens, but somehow suppress the activity of these neurons in the parafacial nucleus that generate this physiological sighs. So again, you have two choices or I suppose you have many choices, but two main choices to contend with this new information. One is that you remind yourself to engage in deep breathing and in particular, physiological sighs every five minutes or so, while reading anything or texting on your smartphone, the other would be, again, if there's material that you really need to learn for sake of regurgitation later, or for something particularly important, try and read that from either a larger screen or even better would be from printed materials or books. Another reason I bring all that up is that it relates to a larger theme, which is that I get many, many questions about ADHD and about people's challenges with focus and much of what we're told these days is that we are challenged with focus because of the hundreds of videos that we can see streaming by us in any moment on our phone, which probably is true. The fact that the information that we're reading on the internet and on our phones is emotionally disturbing or distressing in some way. And that probably is true as well in many cases. This study really points to the fact that independent of the information that we are looking at or consuming independent whether or not it's movies or texts or anything of that sort, the mere size of the window, the aperture, the screen that we are looking at is also strongly impacting our ability to learn and remember information. So broaden that visual window print things out, look at a book. I didn't design the system. I always say, you know, however our visual system and respiratory system happened to evolve. I wasn't consulted at the design phase. This is just simply how your brain circuits work. So if you want to learn things, widen that visual window and even better print things out, pick up a book or read on a tablet even, but try and make that tablet larger than a smartphone screen size. Before we begin our discussion about The Power of Play, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens also now called AG1. I started drinking Athletic Greens way back in 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic Greens is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. The reason I started drinking it in 2012, and the reason that I still drink it once or twice a day, is that with Athletic Greens, I cover all of my basic foundational vitamin mineral probiotic needs. It's filled with adaptogens for recovery. The probiotics are particularly important because they encourage health of the so-called gut microbiome. We're going to be talking a lot about the gut microbiome on this podcast in the weeks and months to come, but to make a long story short, we have a lot of bacteria living in our gut that are healthy bacteria that support them like digestion immune system, metabolic function, hormone systems. And perhaps most interestingly to me, the gut microbiome supports brain function, including mood cognition and so forth. The probiotics in Athletic Greens strongly support the gut microbiome and thereby the other systems of the body, including the gut brain access, which I just referred to. If you like to try Athletic Greens again, also called AG1, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3, K2, vitamin D3 is extremely important for many biological functions. We are told that we can get enough D3 from sun exposure, but many of us we're getting sun exposure. And many of us who are not getting enough sun exposure still don't have ample levels of vitamin D3 So supplementing with vitamin D3 is necessary for many many people. And K2 is important for cardiovascular function for proper calcium balance, et cetera. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can get the five free travel packs a year supply of vitamin the D3 K2, and of course your Athletic Greens. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system. And one of the many challenges that your visual system has to deal with is for instance, when you move from a bright environment to a dimer environment, you have to adapt. You have have to be able to see things clearly, many sunglasses and eyeglasses don't allow that adaptation to occur seamlessly, ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses allow that to occur in concert with your biology and in a way that makes it very seamless. You just don't notice the transition at all, which is wonderful. I love it 'cause I don't have to constantly be taking off and putting on my sunglasses when I'm outside. I happen to wear readers at night, eye glass readers. It's also terrific as the luminance in your environment changes. So they work under low luminance, high luminance, et cetera. They're very lightweight. In fact, you can wear them when running, when cycling, they were designed by two All-American swimmers from Stanford. And so originally they were designed for the purpose of being worn during exercise, but you can wear them anywhere. They have a great aesthetic, so you can wear them to dinner, to work, et cetera. And while a lot of performance eyeglasses out there, in my opinion, make people look like cyborgs, ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses have just a terrific aesthetic that you can wear truly anywhere. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com that's ROKA.com and enter the code Huberman to get 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA ROKA.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are second to none. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress about a year ago now, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. What's unique about Helix mattresses is that they tailor their mattresses to your sleep needs. So if you go to their website, you can take a brief two minute quiz that asks questions like, do you sleep on your stomach or your back or on your side, maybe you don't know, do you tend to run hot or cold throughout the night? Or maybe you don't know, and it matches you to the mattress. that's perfect for your sleep needs. I matched to the so-called Dusk mattress, D U S K, because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm and not too soft. And so I sleep on a Dusk mattress. You should figure out what mattress would be ideal for you. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz and the match you to a customized mattress. And you'll get up to $200 off any of your mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, that's $200 off and two free pillows. The pillows are excellent. I also use Helix pillows. They have a 10 year warranty. You get to try out the mattress for up to a hundred nights, risk free. If you don't like it, they'll come pick it up, take it away. But I think you'll love it. Again if interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. There can get up to $200 off and the two free pillows. Let's talk about play. Now in researching this episode, I thought that I was going to come across a bunch of papers that say this brain area connects to that brain area, which controls play in animals. And there's similar areas in babies and in adults. And indeed, that's true. And we will talk about brain circuitry, but I think more importantly is to understand what is the utility of play? You know, why do we play when we're younger? Why do we tend to play less as we get older? And what in the world is play for? Some of us would be categorized as more playful. I'm sure that you know, people like this, maybe you are like this people that can walk into a room, a social setting of any kind, and they seem to already kind of have a playful, maybe even a mischievous quality about them. We'll talk about mischief a little bit later, but they sort of look at an environment or a social setting as an opportunity for different kinds of novel interactions. Other people and I'd probably put myself into this category. If I walk into a novel environment, I tend to be more in the mode of just assessing what that environment is like. I'm not a particularly spontaneously playful person, although around certain individuals, I might be more spontaneously playful. We are all on a continuum of this kind of seriousness to playful nature. Turns out that all young animals, including humans have more playfulness and tend to engage in more spontaneous play in their earlier years than in their later years. And therein lies a very interesting portal to understanding what the utility, what the purpose of play is. First of all, I want to lay down a couple of key facts about play that point to the fact that play is not just about games. Play is about much, much more and play and in particular, how we played as a child and still how we can play as adults is really how we test and expand our potential roles in all kinds of interactions. One of the most important, interesting and surprising features of play that I'd like everyone to know about is that it is homeostatically regulated. Some of you are familiar with the term homeostasis. Homeostasis is just this aspect of biological systems to try and remain in balance. You know, if you stay awake for a long period of time, you tend to want to sleep for a long period of time. If you slept for a long period of time and you're very rested, then you tend to be very energetic the next day. And of course, I know people out there will immediately say, oh, well, if I sleep too long, then I'm groggy the next day. Of course there are exceptions, but in general, sleep and wakefulness are in homeostatic balance. Thirst and water consumption are in homeostatic balance. If you don't drink any fluids for a while, you tend to get more thirsty, you drink fluids and your thirst tends to diminish likewise with food. Likewise, with most all motivated behaviors. Well, one of the most important discoveries of the last century, was largely the work of a guy named Jaak Panksepp. No, it's not Jack it's Jaak Panksepp who really pioneered this understanding of the biology of play and relating that to the psychology of play in animals and humans. He's considered kind of luminary in the field of play, and what a great title to have, right? If you could have a title and be a scientific luminary, you might as well be the, the play guy. In fact he was known and I'll get into this later as to why, but he was known as the "Rat Tickler" because he tickled rats. And he actually found that rodents and animals of many kind generate laughter in response to tickling. And in fact, they don't have the capacity to tickle themselves something we'll also talk about why that is. And he was called the "Rat tickler," but then he discovered that many species of animals engage in laughter in response to tickling and they tickle each other. And the reason you don't hear them laughing, no you can't hear your dog laughing that isn't laughing it's something else is that most animals besides humans laugh at kind of ultrasonic levels of auditory output. Meaning the frequencies of sound are just too high for you to hear, but with the appropriate devices, he was able with his colleagues to isolate this so-called the "Rat Laughter" and then turns out there's kitten laughter and there's puppy laughter. And of course there's human laughter. So Jaak Panksepp was a very interesting and pioneering person in this field. And he also discovered that play is homeostatically regulated. Meaning if animals including children are restricted from playing for a certain amount of time, they will play more when given the opportunity in the same way that if I food restrict you for a long period of time, you'll eat more when you are finally allowed to eat. Now this is important because it moves this thing that we call play from the dimension of higher order functions or things evolved recently, you know, that are really kind of at the front edge of human evolution, deeper into the circuitry of the brain, whereby we say the brain stem, the kind of ancient parts of the brain are going to be involved. And in fact, that's the case as we're going to learn later in the podcast, play is generated through the connectivity of many brain areas. But one of the key brain areas is an area called PAG Periaqueductal Gray. The Periaqueductal Gray is a brain stem area. So it's pretty far back as the brain kind of transitions into the spinal cord. And it's rich with neurons that make endogenous opioids. So these are not the kinds of opioids that are causing the opioid crisis. These are neurons that you and I all have that release endogenous, meaning self-made or biologically made opioids. They go by names like enkephalin and things of that sort. Play evokes small amounts of opioid release into the system. They kind of dope you up a little bit, not so much as one would see if one were to take exogenous opioids. And in fact exogenous opioids as we now know, are potentially very hazardous, highly high addiction potential high overdose potential. They cause all sorts of problems. Yes there are clinical uses for them, but they're causing a lot of problems nowadays, but these endogenous opioids are released in children and adults anytime we engage in play. And that turns out to be a very important chemical state because there's something about having an abundance of these endogenous opioids released into the brain that allows other areas of the brain, like the prefrontal cortex, the area of the front that's responsible for what we call executive function. Executive function is the ability to make predictions, to assess contingencies. Like if I do this, then that happens. If I do that, then that happens. Well prefrontal cortex is often seen as a kind of rigid executive of the whole brain. That's one way to view it, but probably a better way to view it is that the prefrontal cortex works in concert with these other are more primitive circuitries. And when the periaqueductal gray releases these endogenous opioids during play, the prefrontal cortex, doesn't get stupid. It actually gets smarter. It develops the ability to take on different roles and explore different contingencies. And we're going to talk about role play later in different contexts. And what we will find is that so much of play is really about exploring things in a way that feels safe enough to explore, right? This is not what happens when we drive down the street or when we bike down the street, when we are headed to work, commuting on our bicycle or walking or driving, we tend to be very linear and we tend to be very goal directed. We're not going to just take a new street just because we're not going to be spontaneously riding in the middle of the road and then on the sidewalk and then back and forth. Although I can remember as a kid, I was doing some of that. I like to jump off curb cuts when I was a kid. And then eventually I graduated, sorry to the cyclist, but I graduated to skateboarding. And then I look on skateboarding. You're always kind of exploring terrain, but you know, as I got older, actually I find myself becoming much more linear. I just don't play with my commute very much. It's really just about getting to work and then working. When endogenous opioids are in our system, when we're in this mode of play, the prefrontal cortex starts seeing and exploring many more possibilities of how we interact with our environment, with others and the roles that we can assume for ourselves. And so we're going to dissect one by one, the different aspects of play, role play, social play, individual play, imaginary play, competitive play they are enormous number of dimensions of play. And by the end of this episode, we are going to arrive at a very key feature. The key feature is one that's called your personal play identity. All of us have what we call a personal play identity. This personal play identity was laid down during development. And it is the identity that you assume in playful scenarios. And it is identity that you adopt in non playful scenarios. Now the great news is that your personal play identity is plastic throughout your entire lifespan. You can adjust your personal play identity in ways that will benefit you in work in relationships and your overall level of happiness. We will discuss protocols and ways to do that. But I do want to give a nod to the late jack, Jaak excuse me, Jaak Panksepp, "The rat tickler." And I also want to just give a nod to play generally, as we move forward in the discussion. What I'd love for everyone to do is to stop thinking about play as just a child activity, not just a sport related activity, but really as an exploration in contingencies. Again, it's an exploration of, if I do A, what happens? If I do B, what happens? If someone else takes on behavior or attitude C what am I going to do? And play is really where we can expand our catalog of potential outcomes, and it can be enormously enriching. And indeed as we'll talk about the tinkerers of the world, the true creatives, the people that building incredible technologies and art, and also that just have incredibly rich, emotional and intellectual and social lives all have a strong element of play. And so today I hope to convince you of some protocols that will allow you to expand your various roles in life, through the portal of play. So we establish that play is homeostatic, meaning we all need to do it. Many of us, including myself, haven't played that much as adults. We're all pretty busy. Number of us are stressed. We got a lot to do in life, but as children, most all of us engage in a lot of play. And in looking at the way that very young children and especially toddlers play, we can learn a lot because it reveals the fundamental rules by which the toddler brain interacts with the world. Now, one of the key things about the baby brain is that the baby brain somehow knows that it can't do everything in the world, right? If a baby needs something, it generally will cry or make some sort of vocalization or some sort of facial expression or combination of those. And the caretaker, whoever that may be will provide it. This is an ancient hard wired mechanism whereby the so-called autonomic nervous system that generates stress will create this kind of whining and discomfort, maybe arriving, maybe the baby gets kind of red in the face and the caretaker delivers some thing based on a good guess of what that baby needs. So maybe it's breast milk, maybe it's bottle milk. Maybe it's a diaper change. Maybe it's to be warmed up if the baby is cold, maybe it's to be cooled down if the baby's too warm, maybe if the baby's in its a little onesie thing, it's feeling restricted and it just wants to move and they'll get taken out of their, their crib or their stroller, whatever it is and allowed to stretch out on the floor. Remember the baby doesn't know exactly what it needs. It only knows the state of discomfort. And of course we don't know exactly what babies and toddlers are thinking because they can't express themselves with language yet. But what's key to understand is the rule or the contingency that is set up in that scenario. In that scenario, the child feels some discomfort expresses that discomfort verbally or through a facial expression or both and then some force some person from the outside world resolves it. And so the very young baby and indeed many children up to certain ages and let's confess many adults are not able to meet or adjust their internal states of stress. And so they look to things outside of them. That's the first rule, the fundamental rule that we all learn when we come into life, that when in a state of discomfort to look outside our immediate biology, beyond the confines of our skin and find a solution, a sip of water for adults, it might be sip of alcohol, right? Probably not the best tool to relieve stress, but that's one that many people do. In fact engaging for the baby that's hungry. The bottle milk comes from the outside. As we gain more proficiency in moving through life and we can get things for ourselves. We still often bring things from the external world in to resolve this what I'm calling autonomic discomfort or autonomic dysregulation. That's not a game, but that's a rule. As we advance from infant to toddler, we start to think more in terms of where we are and what we own relative to what's out there in the world. And now in the world of child psychology, there's a somewhat famous poem that was written by a research child psychologist. His name was Burton White, and he wrote a poem called "The Toddlers Creed" "The Toddlers Creed" defines well, what the rules and contingencies of play are in very young children. And it reveals to us just how narrow and limited their world view is and how self entered their world is. So "The Toddlers Creed" read quickly, cuz' I don't want to take up too much time with this is. "If I want it. It's mine. If I give it to you and change my mind later, it's mine." For anyone that's played with a toddler, you can imagine this in your mind. "If I can take it away from you, it's mine. If I had a little while ago, it's mine. If we are building something together, all the pieces are mine. If it looks just like mine, it's mine. If it's mine, it will never belong to anyone else, no matter what." And of course, as we hear this sounds quite awful, right? And yet this is actually a reflection of what a healthy toddler would think about the world. That the objects and things, and even the people in the world are theirs, that they are actually possessions that belong to them. Now of course, some people never actually transition beyond this stage of moral and social development. And there are indeed some adults that fit "The Toddlers Creed." And you're welcome to share this with them. If ever you think that it might be of benefit to their self-reflection. But in all seriousness Burton White's "Toddlers Creed" is really grounded in this transition from when we are infants. And we have to have things delivered to us, to the point where we are toddlers and we can access things in the world, but we tend to assume that they are all ours. And then the next stage is the really key stage as it relates to play because is in the next stage of development is where young children start to interact with other children and there's an exchange and a possession and then a letting go of certain things, learning that not everything is yours and that the entire world is not about you is one of the key contingencies that is established during play. It's one of the key way in which children go from being very self-centered and basically unable to engage with other kids for very long, without some sort of eruption of crying and some sort of battle of, you know, kind of push pull over an object to things like sharing and things like cooperative play. So as we transition from forms of play that are all about the self that are all me, me, me, me, "The Toddlers Creed" to forms of play that involve some discomfort in assuming roles that maybe we don't want and not getting what we want. It's really an opportunity for the brain to start to explore different roles that people take, how they work as individuals and as pairs and in larger groups. And to do that in a low stakes environment, right? You wouldn't want this to be worked out on the battlefield or when searching for food or in some high stakes environment where the survival of the species was important. It appears that these circuitry for play evolved. So that rules and contingencies around who's most important, whether or not the group is important, whether or not individuals are going to be leaders or followers, et cetera, that can be explored in a low stakes environment. Now there are hundreds of different types of play and hundreds of different types of contingency testing. But the key theme here is that play allows children and adults for that matter to explore different outcomes in a kind of low stakes environment. If you're playing a board game or a card game, you might get really into that game, but unless there's a lot of money on the table, so to speak, or you're really playing for something important or unless your ego is swollen way out of proportion, to reality, if you lose, you might not feel good about it, but it's truly not the end of the world. And if you win, you might feel really good about it, but you're not really incredible. You were just incredible in that particular situation for that particular moment, it doesn't really transform the rest of your life, unless that game is of a particular type for sport for instance. We'll talk about sport later. So the key theme here is that play is contingency testing. play is contingency testing under conditions where the stakes are sufficiently low, that individuals should feel comfortable assuming different roles, even roles that they're not entirely comfortable within their outside life. And that all relates again to the release of these endogenous opioids, in this brain center periaqueductal gray and the way that it allows the prefrontal cortex in a very direct way I mean, truly it allows it in a biological way to expand the number of operations that it can run, and start thinking about, oh, well, okay. Normally I'm kind of a loner and I like to read and work and you know, hang out alone maybe and play alone but you know okay, I'll play a board game or a game of tennis where I have a partner and we're going to play as partners against two other people. Okay, that's a little uncomfortable, but I'll do it. And in doing that, you discover certain ways in which you are proficient in certain ways, in which you are less proficient, you discover that the other person actually tends to cheat a little bit or the other person is extremely rigid about the rules, or maybe it is extremely rigid about the way they organize their pieces on the board, or they're crossing the line into your side of the tennis court. There are all sorts of things that we learn in these rather low stake scenarios. That's the key theme here. So before I continue, I just want to point to a tool that anyone can use, but in particular, the less playful of the group. And I would put myself into this category. Again, I'm not somebody who really engages in spontaneous play. I enjoy sports. I enjoy exercise, but that is distinct from play because the sports and exercise that I engage in, I take pretty seriously. They're not low stakes for me. I put actually I put a lot of importance on them. Which is I'm saying all this, I probably should put a little less importance on them and have a little more fun with those. And yet what I'm about to tell you is that anyone and everyone can benefit from engaging in a bit more of this playful mindset, the playful mindset is not necessarily about smiling and jumping around or being silly. That's not it at all. It's not Tigger character from "Winnie the Pooh" necessarily. It could be, but it's really about allowing yourself to expand the number of outcomes that you're willing to entertain and to think about how you relate to those different outcomes. So what this means is putting yourself into scenarios where you might not be the top performer, right? Playing a game that you're not really that good at. I had this experience recently, friends that like to play cards, they like to do some low stake gambling. This is non illegal gambling ring. They play for trivial things. And I generally don't buy into the game. I generally don't play mostly because they end up winning and taking whatever it is that I have. But in the mode of assuming a more playful spirit, the idea would be well, if the stakes are low enough, then to play simply for the sake of playing, because there's something to learn there about the other people in the group and about one's self and how one reacts to things like someone who's clearly trying to take everybody's money or somebody who is clearly trying to cheat or somebody who's clearly very, very rigid about every last detail, including how the cards are dealt and shuffled right? There is learning in this exploration. And that is at a biological level, the prefrontal Cortex, starting to entertain different possibilities, starting to entertain different outcomes in this low stakes way. And if you think about it, that's not something that we allow ourselves to do very often. Even if we listen to new forms of music or we go see new art or new movies, those are new experiences, but that's not us making new predictions about what's going to happen next. It's not the brain working to figure out new possibilities. And so you can immediately see how just a small increase in your willingness to put yourself into conditions where you don't understand all the rules perhaps, or you're not super proficient at something, but you enter it because it is low stakes. And because there is information to learn about yourself and others could start to open up these prefrontal cortex circuits. And when I say open up, I don't mean that literally there's an opening in your skull. What I mean is that your prefrontal cortex can work in very rigid ways. Meaning if A then B, if I go down this street turn left and go that way to work, it is fast. If I go down the other street, it's slow. If there's a traffic jam there, I'm going to go there but it's starting to explore different possibilities. And there are very, very few opportunities in life to explore contingencies in this low stakes way, such that it engages neuroplasticity, the prefrontal cortex. So play is powerful at making your prefrontal cortex more plastic, more able to change in response to experience, but not just during the period of play, but in all scenarios, because you get one prefrontal cortex, you don't get a prefrontal cortex just for play. You get a prefrontal cortex that engages in everything. So going forward, I will layer on some more concrete aspects of tools, but for now, if you're somebody that doesn't consider yourself, particularly playful consider, and maybe even engage in just a little bit of play in some way, that is of discomfort to you with the understanding that is increasing your prefrontal cortical plasticity. Another really interesting and important aspect of play is so-called play postures. These are seen in animals, and these are seen in humans. And for those of you that are watching this podcast on YouTube, I'll do my best to adopt them here. For those of you that are listening, you'll just have to imagine them in your mind's eye, but Jaak Panksepp and indeed Darwin himself, study these play postures that all animal engage in. Perhaps the most familiar one is seen in dogs and in wolves where they will lower their head to the ground and they'll put their paws out in front of them and they will make eye contact with another typically dog or wolf to so-called call the play. Now, when they do this posture, it's obvious that they're lowering themselves. They're not in an aggressive stance, because they're lowering their head. And this is universally known among canines as play posture. There's some famous videos online. You can look these up of dogs actually doing this with bears that they're confronted with and the bears, at least in these videos in exchange also lowering their head, and there you see bear dog playful interactions. Now you always have to be cautious with bears in general. I would say you have to be cautious with bears, but this speaks to the universality of this bowing, this sort of the, the, what some people call the puppy bow or the play bow that dogs do turns out that humans do this as well. Although in a different form, I'm sure there are some that go into the, the down-dog play posture, but more typically when humans want to play, they will do a subtle or not so subtle head tilt. The head tilt with eyes open is considered the universal head and facial expression posture of play in humans. So when two people see one another, if they are aggressive towards one another, they will assume certain facial expressions and postures. But if they're feeling playful towards one another, oftentimes they'll tip their head to the side just a little bit and they'll open their eyes. They might even raise their eyebrows briefly. This has been seen again and again and again. Another hardwired feature of so-called play postures is what's called soft eyes. When animals are aggressive, or when they're sad, they tend to reduce the size of their eye openings by basically making their eyelids closer together, somewhat, by keeping their eyes together in particular for aggression, they'll bring their eyes towards what we call a vergence eye movement. Bring it towards the center that actually narrows the aperture of the visual field. When people or animals want to engage in play, they tend to open their eyelids somewhat, and they tend to purse their lips just a little bit. So it's not like stronger pursing when your lips like this, it's, pursing their lips. They'll open their eyes a little bit. And they'll often do the head tilt as well. Sometimes with a little bit of a smile. These are reflexive these are not trained up. Children do this. Adults do this dogs, wolves do this. Even certain birds will do this. Most birds have eyes on the side of their heads, but they do a sort of form of this soft eyes approach. And certainly in raptors, you see a softening of the eyes and indeed raptors like Hawks and Eagles they actually do have a certain form of play, but only early in life. The other thing that we see during play, or what are called partial postures, partial postures are a kind of play enactment of postures that would otherwise be threatening. So a partial posture that we see during play in animals and humans that relates to aggressive play. So things like wrestling or things like rough and tumble play, which is very common in animals and kids and some adults. Is that because there's going to be physical interaction in animals, what will happen is they will march toward one another often very slowly, but rather than having their hair up, which is we call piloerection, which is when the hair goes up, animals do this to make themselves look bigger. Think of about the, the cat. That's trying to look bigger or an animal that's being aggressive, trying to look bigger in the presence of a foe, a different animal that they're either going to try and kill or fight in some way, even if it's to defend themselves, partial postures occur when animals will approach one another, but they'll keep their fur down. Humans will do this to, they will approach during play, but unless it's highly competitive play like a football game or a boxing match, they will actually shrink their body size somewhat. We have hair on our bodies, some of us more than others, and that hair is capable of piloerection. It can stand up. That's the hair standing up on end phenomenon, but most of us don't have enough hair on our bodies that we can actually use that to make ourselves larger. So what you see with people who are about to engage in play is they tend to make their body a little bit smaller unless they are highly competitive and highly competitive play is its own distinct form of play. That we'll talk about later, such as during sport, when the stakes are high, a Super Bowl football game, I'm revealing my ignorance about sports here. The Super Bowl as it's typically called is a very high stakes game, right? Salaries depend on it. Sponsorships depend on it. It's on television, reputations depend on it. So that's not really playing a game. That's playing a very high stakes game and there you're not going to see these partial postures. You're not going to see soft eyes and tilting of the head. At least not between the opposing players on the team, you're going to see quite the opposite. Grunting, screaming, shouldering people not blinking lowering their eyes, or rather shrinking their eyes down to be, to appear more aggressive. These kinds of things staring right through the other person, you know verbal threats et cetera. So that's not really play, even though we say they're playing a game of football, it's very high stakes play. What I'm referring to here is when it's fairly low stakes. And we see this again in animals and human. So there are many, many of these partial postures. Again, they happen spontaneously. So if someone ever looks at you and they tilt their head a little bit and they raise their eyebrows and they maybe smile a little bit, they're looking at you playfully, that's the universal human exchange of, I want to play. Do you want to play? There's another play expression that is considered the most extreme of the come on let's play express and postures. And this is one that's seen in a lot of primates and indeed in some humans as well. And that's the eyes wide open and believe it or not tongue out, it's the, that kind of silly thing. That's I don't think that I've ever done that before. Just that kind of thing is basically what primate species of all kinds. And indeed we are old world primates as well, do when they want to say, I'm definitely here to play and that's why I'm here. Okay it's it has this kind of silly look or connotation. But if you watch chimpanzees or you look at Bonobos, or even in the so-called new world monkeys, which tend to be the smaller monkeys, old world monkeys tend to be the ones that in general, see the world as we do, they have what we call trichromacy. They're the ones that often can look very human-like. The new world monkeys tend to be the little ones in general I'll give you a little trick here. Little tool based on primatology. If you see a monkey and it's making very slow movements, or you see an ape of any kinds, making very slow movements, very likely to be an old world primate. If you see a monkey and it's, it can very quick movements like it's doing this kind of thing, like it's like a could be a squirrel monkey could be a marmoset, likely to be a new world monkey. And they don't see the world that the same way we do, they see the world more like a dog. They don't really see reds. They see reds as orange et cetera. Okay that's not a hard and fast rule. And I'm sure the primatologists are going to come after me with whatever primatologists come after you with monkey biscuits or something like that. But in general, it's a good rule. If you're at the zoo and you see a slow moving monkey with slow deliberate gestures kind of moves its eyes makes eye contact every once in a while, those tend to be the old world primates, those kind of jittery ones that look like they're really nervous wrapping their tail and kind of hiding there in a little bundle. Those tend to be the new world monkeys, okay. Again, not a black and white type division, but that'll get you most of the way. So the whole purpose of these partial postures or the tongue out thing is to limit power in deliberate ways to really take bodily expressions that could be portrayed or could be interpreted as aggressive or as threatening or as wanting to mate, or as willing wanting to do anything for that matter. And to limit the power with which they are expressed in very deliberate way. So that's the putting the hair down, despite getting into a fighting stance. That's saying let's fight, but I'm not really here to fight fight. It's low stakes fighting. Like if I pin you, then I'll let you go. Or if you pin me, then you ought let me go. And so immediately you can start to see how play starts to call into action, social dynamics in which both parties have to make some sort of agreement about how high the stakes are. Now, the failures to do this are also very informative in how we develop in social groups. And this also can inform why some people really play well with others and other people don't. And some people seem to get along well with groups and can handle other people. And some people are very rigid. In fact, I have an anecdote about this when I was a kid, we used to play this game. It's not a game I suggest, but we used to do what were called "Dirt Clod Wars." So a friend of mine, his parents were generally not home in the afternoon. So we must have been somewhere around 10 or 11 years old. And we would set up these two big dirt mounds. We would shovel them to big dirt mounds on two sides of the yard. And then we would just take dirt clods and we throw them at one another and just have dirt clod wars. Again, not suggesting this I'm not responsible for what happens if you do, but there were rules and the rules were, for instance, you couldn't pack rocks into the dirt clods and you could run across to the other side and you could jump on the other person's mound and you could throw dirt clods in there. I guess, as the stuff that we thought was entertaining. But if someone got hit in the head, generally there was an unspoken rule that you kind of stop and see whether or not they were damaged or not before you'd continue, you couldn't continue pelting them. And of course, people broke this rule. In fact I remember one kid I'm not going to name him because actually he's grown into a very actually prominent and functional adult, but he got hit once in the head. And then I think someone had thrown a dirt clod shortly thereafter, and all of a sudden he just went into a rage, picking up rocks and sticks and attacking another kid. And so clearly that was a case in which the rules of the game were now being violated, but it served a very important purpose. There was, you know, the typical thing that the, there were some tears I think, as I recall from one kid or the other, there was like snot coming out of the nose and turning bright red, a kid went home. It was a mess. The parents had to say something, or maybe there was a phone call. I don't quite recall how it got resolved. But the idea is that there's an agreed upon set of rules about how high the stakes are and what we're all going to do. And this is separate from sport where there are clearly defined rules about what's out of bounds. What's in-bounds. What sorts of behaviors will get you a yellow card or a red card for instance on the soccer field, all animals including humans are doing this low stakes contingency testing and all animals including humans you'll find, start to up the stakes. And inevitably in group play, one member of the group will kind of break rules. You see this also in puppies. So for instance, puppies will bite one another with those sharp little needle-like puppy teeth. I remember when Costello had those teeth, those things were so darn sharp and puppies will yelp when one of their littermates bites them, that Yelp actually serves a very important inhibitory function. This is well defined to tell the other one that's too tough, and this is how animals learn soft bite. Okay. If they don't get that feedback from other littermates, they never actually learn. What's too hard and what's soft. And so humans do this as well. Now you can look at your adult, counterparts, and indeed we should probably look at ourselves and ask, you know did we learn proper play contingency when we were younger? Do we tend to take things too seriously? Do we tend to overreact aggressively when other people are clearly engaging in, you know, playful, jabbing or sarcasm or things of that sort. So each of you will have a different experience of this, but the point is that play serves many functions, it's not just about the self. It's also about interactions between multiple people. It's about rule testing and low stakes contingency rule breaking also serves an important role as is with the example of the "Dirt Clod War" puppies biting other puppies et cetera. And last but not least, there are different forms of play that help us establish who we will become as adults. One of the more powerful of these is role play when children and sometimes adults will take on different roles that are distinct from their natural world roles in order to for instance, establish hierarchies. So someone's going to be the leader and someone's going to be the follower. Someone will be dominant. Someone will be submissive. Someone will work alone. Other people will work in a group. These kinds of role playing are again ways in which the prefrontal cortex has to expand the number of operations in neuroscience we call these algorithms that it has to run in order to make predictions. You have to take in a lot of information about your environment all the time and make predictions. But if you are suddenly cast into a new role, well then you definitely have to make even more predictions from a different standpoint. So these are very powerful for teaching the brain, how to function. I had a sister growing up, I still have a sister, fortunately, and she and her friends largely played with dolls and doll houses in the room next door. And they take on different roles. In fact, some kids, if they play alone will start to take on the role of leader by taking on an imaginary or creating an imaginary friend. And, you know, my apologies to my sibling, but for a long time, she had an imaginary friend eventually that imaginary friend disappeared. I don't know the science around imaginary friends and what it makes them disappear or not at what stage of development, but imaginary friends are pretty common. And that's just another way of being able to, you know boss somebody around, if that's your thing, or to do engage in cooperative play. So we can look at this stage of development, we call childhood and we can look at each stage of it and we can say, wow, there are all these different dimensions of play that really are about testing out how we feel comfortable or uncomfortable, how we react good or bad, how we react with stress or with glee when others behave in certain ways. And so what I'm hoping is coming through is that play is not just about having fun. Play is about testing. It's about experimenting and it's about expanding your brain's capacity. And that's through early in development, and it's through throughout the lifespan. So at this point in the discussion, I want to take a step back, look at the biology and neurochemistry of play just a little bit. And that really define what is effective play. If the goal of play is to explore different contingencies in low stakes environments and to expand the function of our prefrontal cortex so that we can see new possibilities and new ways of being become more flexible, more creative, more effective outside of the games of play or the arenas of play, I should say. Well then we should be asking, how do I know if I'm playing? How do I know if I'm playing correctly? Turns out there's an answer to that. Earlier I referred to this brain area, the periaqueductal gray that releases opioids, endogenous opioids into our brain and body, and tends to relax us a bit. It actually is what leads to these things like soft eyes and head tilts and puppies making, you know, puppy postures and things of that sort, and how that opens up the number of different functions or algorithms that the prefrontal cortex can run, but there's another piece of the puzzle, which is for something to genuinely be play and playful, and for it to have this effect of expanding our brain and engaging neuroplasticity of really changing our brain so that we can see and engaging more possible behaviors and thoughts et cetera. We also have to have low amounts of adrenaline, so called epinephrine in our brain in body. Now the background science for this is quite extensive, but for those of you that are interested in papers and manuscripts, perhaps the best one is a review published in Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews by the very Jaak Panksepp although he has a co-author, which is Stephen Siviy, S I V I Y I'll provide a link to this in the caption show notes. And the title of this paper is; "In Search of the Neurobiological Substrates for Social Playfulness in Mammalian Brains." And it's a quite extensive review, but it basically boils down to some key findings whereby, any sorts of drugs or behaviors or scenarios that increase levels of adrenaline too much, will tend to inhibit play and drugs and scenarios and I'm not suggesting recreational drugs here, but these were experiments that were done in the laboratory setting that increase the endogenous opioid output will tend to increase playfulness. And so really the state of mind that one needs to adopt when playing is, first of all you have to engage in the play it, whatever it happens to be with some degree of focus and seriousness and focus and seriousness in the neurobiological context generally means epinephrine being able to focus is largely reliant on things like adrenaline epinephrine, but also the presence of dopamine, which is a molecule that generates motivation and focus in concert with epinephrine, but also that these endogenous opioids be liberated. And it's really the low stakes feature of play that allows those endogenous opioids to be liberated. What do I mean by that? Well, if you are very, very concerned about the outcome, like you've put a lot of money on the table in a given game, or you're a football player in the Super Bowl, or you're playing a game for which, you know, defeating the other person or your team winning is absolutely crucial to you. Well then that's not really going to who engage the play circuitry. On the contrary, if you are engaging in those same behaviors or any other behavior in a way that you're simply there to explore, but you don't have high levels of adrenaline in your system, you're not stressed about the potential outcome. Well, then that constitutes play. Now that's somewhat obvious on the one hand that you take seriously what you take seriously, and you can be more playful about things that you don't take so seriously, but what is absolutely not obvious is that the state of playfulness is actually what allows you to perform best because the state of playfulness offers you the opportunity to engage in novel types of behaviors and interactions that you would not otherwise be able to access if you are so focused on the outcome. Okay. So a state of playfulness is absolutely critical, not just during play, but during competitive scenarios of any kind. I actually started to cultivate a practice related to this. When I was in college, I had this kind of general practice of when I wanted to learn something. I would tell myself that it was the most important information in the world and that I was very very interested in it. I would kind of lie to myself and say oh, I'm super interested in, I won't name the topics, but super interested in this or super interested in that. And I could sort of delude myself into being hyper focused on whatever it is that I was learning in ways that surprised me. However, when we are hyper focused on something and we are rigidly attached to the outcome, we can't engage in flexible thinking. So it's a great tool to be hyper-focused on something and take it very, very seriously when we're simply trying to learn things by kind of rote memory, learn things and regurgitate, learn and regurgitate of the sort that, you know, I'm frankly a lot of schooling involves. But if we are trying to get better at something, we sort of hit a wall in athletic performance or in cognitive performance, where we're not creative enough, where we're finding let's just use a sports example that, you know we only have a certain number of moves that we can deploy or certain number of swings of the racket that we can deploy. The way to actually expand your practice is to engage in this kind of low stakes thinking, the idea that, well, I'm just going to kind of play and tinker. I'm going to explore in a way that it doesn't really matter if the ball goes back over the net, doesn't really matter if the ball goes in the hole and it's counterintuitive because you think, no, the thing that we need to do is drill and drill and drill and drill. And indeed there's a place for that. But this mode of play with modest levels of endogenous opioids being released in our system, plus low levels of adrenaline, right? Epinephrine low levels of epinephrine and adrenaline are possible only when the stakes are low enough that we're not stressed. Well that combination really allows the prefrontal cortex to explore different possibilities in ways that can truly expand our capabilities over time. Now, this has been seen again and again, also in the business sector, some of the more challenging, or I should say compare additive companies to get jobs at are very interested in hiring people that as children were so called tinkerers, and actually NASA was first famous for this, that many of the people that achieved great success in engineering at NASA, when they looked back into their childhood histories, those people tended to be tinkerers. They were people that would kind of play with things in way that wasn't about rigidly following a recipe or an instruction manual. Great cooks discover new forms of food. Indeed created entire genres of food by way of being tinkerers. Okay, musicians do this. I grew up playing various sports, but skateboarding was one that I was particularly involved in for a long time. One of the greatest skateboarders of all time is some of you may recognize his name as the Great Rodney Mullen. And Rodney was kind of famous for evolving the sport and continuing to evolve the sport in ways that no one could predict using skateboards and all sorts of ways that no one had thought of previously. And of course there are other skateboarders that did that as well, but he's particularly well known for that. And his process is his own. I can't speak to it too much, but he was also known as a kind of a tinker as somebody who would spend a lot of time, just kind of flipping the board and just flipping it into the air and watching the ways in which it flipped and kind of studying the physics of it really and expanding on his existing understanding of what could happen on a skateboard by way of just playing. Now, he took it very seriously, but it's this kind of razor's edge between taking something very seriously, but also tinkering and playing and exploring and just seeing what happens and kind of like, well, let's just see what happens if we did this, that mindset is extremely powerful to export from this thing that we call play into what we could call more serious endeavor of one's occupation or sport, whether or not it's behind a desk or whether or not it's running around on a field really for or engineering, any endeavor. And so the whole purpose of this episode on play is yes on the one hand to illustrate the incredible evolutionary utility of play for setting up the self and relation of the self to others, indeed for setting up cultures entirely, cuz' cultures will watch sport together or they'll celebrate their team winning. I mean, World Cup, I've never been a big soccer fan, even though my dad is Argentine, but it's incredible. I mean the entire world kind of lights up and gets engaged around whether or not their team, their country is going to win the Olympics also being another example, but play and sport are not quite the same as I've pointed out before. And for all of us who are thinking about tools and things that we can extract from science to enrich our lives, I would say for those of you that are already playing on a regular basis in one form or another terrific start to expand other forms of play in particular forms of play that involve new groups of individuals. So if you're somebody that typically plays one-on-one with somebody, try to expand into playing as teams. If you're somebody who only plays alone, then try to expand into playing in perhaps one-on-one first and in groups, this is the way that your brain learns and evolves and changes and gets better. And I raised this because another one of the top 10 questions I get is how can I keep my brain young? How can I continue to learn? How can I get better in school and sport in life and relationships, et cetera, emotionally, cognitively, and on and on and on. And yes, there are supplements that can support neuroplasticity. Yes, there are brain games and apps that can support neuroplasticity. But if you really want to engage neuroplasticity at any age, what you need to do is return to the same sorts of practices and tools that your nervous system naturally used throughout development. And it evolved over hundreds of thousands of years to trigger this thing that we call neuroplasticity. And the reason this is so important is because it starts to move us away from what some people call hacks. I define hacks as using one thing for a different purpose to kind of get a shortcut. I don't really like the term, frankly, and I don't like it because it's not grounded in any biological mechanism. But when we look at play, we can say, play is the portal to plastic. Play at every stage of life is the way in which we learned the rules for that stage of life. And play is the way in which we were able to test how we might function in the real world context. So play is powerful. And we could even say that play is the most powerful portal to plasticity. The reason for that is that yes, this high opioid, low epinephrine or adrenaline state is what opens up play. But then inside of the arena of play, when the prefrontal cortex is running all these different possibilities in this low stakes way. But with some degree of focus, there are a number of other chemicals that are deployed. Things like Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and other growth factors that actually trigger the rewiring of brain circuits that allow for it to expand. And indeed that's what is neuroplasticity. If you're interested in those chemicals and kind of arena of things that happen when one engages in neuroplasticity, there's a vast literature out there. But one of the more popular books that I think is quite good is from my friend and colleague, John Ratey, who's a psychiatrist at Harvard Medical School. That's R A T E Y. He wrote the book "Spark" a few years back, and I think it's still very relevant. And John talks about the important role that play exerts in the neuroplasticity process and points to a number of different protocols that one can engage in. He also points to the importance of navigating new environments to not just go on the same hike every week, or take the same walk, but actually get into new novel environments. So you're starting to sense a theme here. There's novelty, exploring contingencies, keeping the stakes relatively low, et cetera, et cetera. But these really are the gates to this holy grail that we call neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity as I've talked about in the podcast before is a two step process. It involves focusing very intensely or at least focusing somewhat on whatever it is that one is trying to learn, and then engaging in deep rest, ideally deep sleep in the following nights. And I've also talked about the benefits of things like naps and Yoga Nidra so-called NSDR, Non Sleep Deep Rest for enhancing or accelerating plasticity. You can check out the episodes on Focus at hubermanlab.com or the episodes on How to Learn Faster. The detail all of those. We had a newsletter that lists out all the tools for neuroplasticity enhancing neuroplasticity, all that is available. Zero cost to you at hubermalab.com, et cetera. You can just download that information, but John's book that newsletter those episodes. They really point to this two step process where it's focus and then rest focus and then rest and play is its own unique form of focus and then rest, focus and rest. It's not the same as learning something for sake of school or critically trying to learn a motor behavior for sake of sport. It's really about expanding the number of things that you could learn down the line. Okay, so said once again. So I just want to make sure it's abundantly clear play is about establishing a broader framework within which you can learn new things. It's not about learning some specific thing. It's not about the game you happen to be playing. It's not about the dollhouse that the kids are playing with so that they can become amazing dollhouse players when they grow up. Right. The dirt Clod war that I referred to earlier for better or for worse was not about becoming the best dirt clod thrower or winning the trophy for dirt clods in the neighborhood. Although we actually had a trophy for the best dirt clod team. Alas, it was not my team that year. But the point is that you're learning rules and establishing a broader foundation of practices that then can learn more things within that context. Thus far I've tried to convince you through a combination of data and anecdote and explanation that adopting a stance of playfulness and indeed engaging in play on a somewhat regular basis could be beneficial to you regardless of circumstances or goals. If I haven't done that already, what I'm about to tell you, hopefully will push you over the line. It turns out that when you look across the kingdom of all animals, what you find is that animals that engage in playful behaviors for the longest period of time are also the animals that have the greatest degree of neuroplasticity, the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience, put differently, animals that only play for a very small fraction of their entire life have very rigid brains that don't learn new things, whereas animals that play for a long period throughout their life have very plastic brains. And there's even some evidence that's at this point, largely anecdotal, but there's some data starting to emerge that adults that maintain a playful stance that engage in things again that are low stakes contingency exploring important enough that people focus and that people pay attention to what they're doing, but that they are not, you know, filled with adrenaline, you know, freaked out about the outcome being A or B, they're not super, super competitive, maybe just a little bit competitive or not competitive at all. That allows for more ongoing plasticity. And one of the people that comes to mind in thinking about this is of course the Physicist, and I should say the Great Physicist, Richard Feynman, Nobel Prize Winner Professor at Caltech was involved in the Manhattan Project, but was also known for being a lifelong tinker, right? He also is a mischievous tinker. If you read any of the books about Feynman or by Feynman "Surely You're Joking." Mr. Feynman, or "What Do You Care What Other People Think?" these are wonderful short stories, mostly about Feynman, doing things like picking all the locks at the Los Alamos Laboratory and putting all the top secret documents out on the floor of the office so that when people came men in the morning, they were all out there. Obviously they weren't released to the general public. He didn't want to threaten national security, but playing pranks like that. And actually Caltech, I don't know if this is still the case, but Caltech where he was employed was always known for doing very technologically challenging pranks. They're not known for their athletic pros at Caltech, sorry, Caltech, but they were known for example, disrupting the scoreboard at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, for instance, and things of that sort through technological feats, at least at the time required a lot of playfulness and technological pros. So if you look in science or you look in art, or you look in medicine or you in any domain, what you find is the people that continue to evolve new practices tend to be people that were tinkerers. People that are very creative, tend to be people that are unafraid of exploring things in a, this low stakes way. They're not so rigidly attached to the outcome that they have to do everything perfectly all the time. Now they might cloak these playful behaviors so that their final works always look perfect or always look incredible, but they have this kind of playful nature about them. I would venture even say that the, the street artist Banksy, for instance, obviously an incredible artist puts a ton of thought and preparation into their work, but there's a kind of playfulness to the whole thing too, of using two dimensional paintings in concert with three dimensional city dwellings in ways that, you know I think that most people hadn't previously, there were other people like Christo and, you know, artists of that sort that did that. But I think Banksy is kind of recognized as the modern, the modern rendition of that kind of playfulness using cities in ways that most people don't use cities using art in ways that most people don't use art, for instance. So to go back to the example of Feynman. Feynman was somebody who learned to paint and draw quite well into his sixties. He was somewhat famous or infamous, I should say for Bongo Drumming on the roof of Caltech. I say infamous because he was known also for doing that naked. Something that certainly not in concert with the ethical standards and behaviors of universities today. But Feynman had this playful spirit as a child. He had that playful spirit as a teenager, and he had that playful spirit as an adult. And that's one of the whole hallmarks of Feynman was that he wasn't just a rigid physicist who could explain things clearly to the general public. He always carried through this playful spirit and in some of his writings, he pointed to the fact that that playful spirit was something that he worked very hard to continue to cultivate in himself because it was the way in which he could see the world differently and to indeed make great discoveries in the field of physics, but also to kind of evolve his relationship to life more generally. And so he comes to mind as a prominent example of somebody who did this. And if I could achieve anything with this episode, besides teaching you something about the biology of play, it would be to teach you about the utility of play. Again, I'm, don't consider myself a particularly playful person by nature, but I've tried over the years to adopt this stance of exploring things that are, you know, very focused on contingencies of different kinds, but keep the stakes low enough that I can have some fun doing them. And I like to think that it's benefited me somewhat. Now, I'd like to drill a little bit further into this thing that we called neuroplasticity. Again neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. And I should just say that throughout the entire lifespan, the nervous system can change very quickly in response to negative experiences. We can almost all engage in what's called one trial learning where if something really terrible or traumatic happens to us, our nervous system will rewire almost immediately, at least within a few days, such that we tend to want to avoid the experience that led to that trauma. Now the whole business of why people return to things that are traumatic to them is a whole other issue. There are books about things like trauma bonding. There's the so-called repetition compulsion from psychoanalysis that people go back into trauma to retest and gain new opportunities to overcome the trauma, et cetera, et cetera. But in general, what I'm referring to here is, you know, you have a bad experience at the swimming pool when you're a kid where someone holds your head underwater too long, and then you just don't want to get back in the water. That's one trial learning of sorts, that of course can be overcomed through proper exposure therapy or someone that you trust taking you there, or any number of behaviors that allow you to overcome that, be that particular scenario and experience something new in that same context. But across the lifespan, the learn earning of new things, new contingencies, new possibilities occurs very differently from about age zero when we're born until about age 25 and thereafter. So from about, about, I want to emphasize approximately age 25 onward neuroplasticity occurs through the process that is exactly as I described before, focus, rest, focus, rest, we focus very intensely. We can't do the thing. We can't do the new movement. We can't do the golf swing. We can't learn the math. We try, we try, we try, we try, we sleep a few nights. And then all of a sudden we can do it, right, because the rewiring actually occurs during deep rest or naps, but mostly during deep sleep. From birth till about out age 25 however, we can learn things, new things, and new contingencies, not just negative things and traumatic things through somewhat passive exposure to those things, right. I will never forget the first time that we went on a family trip to Washington DC. And we went to the Smithsonian. I got to see the, the old fighter planes. And I think, I think the Kitty Hawk or the first one of the first planes was there. Anyway, I obviously my recollection isn't terrific. My hippocampus is, is flailing on that one, but I'll never forget the trip. And I'll never forget who went. And I think I was probably eight or nine years old. It's embedded somewhere in my memory. And so just through passive experience and my focusing on the things that excited me about that trip, I have a recollection of that experience. I didn't have to deliberately focus. I didn't, wasn't telling myself focused, you're going to need to remember this trip someday and you're going to be podcasting about this, you know, in 39 years, or whenever again, I forget exactly how old I was. But the key feature here is that the developing brain is able to learn through passive experience because the neurons, the nerve cells in the developing brain are much more over-connected than they will be later in life. The way to think about this is sort of, if you use Google maps, as I do too often I think when I drive, there are a number of roads and pathways that would get you from point A to point B. We could imagine those as neural circuits, or we could imagine neural circuits as those roads. Early in development, the nerve connections are much more extensive. It it's like having a Google maps that where everything is connected to everything through tiny little cross streets. And the whole thing is just a complete mess. But then by taking particular routes of behavior of thought of emotion, certain routes become well established. And the other routes that are not taken simply disappear. Now in the biological context in the brain, we call that process pruning. And the simple way to envision this is early in development. You have many, many more neurons than you will have as an adult. Those neurons are extensively interconnected, and approximately 40% of those interconnections will disappear by the time you're 25 years old, they are gone. They are actively removed through processes that involve things like glial cells that come in and literally sneak their little processes in between neurons at the synapse, which are the points of contact and communication between neurons and push those apart, even eat neurons, right? There's some incredible work from for instance, Beth Stevens' Lab at Harvard Medical School, showing that glial cells go in and eat synapses that are not functional for that particular circuit. Now, what this tells us is that much of our learning during development is the removal of incorrect connections, but it also involves the strengthening of connections that are going to serve certain emotions, certain functions, motor functions, cognitive functions, et cetera. The process of play is largely a process of engaging pruning of neural connections and strengthening of the remaining connections. I'm sure that many of you have heard the term fire together wire together. That phrase is often incorrectly attributed to the great Donald Hebb, who indeed was great. Did incredible work a psychologist from Canada who established a lot of the basic cellar learning rules for learning and memory, but it was the also great Dr. Carla Shatz, who is now at Stanford and was at Berkeley and Harvard as well, but who is at Stanford Medical School who coined this term fire together wire together. Indeed that's what happens when children play when adolescents play and when young adults play, whether or not it's social play or play with an object, whether or not it's a sport or a play of any kind imaginary play imaginary friend play, there is a strengthening of certain neural connections and a pruning away of up to 40%, perhaps even more of connections that are not necessary for certain types of behaviors, emotions, and thoughts. And what this means is that it is through the process of play, that we become who we are as adults. And as I mentioned earlier, it is through the process of play that we are able to adjust who we are as adults. Now, there are bounds on this process, as far as I know there's never been a reported case of an individual who had a hyperplastic or I should say a brain that was as plastic in adulthood as it was in childhood. But what this tells us is that what we do in the process of play as children is really how we set up the rules for how we behave as adults in almost all domains, which is really incredible. And of course the reassuring thing is that playing as an adult will allow you to expand on those neural circuits. You can literally grow new connections. Some of you may be saying, does it create new neurons for better or for worse? It does not seem that many new neurons are added to your brain in adulthood. There are some papers that report a few neurons in certain brain areas, isolated brain areas, but by and large, most of the rewiring of neural connections is the removal of certain connections. This process we're calling Pruning and the strengthening of the remaining connections that make those kind of Google maps roads. And the analogy I laid out before thicker and more robust think about as taking little trails and turning them into roads, then paving those roads. Then turning those roads into highways, then putting up more lanes on those highways and eliminating all the small little back-country roads that one could take. And again, this is an analogy for what is happening at the level of neuro circuitry. Now, one of the key findings that has emerged from the literature is children that have been subjected to trauma or immense amounts of stress of any kind, have a harder time both engaging in play, but also a harder time accessing neuroplasticity later in life. The good news is this is not a permanent effect. And we'll talk about some of the ways to overcome that in a moment, but this should make sense to you because earlier we talked about how a high level of adrenaline epinephrine in the brain and body actually inhibits blocks the circuits in the brain and body that generate play behavior. And when I say that, I mean that in a very concrete way, that epinephrine and adrenaline can actually suppress the sorts of circuitry that can lead to things like soft eyes or tongue out, or the head tilt, or what we called partial postures of being able to engage in, you know, a rough and tumble play, but not take that to the point of outright aggression and damaging the other person or them damaging you. So when I say that, you know, trauma and stress can inhibit neuroplasticity by way of inhibiting play at a deeper neuro biological level. What I'm really saying is that the high levels of adrenaline that are generated from trauma and stress actually shut down the circuits that allow a child or a young adult to enter the game of play or in the game of play in the same way that a child or young adult who didn't have high levels of adrenaline in their system could possibly engage in. Now, the good news is that many of the existing trauma therapies that are out there now, including things like EMDR Exposure Therapy, Cognitive Behavioral therapy, and on and on, including some of the therapies that are more neurochemical, things like ketamine, or are more engineering based, things like Transcranial magnetic stimulation for instance, many of those are paired with forms of talk therapy that are really about the same thing that play is about, which is exploring different contingencies. It's about exploring different types of emotional experiences as they relate to the same sort of scenario that created the trauma. And we did an entire episode on fear and trauma, and I recommend you check out that episode. It's easy to find again at hubermanlab.com, it's on YouTube, Apples, Spotify, et cetera, et cetera, very easy to find. And there I talk all about trauma treatments and the various kinds of trauma treatments that are out there, their efficacy in different scenarios and traumas and so on. But the point I'd like to make now is that the reason why children who experience a lot of trauma and stress have limited plasticity later on is because the neurochemical substrates that are created from trauma and stress, because after all stress is epinephrine and epinephrine is stress. Those are inseparable and the way in which it more or less shuts down or at least inhibits suppresses those play circuits. And again the reassuring thing is that by engaging in play as adults, we can reactivate some of those circuits and reopen the plasticity. In fact one very prominent trauma treatment now, especially for people that have been subjected to very severe traumas, in the ongoing sense, meaning traumas that went on for many, many years is to get them to engage in play in things like dance in basically getting them to engage their bodily movements in ways that they would otherwise not feel comfortable to engage in. And I find this area so interesting because on the face of it, you could say, oh, that's kind of, you know, is that really biomedical treatment? You know, you're taking people who traumatized and having them dance. I mean, it seems kind of silly on the one hand, depending on your, you know, your particular orientation. But on the other hand, it's actually quite profound and quite grounded in the mechanisms by which the brain circuits change. So again, back to this original principle, which is that play, isn't just one portal to plasticity play is the fundamental portal to plasticity and that play and dance and exploration of novel movements, exploration of novel athletic movements are the route by which we access new ways of thinking new contingencies. And I find it wonderful that the trauma release and the psychiatric and psychology community are exploring things like play and dance and other forms of reopening these circuits because indeed we would all love for there to be a magic pill by which trauma could be erased and new memories could be laid down or a device that could do that. But frankly, if you ask me or a number of my colleagues, whether or not that's likely to happen anytime soon in an effective way, I think the short answer is going to be no, that there are going to be chemicals and things that can augment and support that process, but that there's not going to be just a magic pill that will suddenly reverse trauma altogether. That it's always going to be a case whereby shifts in neurochemical states are going to have to be combined with new ways of thinking and new behaviors. And I find it wonderful in reassuring that people are looking at play and play behavior as a not just one tiny shard of possibility there, but that it might actually be the main driver and a highly productive lever by which to rewire the traumatized brain. So if you're like me, you might be thinking, okay, I'm willing to be more playful. I'm willing to explore, play as a portal to plasticity. And that all makes good sense, but what should I play? What should I do? Well, we've already established that you want to keep your adrenaline low. You have to keep the stakes slow enough that you're not going to get totally consumed by the outcome. Now, for some people who are highly competitive, that's going to be challenging. And yet I don't want to make it seem as if you can't be competitive during play. There are many forms of competitive play that because you are a competitive person, allow you to drive great joy from that competitive play. I have a friend who's particularly good at horseshoes. I'm not particularly good at horseshoes, but whenever we play horseshoes, I can tell he's out there to crush me on horseshoes. And it's just one of these things where, you know, I can tell he derives great pleasure from crushing me at a game of horseshoes. I can't say because I haven't actually done the microdialysis, which is a way of extracting chemistry from the brain in real time, nor have I recorded from his brain or image it in a scanner, whether or not he has high levels of epinephrine or low levels of epinephrine. During those games of horseshoes, I suspect his low levels of epinephrine and high levels of dopamine, especially when he wins. And he has, he wins every time. But the win is that you can be competitive during play, provided that you were enjoying yourself. Okay, you can be competitive provided that you were enjoying yourself. There are particular forms of play that lend themselves best to neuroplasticity. And those particular forms of play again, are not designed to necessarily just engage the plasticity that allows you to perform that behavior, but rather to expand the number of possibilities for your brain to change in general throughout life and the two major forms of those for which there's good Peer Reviewed Research is to engage in novel forms of movement, including different speeds of movement. So let's say for instance, you're somebody who runs. I happen to like running. I try and run three times a week. And generally when I run, I run forward, I don't run backward, although recently, because I've become very excited about the work of so-called "Knees Over Toes Guy," his name is Ben Parker, but he goes by "Knees Over Toes Guy" on Instagram. I've never met him, but we've exchanged a few messages back and forth. And some of his practices involve walking backwards or doing sled poles backwards. I found these to be very beneficial for my back and for my, you know, interior tibialis and some things that have really helped with my posture and so forth. But in general, when I run, I run forward, I don't tend to run backward that much. And I might do that for a few minutes at the end, but not so much throughout the entire run. Running doesn't lend itself to a lot of novel forms of movement, lateral movements. So for the nerds out there movement in the Sagittal plane or angled movements, but it does appear that things like dance or sports where you end up generating a lot of dynamic movements where there's jumping, where there's movement at different angles, where there's ducking, where there's leaping, that basically involve a lot of dynamic movement. And aren't just strictly linear. Those seem to open the portals for plasticity. And that's because they mimic a lot of the brain circuitry that is associated with play. And the reason for that is the way in which those dynamic movements and movements of different speeds engage the vestibular system. The balance system, the vestibular system is in the inner ear, relates to the cerebellum, which translates the mini brain. You got a little mini brain in the back of your brain. It brings together visual information in a very direct way. I talked a lot about this in the episode on how to learn faster. So if you want to go in depth on how vestibular and different types of motor movements can open plasticity, I talk a little bit more, I should say a lot more there, but suffice to say that engaging in play that has a lot of dynamic movement or movements of different speeds, things like dance, things like sports, like soccer where you're moving in different dimensions. That tends to be very conducive to what we would call play related circuitry provided you don't take it too seriously. You don't get those high levels of epinephrine. Now for those of you that are also interested in non-physical or non-athletic forms of play that can really expand plasticity. There's some very interesting research about the game of Chess. I don't play the game of Chess. I've played a few times. I confess I don't know how to move all the pieces. So I'm not going to try and describe that here, but I've always wanted to learn Chess. And I think after reading some of the Peer Reviewed Research about chess and play and neuroplasticity, now I understand why there's a really nice paper published in the International Journal of Research in Education and Science in 2017. And the title of this paper is, "Is Chess Just a Game or Is It a Mirror That Reflects a Child's Inner World?" That's a very, a very intense title for a biologist like me, but this paper is so interesting because what it really points to is the fact that in a single game chess, you have at least as I understand two players, and those two players are moving pieces on the chess board, for which each piece can do different things, right? Can move in different ways under different scenarios, but they're different rules for different pieces. And so each player actually has to assume multiple identities during the same game. And each of those identities has different rules and ways of interacting. So in a way we can think of chess as one game, but actually chess is a kind of a substrate for exploring multiple roles for different characters. And this is quite a bit different than for instance, video games where somebody has their favorite video game player, or they have an avatar. And they're always in the same role. It's also quite a bit different for when you engage in any kind of play where you are yourself, you're just being you in that game. And so now I'm highly incentivized to explore chess. You see quotes out there, for instance, things like "Chess is life or jiu jitsu is life." I always assumed that that meant that someone's entire life was chess or their entire life was jiu jitsu for instance, but in reading over the research about chess in particular, but at also certain forms of martial arts, also certain forms of dance. What one finds is that indeed those games are life in the sense that they involve adopting multiple roles and exploring contingencies in a number of different ways. So there are some games that allow you to explore a much vaster landscape of movements or of mental roles or of ways of engaging in strategic movement as is the case with chess. And so when you hear that, you know, activity blank is life. It often reflects the passion for that activity, but I think looked at differently. It also reflects the fact that that activity is a portal through which you can explore life through many, many different lenses. And I think that that's especially powerful in terms of thinking about how play can be leveraged for plasticity. So for those of you that are interested in leveraging play for neuroplasticity and expanding your mind, if you will, I highly recommend picking an activity that will allow you to adopt different roles within that activity where it's not rigidly linear. This is actually a way in which I start to depart from this modern and important, but somewhat narrow idea. That exercise is the only route to plasticity. Yes, it's true. I have Nobel Prize winning colleagues that swim for two miles a day and have done on that for a long time. And they will tell you, I always think more clearly after my swimming and I certainly in my experience after a good run or a good workout, my mind seems to work best. Unless of course, that workout was very, very intense. I've talked about this before. If you do work out very, very hard in whether or not it's aerobic or resistance training or sport of any kind, you brain won't function as well afterwards, mostly because of the diversion of oxygen to tissues away from your brain, you actually are getting less oxygen to your brain, but in general, most of us feel that if we exercise regularly, our brain functions better. But there are activities that extend beyond linear exercise, beyond just generating the same sets of movements over and over again, when or not it's exercise or not. And that's really what play is. Play is about dynamically exploring different kinds of movements, dynamically exploring different kinds of thoughts, dynamically exploring different kinds of roles that one could adopt. And that is the way that the brain learns new things. So I encourage you to explore chess. I intend to learn chess this year. I'm very excited to do that. Now, if you already play chess and you are an expert chess player, you actually will derive less benefit in terms of this play induced neuroplasticity than you would, for instance, if you went out, and I don't know, played a game of soccer or did something that was very novel for your nervous system, because in that novelty and in that exploration of new behaviors and new ways of thinking, you are opening the portal to plasticity, whereas in doing what you already know how to do and trying just to perform better and better at it, you will get better at chess, but again, that's just chess. You are not expanding the realms in which you can become more plastic, that you are able to learn new things in relationship, in life, in finance and friendship, et cetera. In researching this episode, one of the most interesting areas I discovered was this notion of personal play identity, personal play identity is a term that at least to my knowledge was coined by a Turkish researcher by the name. And forgive me, I'm going to mispronounce this is Gökhan Güneş G O K H A N, last name G U N E S. And forgive me Gökhan and if we have any Turkish speaking members of the audience, please put the correction in the comment section on YouTube, make it fanatic so I can understand what it is. Please I'd love to correct it and apologies, or who knows if I got it right then it was pure luck. Gökhan Güneş has coined this term personal play identity, and the key role that personal play identity establishes in who we see ourselves as being, and not just in the context of play. Personal play identity has four well defined dimensions. And I should say that if you're interested in learning more about this, the paper that I found particularly informative is published in Current Psychology and the title is "Personal play identity and the fundamental elements in its development process." And the author of course, is Gökhan Güneş G U N E S last name. This is from 2021. So recent review. There are four components to personal play identity, how you play, your personality, socio culture and environment. So that's the third one that's together, socio culture environment, and economics and technology. Now that sounds somewhat complex, and this paper is somewhat complex, but basically what it says is that we bring together certain aspects of ourselves and how we react to different place scenarios when we're younger. And we bring that forward into the world. In all context as adults. To illustrate this, I'm going to ask you a question, when you were a child, let's say 10 years old, would you have considered yourself competitive? Would you have considered yourself somebody who's cooperative? And realize of course that those are not mutually exclusive, you could be competitive and cooperative. Would you consider yourself somebody that preferred to play alone or preferred to play with one or two close friends? Or were you somebody that really enjoyed playing in large groups? Here's a key one. Were you somebody that enjoyed playing the leader in one moment and was equally okay with being a follower at a later moment? Were you okay with having your role switched midway through a game? Were you get up upset or be delighted or not care at all about having to switch teams during the middle of game because your team was winning right? To even things out, you can imagine how that would play out internally. You would immediately register that you must be a valuable player because you're being moved off the winning team toward the losing team. But then again, you're now being forced to join the losing team. How did you feel about that? Were you somebody that was comfortable with other people breaking rules or perhaps even yourself breaking rules or bending rules, kind of be able to find term, or were you somebody that really needed to know all the rules? And if everyone didn't rigidly adhere to those rules was quite disturbed by that? The number of questions goes on and on and on. And I will provide a link to a paper that asks a number of questions that helps you arrive at a sort of score of sorts or an index of what Güneş and others have referred to as personal play identity. The point is that if we look back to our early adolescence, somewhere between 10 and 14 years old, a peak time for social development, a peak time for play of various kinds, a peak time for motor development, a peak time of psychosocial development, where we learn where we fit into hierarchies. As we relate to members of the same sex of the opposite sex, et cetera, we can start to get a portal into how and why we show up to various activities in work and relationship, et cetera, as adults. In fact, I'll venture to say that if we go into that process for ourselves for five or 10 minutes, you start to see some remarkable parallels between the way you were at that stage and your tendencies and your preferences as adults. We tend to look at our early childhood experiences and our families, and to some degree our friends in terms of how we become who we become. I've talked about the incredible work of Allan Schore on previous episodes of the podcast. Allan Schore is a psychiatrist and has done extensive work on how parent child interactions in particular baby and mother, but also baby and father shaped the brain and the brain and emotional system's ability to go from states of elation and excitement, the so-called dopamine epinephrine type circuitry to the more warm soothing types of calm interactions that in broad terms could be described as more serotonin oxytocin and things of that sort. That work really points to the key roles that the caregiver and the child you engaged in an early life. And that is incredible work. I do hope to host Dr. Schore on the podcast at some point in the not too distant future, but equally important of course, are the interactions that we export from that early laying down of biological circuitry and psychological circuitry, to the way we play by ourselves and the way we play with others in small numbers or in great numbers. And of course it would be the case that how we played as a 10 or 12 year old would impact how we behave as a 16 year old and as a 20 year old and as a 30 year old and so on and so on. One of my favorite things about developmental biology and developmental psychology is that it is grounded in the fact that we don't just have a childhood and an adulthood. There isn't just our child self and our adult self. And even though there are transitions around the mechanisms that underline neuroplasticity at approximately age 25, it is simply the case that development is our entire lifespan, that our lifespan is one long developmental arc. How long depends on our genetics, our lifestyle accidents, injury and disease of course, but it is one long developmental arc. And so it shouldn't surprise us at all that how we learn to play as a 10 year old or 12 year old would impact how we play and interact with people as a teenager and a young adult and on and on and on. And that play is the place in which we explore in which we learn play is the substrate by which our nervous system changes us from this hyper-connected batch of neurons, where everything is connected to everything, more or less to a brain and nervous system whereby certain circuits work with immense proficiency and others are less accessible to us. But again, the wonderful thing about the human nervous system is that because it is plastic for the entire lifespan and because these two elements of focus and rest can be deployed again and again, and again, just because neural circuits didn't form does not mean that they can't form later in life. And today we've been focusing on how play itself, the same substrate that we use during development to become who we are, is the portal by which we can change who we are for the better. So I hope I've convinced you that play is an extremely important fundamental homeostatically regulated aspect of our nervous system, which is just a mouthful of nerd speak to say, play can change your brain for the better. And that is true for every stage of life. The recommendation that I make, and certainly the one that I'm going to direct it myself as well is to try and engage in at least one hour of pure play per week. Now I came to that recommendation because of the literature that says, well, you need to engage something pretty repetitively. It should be novel. So this wouldn't be something that you are exceptionally good at already. If you insist on doing something that you're already exceptionally good at, then you want to really do some free form, low stakes tinkering. So make it safe, but make it free form. So really explore things with that. Some people call this beginner's mind. Although I find that a little abstract, I like the notion of beginner's mind, but sort of like, how do you know if you're in beginner's mind? I think beginner's mind is sort of the expectation that you're not going to do it well yet, but play extends beyond beginner's mind. Play is really about not even worrying if you're going to get good at it or really proficient at it. It's really about exploring contingencies with truly low stakes. That's what will allow you to access these neurochemical combinations of elevated endogenous opioids, low epinephrine, et cetera, that will open up neuroplasticity. For those of you that need a little more guidance on how to play. There's a book out there actually learned about this from Tim Ferriss' blog, it's called "Play It Away: A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety." So that's more focused on anxiety. The author is Charlie Hoehn, last name H O E H N will provide a link for it in the show notes and caption, "Play It Away: A Workaholic's Cure for Anxiety." But books and other resources aside, I think one hour of play per week is a reasonable amount of time to engage in dedicated play behavior. For the purpose of opening up these neural circuits for plasticity, the key feature of course, is to not have immense proficiency in that given activity, or at least not the way you perform it. And if you do gain proficiency in that activity, well, then it becomes something else it's no longer about play it's performance. So in that case, you would then want to adopt a new play behavior. You'll notice that I largely avoided using the word fun throughout this episode. Fun is a somewhat abstract term and like many emotions and many verbal descriptions of experience. It falls short in the context of a neurobiologic goal discussion about play. If you have fun, terrific. Some people might find, however that engaging in play is kind of uncomfortable. Well there, your goal then should be to lower your level of discomfort by focusing less on the outcomes and just simply engaging in the behavior because, well, I'm telling you that it's good for you, but hopefully you will tell yourself that it's good for you and that you will experience that it's good for you. The literature certainly points to that. And the literature certainly points to the fact that play is the way that we are built. We are built to play. We have brain circuits from back to front and within our body that are there for play and they don't disappear. They do not get pruned away as we go from development to adulthood. So if ever you needed a neurobiological explanation for why play is important throughout the lifespan, it's that. It's that biology does not waste resources. It's a extremely efficient. And were the circuits for play not to be important in adulthood. They would've been pruned away, but I guarantee you, they are there in your brain and nervous system now, they will be there tomorrow and they will be there going forward. So my suggestion is that you use them. One hour per week. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube Channel. That's at terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Spotify and or Apple and on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. Please leave us comments and suggestions and feedback, including suggestions for future podcast guests in the comments section on YouTube, we do read all those comments. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. If you're not already following us on Twitter and Instagram, we are hubermanlab on Twitter and also hubermanlab on Instagram, on Instagram, I do short posts that are related to topics covered on the podcast, but also some additional topics. So these would include science based tools for things like focus for sleep, for learning and many other topics as well. In previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we often refer to supplements. Now supplements aren't necessary or correct for everybody, but many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and focus and so on. We've partnered with Thorne that's T H O R N E because Thorn supplements are of the very highest quality in terms of the ingredients they use. And the specificity of the amounts of the ingredients that are listed on the bottle are actually what is in those bottle, which is not the case for many supplement brands out there. If you're interested in seeing the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman So that's thorne.com/u/huberman. And those supplements you can purchase at 20% off. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that URL portal, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you once again, for joining me for this discussion about the incredible biology and psychology and power of this thing that we call play and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science. [Upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 290 ---
Video ID: Ze2pc6NwsHQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ze2pc6NwsHQ
Title: Optimizing Workspace for Productivity, Focus, & Creativity
Published: 2022-01-31 13:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss ways to set up your workspace to optimize productivity, focus and creativity. I discuss how to adjust light, physically arrange your work environment, and leverage body posture to enhance productivity. Additionally, I explore how to shift your work environment for particular types of tasks. Moreover, I review the role of body movement in the workspace. I also discuss sound-based tools that can either enhance or diminish cognitive functioning (the ability to focus on deep work). I describe a particular frequency of binaural beats that studies show can be used to enhance memory and recall. This episode covers quality peer-reviewed findings practical tools anyone can use, regardless of budget, in order to optimize their workspace to achieve heightened levels of productivity, increased alertness and focus, and creativity.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Productivity

Thank you to our sponsors:
LMNT - https://www.drinkLMNT.com/huberman
AG1 (Athletic Greens) - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
Theragun - https://theragun.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
The Influence of Ceiling Height: https://bit.ly/3gcB31K
Heating, Ventilation, & AC Noise During Mental Work: https://bit.ly/3rbG69c
Office Noise & Employee Concentration: https://bit.ly/3AMoJPa
Effects of a Workplace Sit-Stand Desk Intervention on Health & Productivity: https://bit.ly/3reelwF
Effects of Binaural & Monaural Beats on Attention: https://bit.ly/3IN2Wda
40-Hz Binaural Beats Enhance Training to Mitigate the Attentional Blink: https://go.nature.com/35BVrYh

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Arranging Environment for Focus
00:02:40 LMNT, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Theragun
00:07:55 How to Increase Focus
00:10:02 Lighting Your Work in Phase 1
00:16:00 Lighting Your Work in Phase 2
00:19:45 Lighting Your Work in Phase 3
00:24:17 Where to Look While You Work
00:28:02 Arranging Your Environment
00:31:24 Body Posture
00:34:22 How Long to Do Deep Work
00:36:50 Set the Right Visual Window Size
00:42:15 45 min / 5 min Rule
00:44:23 The Cathedral Effect: Analytic vs Creative Work
00:55:50 Leveraging Background Noise
01:02:20 Binaural Beats for Work
01:06:38 The Best Binaural Frequency for Work
01:11:17 How Binaural Beats Increase Focus
01:13:56 Minimizing Interruptions
01:20:01 Sit or Stand, or Both?
01:25:18 Movement in the Workspace
01:31:00 Summary & Shifting Work Environments
01:39:36 Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about how to optimize your workspace for maximum productivity. Indeed, that means to heighten levels of focus, to increase levels of creativity, to improve your ability to task switch. And this could be for sake of school or for work, creative endeavors, personal endeavors, this really extends to everybody. Most often when we hear about how to focus or how to get the most out of our work sessions, we hear about the biology and the psychology of that. We hear about dopamine and we hear about serotonin and we hear about caffeine. And indeed, those are topics that I've covered a lot on The Huberman Lab Podcast. Today, we will touch on each of those, but we are mainly going to focus on how we arrange our physical environment and indeed how we arrange ourselves in that physical environment, in order to bring out the best in our neurobiology. That is how to put ourselves into a heightened state of focus by virtue of things, as simple as where we place our screen, relative to our eyes at a given time of day. Believe it or not, there's excellent research on this, and there's excellent research for instance, on whether or not you should or should not listen to music, whether or not you should use things like binaural beats, and if so, what frequency of binaural beats. We are going to cover all of that, and by the end, you'll have a checklist of things that you can do to optimize your workspace on any budget. I will mention various products and apps that some of you might find useful for optimizing your workspace. But I want to emphasize at the outset that none of those that I mentioned are any products or apps that we have a financial relationship to. And more importantly, you don't need them. I'm going to explain how for zero cost, you can arrange your workspace in ways that makes you maximally productive, maximally focus and allows you to adapt your workspace to different environments, whether or not you're traveling, working with others, working alone, et cetera. Just to give you a little hint of where we are going, I will mention a zero cost app that will deliver binaural beats at a particular frequency that peer-reviewed research has shown can enhance certain types of learning and memory. However, peer-reviewed research also shows that it can diminish performance in other types of tasks. So stay tuned, we'll go into all the details so that you can optimize your workspace for zero cost and get the most out of your efforts and endeavors. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and none of the things you don't. And when we say everything you need, the main one is salt. Now, salt, aka sodium has kind of a bad rap. We've all heard that too much salt is bad for us. However, if you look into the research on salt, and in fact, if you go to one of the highest level, peer-reviewed scientific publications, Science Magazine, you can find a review article in science some years ago that shows that most of what we think and understand about the science of salt is completely wrong. And in fact, salt does a number of things that's extremely important. For instance, our neurons, which signal to one another through electricity and through chemical signaling, critically rely on having enough sodium in order to generate what we call action potentials or electrical firing of neurons. If your sodium levels are too low, your neurons simply won't work. One of the main deficits from being dehydrated is lack of sodium, not just lack of water. Getting sufficient sodium does a number of things that's very important, it can raise your blood volume, it can help you retain water in a healthy way, not excess amounts. It allows neurons to fire for sake of thinking, for sake of athletic performance, and so on. Other electrolytes that are in LMNT are things like magnesium and potassium, which are also essential for neuronal function, and indeed all organ function. LMNT has a lot of salt, some magnesium and some potassium, so unless you're somebody who really has chronic hypertension, elevating your level of salt intake can often be beneficial. You should check with your doctor, but indeed it can often be beneficial. LMNT contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of a 1,000 milligrams, that's one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium. It tastes delicious, I happen to like the raspberry or citrus flavors, in fact, I like all of the flavors. Put in some water, you can make it as dense, meaning as high concentration as you like. So some people will put it in eight ounces of water. I like mine in about 16 ounces of water and I'll drink that before and after exercise. And I usually will have another one throughout the day, just sip on it as I'm doing work and so forth. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt.com/huberman, spelled drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free LMNT sample pack, you only cover the cost of shipping. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens, now referred to as AG1. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG1 and the reason I still take AG1 once or twice a day is that it helps me meet all of my foundational vitamin, mineral and probiotic needs. And when people ask me, what's the one supplement I should take, if they were to only take one supplement, I always recommend AG1. For the simple reason that the vitamins, the minerals and the probiotic support metabolic health, they support endocrine health, they support brain health and the probiotics and prebiotics in there in particular, support the so-called gut-brain axis. There is now a plethora of data supporting the fact that when we have a healthy gut microbiome, that has little microbes that live in our gut, that are good for us, our gut signals to our brain and our brain signals back to our gut, in ways that support our immune system, our digestion, even our mood. They can even support healthy levels of dopamine signaling, an important molecule for motivation and high levels of mood or positive mood. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 K2 has been shown to be important for metabolic health, endocrine health and K2 in particular for heart health and regulating appropriate amounts of calcium in your bones. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive device that releases deep muscle tension. I was first introduced to Theragun on a shark diving trip. We were way out in the Pacific, filming great white sharks for my laboratory where we study fear, and everyone was diving all day, carrying what are called Pelican cases, which aren't actual pelicans with wings, but cases for these cameras. They're very heavy, removing things all day, we're working really hard, and we got really sore. I got particularly sore from all that physical labor. Someone brought a Theragun along, I'd never seen one of these things before or tried one and I spent the rest of the trip trying to get as much time with the Theragun as I could, at least when I was on board the boat. With Theragun, you can get what is effectively a deep tissue massage to any area of your body, and you can just do that for minutes or hours for as long as you like, it's really wonderful. If you have someone else there, who's willing to use the Theragun on hard to reach places like your back, that's even better. Whether or not you want to treat muscle tension from working out and injury or just deal with daily stress from everyday life, there's really no substitute for the Theragun. You know, professional massage is wonderful, but a professional massage of course involves going to a masseuse, it's quite expensive often, et cetera. If you're interested in getting a Theragun, they start at only $199. You can go to Theragun.com/huberman right now to get your Gen 4 Theragun today. You have a 30-day money back guarantee, that's Theragun.com/huberman. Let's talk about workspace optimization. This is a topic that's intrigued me for a very long time because my undergraduate advisor, my graduate advisor and my postdoc advisor had many things in common, including being great scientists, being kind people and terrific mentors, but they had another thing in common, which always perplexed me, which is that their offices were a complete disaster. They had mountains of books, mountains of papers, mountains of all sorts of stuff. And yet all of them were extremely productive and could remain extremely focused in that incredibly cluttered environment. Now I'm somebody who doesn't like clutter, I find it very hard to focus in cluttered environments. And indeed there's tremendous variation among people as to whether or not they can remain focused or whether or not they struggle to focus in physically cluttered environments. There's no right or wrong to this, but the question we should ask ourselves is why were they all able to be so focused? And it turns out that the reason they were able to be so focused is that they all captured one single and yet fundamental variable of workspace optimization. And we'll talk about what that variable is. In fact, where you're to talk about what all the variables of optimizing a workspace are things like vision, things like light, things like noise in the room, whether or not you listen to music or not, whether or not you use noise canceling headphones or not. We're going to talk about all of that and we're going to do that in a way that you can optimize your workspace, regardless of whether or not you are at home, whether or not you're on the road, et cetera. Because the last thing I would ever want to do is to create a situation where you find the optimal workspace, and then you are a slave to that optimal workspace. That's just not the way the world works. What you want to do or my goal for you rather, is that you will have a short checklist of things that you can look to, anytime you sit down to do work, and you can think about the underlying variables that impact your brain and your body and allow your brain and body to get into the optimal state in order to learn, in order to be productive and indeed to move through your work bouts in a very relaxed and pleasureful way while maintaining focus and while pursuing any of the number of things that you're doing. The first variable we want to think about in terms of workspace optimization is vision and light. On a previous episode of The Huberman Lab Podcast, devoted all to habits, I talked about the importance of dividing your 24 hour day into three different phases. And for those of you that haven't heard that episode, I'm just going to briefly summarize what I described. From the time you wake up in the morning until about six or seven or eight, sometimes nine hours later, your brain is in a unique state. It is in a state of high levels of dopamine, a neuromodulator, and high levels of epinephrin, as well as hormones like cortisol and so forth. Without going into the biology of those things, they set your brain into a state of high alertness. And this is true, whether or not you indulge in caffeine or not. I know some of you say, oh, I really don't wake up until the afternoon, I'm much more alert and focused in the afternoon. We will talk about that phase of the 24 hour day in a moment. But that early part of the day is a time of day in which for sake of workspace optimization, being in a brightly lit environment can lend itself to optimal work throughout the day, not just during that early phase. And so while on many episodes of this podcast, I've also emphasized the importance of getting morning sunlight in your eyes within 30 to 60 minutes of waking, not as often, but now, and again, I will also mention that it's important to light your daytime environment as brightly as you safely can. So if you are going to be doing work in this early, what I call phase one portion of your day, you want to have as much light and indeed as much overhead light shining on you as safely possible. And of course you don't want it so bright that it's glaring and you have to squint, et cetera, but you want as much light as is safely possible. And you can do that a couple of simple ways. One is if do own or you're in an environment, we have overhead lights, turn on those overhead lights. What's special about overhead lights for setting alertness is that the neurons in our eyes, which are called melanopsin ganglion cells, that's the fancy name. Melanopsin ganglion cells are mainly enriched in the lower half of our retinas in our eyes and view the upper visual field. Those neurons send little wires to an area of our hypothalamus, right above the roof of our mouth, that creates a state of alertness. Now, early in the day, we want to be as alert as possible. And this phase one of our circadian cycle is when we are best at doing analytic detailed type work. So we're going to go into other aspects of workspace optimization that are important for phase one, but during phase one, again, within zero to about eight or nine hours after waking, bright lights in your environment, in particular overhead lights, are going to facilitate focus, they're going to facilitate further release of things like dopamine and norepinephrine and healthy amounts of cortisol. And we want that to happen early in the day for a variety of reasons. For instance, we don't want that cortisol peak to happen too late in the day. That's actually associated with depression and insomnia and a number of things that we just don't want. So one of the things that I've done for my workspace is to make sure that when I wake up in the morning, I do go get my sunlight. If the sun isn't out, I turn on as many bright artificial lights as I can manage or tolerate, and then I go get my sunlight exposure. But once I set out to do some work that all the overhead lights in that room are on, as well as lights in front of me. And that's again to stimulate heightened levels of focus and further release of these neuromodulators that I mentioned before, dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine. Now the way that one could do that could be a very low cost way of having, for instance, a desk lamp and those overhead lights. If you're somebody that wants to take this to the next level, you can purchase a ring light, which is, I think those are mainly made for people doing selfie type videos, for Instagram posts and things of that sort. Ring lights can be pretty cost-effective, and yet they're very bright and they have the sort of bright blue light that is going to optimally stimulate those melanopsin ganglion cells. So some people I know will have a blue light or a bright LED on their desk in front of them. And indeed I have one of these, I don't use a ring light, I use a light pad. The particular light pad I use, I bought on Amazon. I can mention the brand, but again, I have no financial affiliation to them, this is the Artograph Lightpad is designed for drawing. And it says on it 930 lux, Lux is just a measure of brightness. So I place that on the desk in front of me and I turn it on essentially throughout this phase one of the day. Even if I walk away from the desk, I tend to keep it on, it doesn't consume that much energy. And in that way, I'm constantly being bombarded with photons that keep my levels of alertness up because the early part of the day is when I do the majority of that focused work. Again, you don't need the light pad, you can use a ring light, or you can simply use any kind of other lights that you might happen to have artificial lights. For those of you that can place your desk near a window, and even better to open the window, that would be really fantastic. I don't have access to that. Why would I say open the window? Well, it turns out that sunlight is going to be the best stimulus for waking up your brain and body through this melanopsin hypothalamus system. And by looking at sunlight through a window, it's 50 times less effective than if that window were to be open, mostly because those windows filter out a lot of the wavelengths of blue light that are essential for stimulating the eyes and this wake-up signal. So all of this has rests on the premise that we need to be alert in order to do our work, in particular focused work. And I've talked about before in the Habits episode, and I'm saying again now, that first phase of the day, that first seven or eight or nine hours of the day is really the time in which our neurochemistry is primed for getting the most amount of focused kind of challenging work done where a lot of precision and detail is required. So you want to brightly light your work environment during that first phase, again, from the time you wake up, try and get sunlight, but then even if you're going to get exercise or do other things, you want to get as much bright light in your eyes as you safely can and then you want to light your work environment. Now in the afternoon, starting at about nine and continuing until about 16 hours after waking, you want to start dimming the lights in that environment. Now you don't want to make it dark because you don't want to get sleepy at two o'clock in the afternoon, unless you're going to take a brief nap, which I do and is perfectly fine, as long as it doesn't interfere with your nighttime sleep. But the idea is that in this so-called phase two of the 24 hour cycle from about nine to 16 hours after waking, you want to bring the level of lights down a bit. And when I say down, I literally mean down. Having lights that are in front of you is fine, but overhead lights at that time are not going to be optimal for the sorts of neurochemical states that your brain wants to be in. The states that I'm referring to are a shift from the dopamine and norepinephrine that's highest early in the day to increases in things like serotonin and other neuromodulators that put your brain into a state that's better for creative endeavors or for more abstract thinking. Now, as we'll soon see, there are other things you can do to improve creative thinking and abstract thinking. And in fact, there are things you can do to improve analytic thing, and we will talk about those, things that are distinct from light, but right now we're just focusing on light. So what I recommend doing, and what I personally do is I will turn off overhead lights in the afternoon. It's not completely dim, it's not completely dark, but I will start to reduce the amount of overhead light and just simply keep the light pad on and whatever other lamps I happen to be using. Now, one thing we haven't talked about is screen brightness. This is highly individual, people have different retinal sensitivities. What I mean by that is everybody differs in terms of how bright they can tolerate their visual environment and their screen. And whether or not you are sensitive to light or not, will depend on a lot of factors. Some of it is eye color, indeed people with darker color eyes generally can tolerate more bright light than others. I have green eyes, I am very, very sensitive to light. If I'm outdoors at a cafe or something, and the table has any kind of reflective properties and it's a sunny day, I can barely see the person across the table from me, unless I'm wearing sunglasses. Some people, other members of my family for instance, have dark brown eyes and can just sit there and have a conversation without the need for sunglasses at all. So that's, there's tremendous variation there, one or the other isn't healthy or advantageous necessarily, just understand that you never want to be in an environment where it's painful to maintain looking at whatever it is that you're looking at. If something's painful to look at, it could be damaging to your eyes, so you do want to protect your eyes. Now, in this second phase of the day, since most of us are working indoors, but even if you're working outdoors, you want to try and get the amount of light reduced overall, but in particular, that overhead light, and you also want to start reducing the amount of blue light that you're being exposed to. So somewhere around four or 5:00 pm, which for me is about 12 hours after I've been awake or 14 hours after I've been awake, I will turn off that light pad and start to transition the lights in my environment to more yellows and reds. Now, I can't always do this, I have friends that actually have converted their entire homes from blue light early in the day to red light late in the day, that's really cool and fantastic, I haven't done that. There's a cost to doing that and it is optimal in terms of optimizing productivity and sleep and so forth, but it's not feasible for a lot of people. But what I do is I simply switch to using yellow lamps. I will turn off that LED in the later afternoon, again, around four or 5:00 pm, and I tend to wake up around 6:00 am or so, I'll turn those off. And what I'll try and do also is I'll try and dim the screen that I'm working on so that I can still manage to see everything that I need to see, but it's quite a bit dimmer than it was early in the day. So that's phase two of the day, and that's how we want to think about light. And then I'll just mention, because I know there are people who are working in the middle of the night, there's phase three, which is about 17 to 24 hours after waking. And I realize that for shift workers or for people that are pulling all nighters or for students, oftentimes you need to be awake and studying in the middle of the night. I, myself am somebody who for years would pull anywhere from five to 10 all-nighters per year. I still pull an all nighter now, and again, because of deadlines and so forth. I don't recommend it, if you can avoid it, great, but many people just simply have to do this for sake of shift work or because of impending deadlines or procrastination or all of the above. If you are going to be doing work in that third phase of your circadian cycle, you really want to limit the amount of bright light that you're getting in your eyes to just the amount that allows you to do the work that you're doing. Because if you get light in your eyes, that's any brighter than that, you're going to severely deplete your melatonin levels. You're going to severely shift your circadian clock and it's effectively like traveling to another time zone. So if you stay up from 3:00 am until 6:00 am or 2:00 am until 4:00 am working on a term paper or something of that sort, and you're getting bright light in your eyes, you are effectively flying six hours to a different time zone, or at least that's what your body registers it as. And it can really throw your sleep and your metabolism and a number of other things out of whack. Now there's an exception to this, which is if you really want to be awake, it can often be beneficial to flipping on all the lights in the room and keeping them really bright. One of the hardest things to do is to stay up all night studying when you're in a dim environment. So you have to determine the trade off between whether or not you want to shift your clock or whether or not you want to get the work done. And I would say the ideal situation is to sleep at night and to do your work during the day and in the afternoon, but if you do have to be awake in the middle of the night, do understand that you want to dim those lights overall. You would not want to use that LED, you would not want to have overhead lights on, unless you're really struggling to stay awake, in which case you want to get as many bright lights on as possible. So there are a couple of tricks to all-nighters, I don't really want people pulling all-nighters unless they have to, but there are a few things that you can do without taking stimulants in order to stay up all night, that can be beneficial that maximize on your biology. One of them that's a little less commonly known is you can drink 32 ounces of water and commit to not going to the bathroom for 90 minutes, at least. It turns out that there is a circuit that goes from your bladder, literally neurons that go from your bladder to your brainstem and when you have to urinate, it makes you very alert. And as many of you have probably experienced, this is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the night when we have to use the bathroom is this circuit for alertness that goes from full bladder, it's signaled by the bladder being full to the brainstem. And this is the circuit that is disrupted in kids that have bedwetting issues. And there are a number of cognitive behavioral approaches to that, sometimes bedwetting in very young kids is because the circuit hasn't developed yet. Most adults fortunately are not bedwetting, but you can increase the amount of alertness in your system and remain awake in the middle of the night, by drinking a little bit more water than you normally would and then refraining from going to the restroom, that certainly will lend itself to alertness. You know how difficult it is to fall asleep when you have to use the restroom for instance. So that's one tool. The other thing is again, to flip on as many bright lights in the environment as possible. And then of course, people will rely on stimulants like caffeine or even more aggressive stimulants. That's not something I necessarily recommend, you'll each have to determine that for you. But if you do in fact, have to use all-nighters for any reason, you can maximize this bladder to brain approach and the right light approach. So that more or less covers how bright to keep your overall environment and how bright to keep your screen. If you really want to get nerdy about this, there is a free app called Light Meter where you can start measuring how many lux, how many photons are in a given environment. It's actually measuring reflectance of photons and so on, if you can look up what a Lux Meter does, if you like, I don't necessarily recommend doing that. I don't want to set a critical threshold by which, for instance, we say, once your environment is more than 1,500 lux, then it's too bright or not bright enough, et cetera. Everyone has different retinal sensitivities, everyone will find that different levels of brightness will cause them to be alert, different levels of dimness, if you will, in the room will cause them to feel sleepy. You really want to just modulate across the 24 hour cycle where it's very bright, as bright as safely can be early in the day so that you are alert. You can do your focus detailed work in that first phase, and then in the afternoon, as you move into more creative type works or abstract thinking, or working with other people in kind of a brainstorming mode that you would shift to dimmer lights, yellow lights, eliminate the blue lights as much as possible. Now that's light, but there's another aspect of vision that has been shown to be critically important for how alert we are going to be and how well we can maintain that alertness. And that has to do with where our visual focus is in a given environment. So I'm not talking about overall brightness, what I'm referring to now is simply where you place your phone or your tablet or computer screen or book, whatever it is that you happen to be looking at. There's a very underappreciated and yet incredible aspect of our neurology that has to do with the relationship between where we look and our level of alertness. And it works in a very logical way, we have clusters of neurons in our brain stem and those clusters of neurons control our eyelid muscles and they control our eye movements up and down into the sides. And indeed, if you were to look at an eyeball, I looked at a lot of eyeballs in my lab and I teach neural anatomy, so we do this from time to time, we would see that there are six muscles attached to your eyeball. Now four of them are located at the top, the bottom and the two sides of your eyeball, sort of at the 12 o'clock, six o'clock, three o'clock and nine o'clock of your eyeball. And those muscles can move your eye in the socket from side to side and up and down. And then we also have some muscles that can actually pull the eyeballs at angles. So we have different muscles that can move the eyes at different angles as well, and that's why we can look up into the side or down into the side, not just from side to side or up or down. Now, the neurons that control those muscles have a very interesting feature, which is that when we are looking down toward the ground or anywhere below, basically the central region of our face, the neurons that control that eye movement are intimately related to areas of the brainstem that release certain types of neuromodulators and neurotransmitters. And they activate areas of the brain that are associated with calm and indeed, even with sleepiness and there's an active inhibition or prevention of neurons that increase alertness. Now the opposite is also true, we have neurons that place our eyes into an upward gaze above the sort of level of our nose and up above our forehead. Literally looking up while keeping the head stationary, or if you tilt your head back and you look up, these neurons are still active. Those neurons don't just control the position of the eyes and cause them to move up, they also trigger the activation of brain circuits that are associated with alertness. Now, this is a fundamental feature of the way that our eyes and brain are wired together and how they relate to what we call autonomic arousal. And there are a bunch of details there. We will actually have a guest in a few weeks who has learned to exploit these neurons and the fact that they control these different states of calm or alertness in order to generate hypnotic states, to place people into very atypical states in which they are both very alert and very calm. We'll save that for a future episode. But the important thing to understand is when you are looking down below the level of your nose, you are essentially decelerating your alertness. You're reducing your amount of alertness, it might be subtle, but it's happening. Whereas when you look straight ahead or in particular, when you look up, you're increasing your level of alertness. Now this has some obvious implications. When we get sleepy, our eyelids tend to close and we tend to nod down, when we're wide awake, we tend to be wide-eyed, we don't tend to blink as often. And we tend to be chin up and kind of on vigilance and alertness. So this has a evolutionary, or at least an adaptive component to it. This can be exploited, and indeed it's been researched in terms of how it can be used to optimize work environments. Contrary to what most people do, which is to look down at their laptop, tablet, or phone, if you want to be alert and you want to maintain the maximum amount of focus for whatever it is that you're reading or doing, you want that screen or whatever it is that you're looking at to at least be at eye level and ideally slightly above it. Now, I haven't seen many workspaces that take advantage of this very hardwired neuro-biological fact. So what should you do with this information? Well, if you're somebody who sits down to do work and starts to feel sleepy, or simply unfocused, unable to attend to whatever it is that you're doing, I highly recommend that you take your laptop or tablet. I do hope that most people aren't doing serious work on their phones because it's such a small visual window, and we can talk about why that's an issue later. And the idea would be to place that screen of your tablet or your laptop or other computer, and try and get it elevated at least to nose level, your nose level, or even higher. Now I realize that can be complicated to do, I've long, just used a stack of books, or I'll sometimes take a box and turn upside down and set it there. I do use a mixed standing-seated desk, I'll talk about that in a few minutes. There are a number of different ways that you could do this, you could wall mount a monitor. I think many people are working with laptops, it's a little bit harder to do that with a laptop, some people though will configure a second screen. You have to decide what's right for you in your budget. But again, in addition to having a brightly lit room, to be able to focus and attend to whatever it is you're working on, you want to have that screen positioned high in your visual environment. Now you wouldn't want it on the ceiling necessarily, I know that would be pretty cool, but you do want it above you. Now, there are a couple solutions to this that don't involve a wall mount or stacking books or boxes. For instance, you could be one of those people that likes to lie in bed or on the sofa and get your screen up above you by putting pillows on your knees. I used to actually do a lot of my writing and work in the middle of the night, I don't do this anymore and I don't recommend it, but I used to do a lot of work from bed. Now I no longer bring electronics for work into the bedroom. I just really try and keep the bedroom for sleeping or whatever else. But in terms of lying down on the couch, it is somewhat easier to get that screen up above you, you can kind of slide underneath that screen and get typing, but there's a problem with that. And we'll talk about this a little bit more in a moment, but it turns out that your posture, literally the position of your body relative to gravity, also has important implications for how alert you are. So ideally you would be standing or seated. I would say the ideal would be standing, second best will be seated and your screen will be either directly in front of you or slightly above you. Or if you wanted to get really fancy, you could create a situation where it was above you and slightly tilted toward you so that you actually had to maintain kind of proper neck posture. This accomplishes a number of things. In addition to making you more alert, you also get away from the so-called text neck. You know, people are starting to look more like C's nowadays, the shape of the letter C because we're constantly looking down. I do every once in a while, see somebody who's texting in public with it at eye level, it always looks a little odd that they're doing that, but I always admire their posture at the same time, so we shouldn't give them a hard time. So this is another feature that you can arrange into your physical workspace. Again, whether or not you're seated or you're standing throughout the day, try and get that screen elevated. Now with reference to posture, there are beautiful data illustrating that when we are standing up, those same neurons in our brainstem, locus coeruleus neurons, which release I should mention things like norepinephrin and epinephrin, those neurons become active when we are standing. They become even more active when we are ambulatory, when we are moving and we will talk about treadmilling and cycling at your desk and so forth in a little bit. But when you sit, they become a little less active and when you lie down and indeed, any time that you start to get your feet up above your waist or your head tilted back, those neurons fire less and neurons in your brain that are involved in calming, and indeed putting you to sleep, start increasing their level of firing. It's a really beautiful system. So beautiful, in fact, that there are studies that show that as you adjust the angle of the body back, you actually get a sort of dose-dependent increase in sleepiness and calmness and a dose-dependent decrease in alertness. And so, as we were all told to sit up straight or even better, just stand up straight, and now I'm also telling you to get that visual thing that you're attending to, screen or otherwise, up in front of you, or ideally above you, those things combine to generate maximum alertness. So you can think about how you might work this into various aspects of your homework environment or office work environment. But as I describe this, many of you are probably thinking what I'm thinking, which is, gosh, most of what we do is in complete opposite direction to all of this neurobiologically grounded advice. Most of us are looking down at our laptop while seated, or we are lying down, which is going to make us more sleepy, or we are positioning our computers in front of us, but we really aren't an environment that's bright enough and so on and so forth. So as you can tell, we're starting to layer in the various things that you can do, first brightness in the room, second, get that screen up and try and put yourself into a posture for work that lends itself or promotes alertness if indeed, you want to be alert for that work. If your goal is to take a nap, get your feet elevated about 10 to 15 degrees above your head, maybe put a pillow underneath it, lie down and take a nap, but that's not what we're talking about today, we're talking about workspace optimization. And I suppose you could also exploit that all-nighter trick that I talked about earlier, I actually did this, when I was an undergraduate, I was a little bit masochistic in this way. I would drink coffee and water at fairly high volume. I wasn't forced drinking or anything like that, but I actually wouldn't allow myself to get up and use the bathroom except on a timer. So I think the longest ever went was three and a half hours. It was kind of excruciating, I actually don't think that's necessarily a healthy advice, but again, you can use slight, I mentioned slight over consumption of fluids in order to generate alertness. That was just me really trying to get as much work done as I could, I had a very, very demanding class schedule and it was just the only way that I could get work done. If I was getting up every few minutes, use the restroom, I found it hard to re-engage in that work and maintain focus, which is what I just want to briefly mention now. I talked about this in the episode on focus, but one thing that is completely unreasonable and that you should never ask yourself to do is to sit down or stand up and immediately focus on something, unless you're stressed about what you're looking at, or you're very, very excited by it. If you're very stressed about some sort of information or a deadline, or you're very, very excited about something, you'll find that you can focus instantly just within a moment. And that's because of the deployment of neurochemicals like dopamine and norepinephrine that bring about our levels of alertness. However, most of us, including myself, will go to begin to work out and we'll find that our mind doesn't quite engage at the level of depth and focus that we would like right off the bat. I've timed this and other studies have timed this in a more rigorous way, mine is just what we call anecdata, but so I've timed it for myself, but there are studies that have looked at this. And the data point to the fact that even at our most heightened levels of focus, most people can only maintain focus before switching tasks for about three minutes, which is depressingly short period of time. However, you can extend that period of time, and I've talked about that in the episode on focus, but more importantly, when you sit down to start a work about of any kind, any kind expect that it would take about six minutes for you to engage these neural circuits, you wouldn't expect yourself to walk into the gym and do a PR lift or start running and do your best sprint, or just head out the door without warming up at all. A little walk jog at first, or a few warm up sets, I mean, we expect that, we are not surprised that we need that. And yet we sort of expect that our brain should be able to lock on and do work in a very focused way immediately. And that's just a ridiculous assumption, it's an unfair assumption, I should say. So assume that it will take about six minutes to engage in your work about and that those neurochemical systems will take some time to rev up and engage. The other things that I'm describing about lighting and screen positioning and posture, those will also help maximize your focus and will limit that ramp up time into a focus state. And I think what you'll find is that as you maximize your workspace, the time the latency, as we say to get into that focus will start to shorten. It will especially start to shorten if you use tools to limit distraction, we will talk about distraction, but things like Freedom, which is an app, a free app that allows you to lock yourself out of the internet or turning off your phone for instance. But even if you're doing work on your phone or that involves your phone or the internet, as many of us including myself do, expect there to be a ramp up time for you to focus. There's another aspect of our vision that's absolutely critical for optimizing our workspace. And that has to do with this really interesting feature of our visual pathways in that it has two major channels. Those two major channels have names, although you don't have to remember the names. The first one is the so-called parvocellular channel, which is involved in looking at things at specific points in space and at high resolution or detail. And then there's the so-called magnocellular channel, that's involved in looking at big swaths of visual space and at lower resolution. So you can think of the parvocellular system as kind of a high pixel density, think about your most modern smartphone, the recent smartphone with the best, best camera. And think about the magnocellular system as being lower resolution, kind of an older smartphone, lower pixels, et cetera. You might ask, why would you want a system that's low resolution. Well, the low resolution system is better at things like detecting motion and not so much at detail and vice versa. Now, again, you don't have to remember the names, what you do have to remember, however, is that you're going to create the maximum amount of alertness in your system. The maximum amount of ability to focus when your system is in that parvocellular mode, when you're bringing your eyes to a common point, what we call a vergence eye movement, V-E-R-G-E-N-C-E. I've said this before on the podcast, and people said, virgin eye movement, no, vergence eye movement. As in convergence, bringing your eyes to a single point in space, will create a narrower aperture of a visual window, meaning your visual world actually shrinks at least perceptually. Whereas when you relax your eyes and dilate your gaze, you can do this now by whatever environment you're in, trying and see without moving your head off to the side, above, below you, as broadly as possible, maybe can dilate your gaze so much that you can see yourself, your body in that visual environment. You'll notice that your resolution of vision isn't nearly as high as when you do that vergence eye movement. Vergence eye movements are incredibly powerful for creating heightened states of alertness and focus. And indeed they create heightened states of cognition, of thinking, and that's because your brain follows your vision in terms of focus. When we say I can't focus, what we often are experiencing is an ability, and inability, excuse me, to not focus visually. Whereas when we are in a very focused state, we are in a state often where we can focus visually. Now we can also do this with our auditory system or to touch et cetera, but right now we're just talking about the visual system. Now, in terms of workspace optimization, what this means is we never really want to be looking at a square or rectangle or target area for our work that is too far beyond our ears. How far is too far? Really, you want to try and keep the blinders on, or I should say the invisible blinders so that whatever you're looking at falls within the region of visual space in front of you, that is present if you were to cup your hands and put them right next to your eyes. Now this is a rough estimation, but I'm doing this now, for those of you that are watching on YouTube, I'm doing this now, I'm trying to simulate like a horse with blinders on, for those of you who are listening, just imagine me looking silly with my hands cupped near my eyes. But if we are to, for instance, look at a screen that's very, very big and we're too close to it, or even if we're standing back from it, it's going to be hard for us to attend to everything within that screen space. So this is actually support for the idea of using a phone or a tablet or a laptop. My laptop is about 15 inches in diameter, I think is the one that I have, some are 13, some are 17. Some of you like to use big monitors, make sure that whatever it is that you're looking at, if you want to remain focused, it doesn't extend too far beyond where your eyes are, the size of your head that is, so just think blinders on a horse. And actually that's the reason they put blinders on a horse so that they're not looking off into the periphery. Horses, unlike humans don't have the same shaped pupil, they don't have a visual system that's organized in quite the same way, they mostly see in Panorama, in magnocellular vision. And so those blinders are designed to keep their visual focus straight ahead, so they physically restrict it. Now, some people will actually go to lengths to further restrict their visual focus. They will do things like putting on a hoodie or wearing a hat for instance, to restrict their visual window. And indeed that works quite well, but as we'll talk about in a moment when you really restrict your visual window, down to a very, very narrow portion of visual space, that actually changes the types of information that you are best at processing. And we'll talk about that in terms of something that's called the cathedral effect in a few moments, but for now here's the principle, make sure that whatever you're looking at is directly in front of you and doesn't extend too far out to the side. Once you get out to say six or 12 or certainly 18 inches on side of your eyes, you are dilating your gaze by definition, you're dilating your gaze, it's completely subconscious, and it becomes very hard to maintain attention. Now, the caveat to this is that if you are going to look at a narrow space, a narrow window for any period of time, whether or not it's a book or a laptop or a tablet or a phone, those vergence eye movements not only create alertness, but they also require energy. And they also can fatigue the eyes because there's a process called accommodation whereby the shape of your eye literally has to change so that the lens can move so that you can focus at that location. Accommodation's an incredible process, but it is as demanding one, and that's the reason that your eyes get tired when you focus on something for too long. So here's a principle extracted from the ophthalmology and neuroscience literature that you can adopt. For every 45 minutes in which you are focusing on something like a phone or a tablet or a book page or your computer, you want to get into magnocellular panoramic vision for at least five minutes. And the way that I suggest to do this is actually to take a walk, ideally outside. We're going to talk about ambulation, about movement and about how that can maintain alertness throughout the day. So for every 45 minutes or so, try and get five minutes of relaxing your eyes. This is something that's not often done, especially in today's homeschooling and where kids are going to school by Zoom and adults are working by Zoom, this is a serious problem. People are getting eye fatigue, they're getting headaches. Indeed, some people are getting migraines, they're having all sorts of issues, neck pain. Much of that, if not all of that, in some cases can be alleviated by this 45 to five rule. For every 45 minutes of focused work that you do, get five minutes where you get outside, or if you have to be indoors where you can dilate your gaze. Now some of you may be saying, well, that spits in the face of your 90 minute rule. You've told us before that we should focus for 90 minutes. I would still want you to take breaks within those 90 minutes, if you're looking at a narrow piece of visual world, meaning at a phone or a laptop or so forth, and again, the best way to do this would be to go outside, just relax your eyes, look off into the distance. Looking at a horizon will automatically trigger this panoramic gaze, which is very relaxing to the eyes and will allow you to go back into a focused work about. The one thing you absolutely do not want to do is to go outside and check your phone, because if you're outside checking your phone or you're taking a break and checking your phone, you're still in that vergence eye movement. So this is very, very important because vergence eye movements increase focus and attention, and you can exploit that to increase focus and attention when you want to, but you absolutely need to relax the system, again for every 45 minutes in which you've been in that focused mode, you want to get at least five minutes of panoramic vision. If you can take a 15 minute walk, even better. Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect of workspace optimization that can actually bias whether or not our brain and nervous system are better suited for detailed analytic work or more abstract work. In fact, there's a way that you can arrange your work environment, or I should say there's a way that you can place yourself into certain environments that will allow abstract thinking, creative thinking, and indeed expansive thinking to emerge. There are other environments that you can put yourself in that will make your brain shift towards more analytic work, toward more detailed and precise types of work. Now, I just briefly want to mention something that was covered again on the Habits episode that I did a few weeks ago, but again, you don't need to see that episode in order to digest this information. It goes back to this issue of three phases within the circadian 24 hour cycle. Phase one, which as I mentioned is about zero to eight hours after waking, phase two, nine to 16 hours after waking, and phase three 17 to 24 hours after waking. Phase one, being ideal for analytic precise, detailed types of work, phase two, better suited for most people for creative, kind of abstract thinking, expansive thinking, brainstorming, et cetera. There are some exceptions to that, but most people follow that pattern because of the different neuromodulators and hormones and so forth that are released into the brain and body at those different phases. What I'm about to tell you is a way in which you can use your physical environment to further shift your brain and nervous system into a mode that's either prime for analytic or abstract and creative thinking. What I'm about to describe is called the cathedral effect. The cathedral effect has been discussed well really, for many, many decades, maybe even hundreds of years, but formally has been discussed since the early 2000s in which it seemed that people who were in high ceilinged environments, hence the phrase cathedral, would shift their thinking and their ideas to more abstract and creative lofty type thinking. So literally higher ceiling, loftier thinking, higher aspirations that this was observed in terms of the language that they use, but also the sorts of ideas that they would generate. And conversely, that people that were in lower ceilinged environments would be more oriented toward using a language that was more restricted, literally more detailed, analytic about things in their immediate space. Now this seems kind of wild on the one hand, but actually if we go back to our understanding of the neurobiology of the visual system and the way that our brain and body is evolved in different environments, it actually makes a lot of sense. We don't have time to go into a long lecture about evolutionary neurobiology, but we have to remember that our nervous system has a number of features that are adapted to different environments. And indeed, we are able to go from big open prairies or mountaintops or large cathedrals or concert halls into small environments and everything scales with it. When we're outdoors in a big, expensive space, our vision tends to go long, we tend to be in panoramic, magnocellular vision. Our hearing tends to extend long, even if we're having a conversation with somebody, we tend to also be attending somewhat to the screech of hawks off in the distance or to the rush of a river. Whereas when we were in small spaces, everything, our vision, our hearing, and indeed even our physical movements become more restrained. Even if we can still extend our hands out as far as we want. What do I mean by that? Let's say you're in an elevator, that's a small space compared to outside on a field. This has been measured over and over again. The size or the amplitude of people's spontaneous movements actually scales down in smaller environments, even if they aren't completely restricted from extending their limbs all the way, whereas when we are outdoors, we feel a natural impulse to move further away from our body, our torso with our limbs, this just feels like more appropriate behavior. And when I say appropriate, I don't mean in any kind of social context necessarily. There's actually a reason for this, the visual system and the so-called vestibular motor system are intimately linked. And I can just tell you briefly one way in which you can test this and observe this and even use this, it's a little off topic from today's episode, but let's say you have a certain amount of flexibility. You can extend your arms off like wings is what I'm doing for those of you that are listening, not watching off to your side with arms straight, and you reach a maximum positioning of flexibility. You can do a quick experiment where you sit still, you would bring your arms in for a moment. You can put them on your knees, if you like, or in front of you, and you can move your eyes very far off into the periphery of your visual field. So you actually, I'm going to do this now. It looks kind of silly, but moving my eyes without moving my head off into the periphery, all the way to the right, then all the way to the left, all the way up all the way down, but especially all the way to the left, almost looking over my shoulder without turning my head all the way to my right. And you will find that you actually can extend your arms further back subsequent to that. And that's not magic, it has to do with the ways in which your cerebellum, which actually means mini brain and your eyes, your visual system are connected, and the way in which your cerebellum controls some of the spindles and other aspects of the neuromuscular architecture of your nervous system, 'cause your nerves control your muscles and allow those muscles to move further out. So for those of you that lack flexibility, you can actually explore your visual system for this. Now that's again, a bit of a tangent, but it's a fun one that relates back to this so-called cathedral effect. The cathedral effect is a way in which our thinking becomes more restricted and restrained in tighter, smaller, more confined visual environments. Or if the ceiling is higher, we are in expansive space with a lot of distance above us or space above us and out to the sides, maybe even out on a field, our thinking goes into these more broad abstract and kind of loftier future thinking in particular. This has actually been measured. There's a really nice paper, I will post a link to this. The authors are Joan Meyers-Levy and Rui, and then in parentheses Juliet Zhu, I'm going to assume that they go by Juliet. The title of the paper is "The Influence of Ceiling Height: "The Effect of Priming "on the Type of Processing People Use." And I won't go into all the details of this paper, but what's really cool about this paper is they looked with very rigorous statistics and they have a fair number of subjects and everything about this paper looks solid to me. The difference in cognitive processing, and abstract thinking and detailed analytic work that people are able to perform in environments that have a 10 foot ceiling versus an eight foot ceiling, which is not that much of a difference, there's just two foot difference there. And what they found were significant effects whereby high ceilings, activate concepts related to abstraction, whereas low ceilings prime confinement related concepts, but, or promote the kind of detailed thinking that lends itself well to sort of spreadsheet type work or accounting type work. Whereas abstract creative work was supported by these higher ceilings. And the way they analyze this was really interesting. Again, we don't have time to go into all the details, but they ask people to sort of generate word sets of related to particular topics like sports. And so people will talk about soccer, football, baseball, golf, et cetera, and talk about some of the equipment and other things. And then they had a kind of a challenge, a cognitive challenge whereby people had to link different concepts along different dimensions so that you depart from the dimension of sport and you start thinking about sports that involve teams or sports that involve a ball, et cetera. And so in the same conditions you can, except for the fact that the ceiling height is different eight feet or 10 feet, what one finds is that the kinds of language and the kinds of associations that people start to create are vastly different. And there're actually two experiments in this study, you're welcome to go look at it, so it wasn't just about sports, there were some other things that were analyzed as well. And in the references of this paper, it also points to other examples of the cathedral effect, which I find very interesting because as a vision scientist and someone who spends his life thinking about and indeed talking about the nervous system, we know that our cognition follows our vision. For low vision or blind people will follow mostly their hearing and to some extent their touch. But for most people who are sighted, as most people are cited, our cognition follows our visual environment. So what does this mean for workspace optimization? Well, most of us have a fixed ceiling level in our home, but you might have rooms in which the ceiling is higher and rooms in which the ceiling is lower. If that were the case, I recommend if you want to do creative work during phase two, the nine to 16 hours of your circadian cycle, nine to 16 hours after waking that is, that you do that in the high ceiling room, or maybe even outdoors out on a deck or on a patio. Cause the highest ceiling of courses is the sky. Whereas if you're going to do detailed analytic work I would suggest doing that during phase one of the day. But even if you're going to do it during phase two of the day, for whatever reason, scheduling or other sorts of constraints that you do that in the lower ceiling environment. Now, if you are interested in controlling the height of your visual world, but you don't have control over the ceiling height of the environment that you're in, there's another way to do that. And I used to observe this in the cafes, in and around Stanford, and the Bay area where you would see somebody who, despite the weather would be in a hoodie, maybe with a baseball cap or other form of hat or some sort of blinder above their eyebrows, which is actually another way of just lowering the ceiling height very, very low and restricting your visual field. Not unlike blinders that we talked about before that one would put on a horse or one would put on themselves by restricting their visual angle of focus to directly in front of them, but not too far out beyond the sides of their head. So these cathedral effects, I think can be leveraged toward doing particular types of work best. And again, the lower the ceiling or the lower your visual environment, the more that one tends to do where I should say performs detailed analytic work accurately. And the more that one's thinking is oriented towards detailed sort of correct answer type work. Whereas when the ceiling is higher or there's no ceiling, the more that the brain and the rest of the processing that we call cognitive processing, is related to abstract reasoning, brainstorming, and indeed can pull from broader swaths of memory resources, because really what abstract reasoning is, is it's taking the existing elements and maneuvering them, arranging them into novel ways. So you can think about like notes on a piano, playing a particular song, learning scales, that's very analytic. There's a correct answer that you're trying to arrive at or generate, whereas writing music or writing poetry or generating new material of any kind, involves taking existing elements, right? You're not going to use words that you don't have committed to your memory or that you're not aware of, and arranging them in novel ways. So I think the cathedral effect can be leveraged. And again, you don't need to move into a different home or build a slanted roof and work at one side of the room at one part of the day and the other side of the room at the other, although if that's the way you want to swing it, that's great, most of us don't have that flexibility, but it's very clear that the height of the ceiling of the visual environment that we're in, has a profound effect on the types of cognitive processes that we are able to engage. Now, I'd like to shift our attention to the auditory environment or the noise in the room or the music in the room or the music or noise in the headphones, because it turns out that there is a lot of quality scientific data out there that speaks to whether or not listening to particular sounds can enhance our cognition. And indeed the answer is yes, but there are very particular types of things to listen to under very particular types of conditions that allow one to do that. First off, I want to say that people vary tremendously in the extent to which they can tolerate background noise for work. In fact, individuals will vary tremendously from one day to the next, or even within the same day in the extent to which they can tolerate background noise. I've experienced this myself, there been times in which I've been working at home and I felt like for whatever reason, I just could not engage in focus. And what worked to generate more focus for me was to go to a cafe or to a library or someplace where there's actually more commotion, more people moving about, maybe even more noise, maybe even music in the room. And we have to all be in touch with when we want more background noise, or when we want less background noise, there is no hard and fast rule. If you look across the literature for studies that involve complete silence or white noise or binaural beats, or music or classical music or rock and roll, you can find results to support any type of environment as being more beneficial. However, as we'll talk about in a moment, there are a few types of environments to really avoid and a few types of sounds that really can enhance the cognition and your ability to focus in your workspace environment across the board, that really seemed to work for all people. Let's talk about background noise to avoid. And here we're talking about background noise to avoid because it actually can cause some pretty severe deficits in cognition. There's a paper first author, Jordan Love, cool name, last author Alexander Francis. The, the title of the paper has to do with "Psychophysiological responses to potentially annoying "heating, ventilation and air conditioning noise "during mentally demanding work," which is a mouthful. But basically what this paper identifies is a large dataset in which workplace and environmental noise, mostly the humming of air conditioners that's very loud or the humming of heaters, that's very loud and ongoing, just incessant doesn't let up, can really increase mental fatigue and can vastly decrease cognitive performance. And if you're interested in looking at the cognitive performance data that authors are Banbury & Berry 2005, that paper is the one that supports the fact that cognitive performance is worse when there's just the hum of an air conditioner in the background or the hum of a heater and otherwise complete silence. There's also evidence which I discussed on the episode about hearing, which is that in young children, white noise can cause some impairments in the development of the auditory system. Now I don't want parents to freak out and if you're exposed to white noise, as it as a sleep aid as a child, which I know many of you were, don't freak out, but it turns out that white noise, especially if it's loud, white noise can cause some disruption in the auditory maps, the representation of different frequencies of sound in the brain that can lead to some deficits in auditory and even language processing. So we really have to be careful about long-term exposure, extended exposure to white noise, or kind of an air conditioning noise that's really at a high level. I wouldn't worry if it's in the background and shutting off and turning on again, as the thermostat kicks off and on, but really try and avoid work in loud fan filled or ventilation generating or heat generating environments, because it really can cause damage to the auditory system long-term and as we described, it can impair cognitive performance and overall increase fatigue. I think we've all experienced that when you're in a room and there's some ongoing background noise and all of a sudden it stops and you just feel this enormous relief [sighs]. And the reason for this is that our auditory system has a parallel to our visual system. In our visual system, that light entering the eyes triggers the activation of those melanopsin cells, which triggers activation of the hypothalamus, a particular area of the hypothalamus, which generates alertness, generates the release, even of cortisol, a stress hormone. In the auditory system, when there's ongoing sound, your auditory system hears that, even if you're not paying attention to it, if you're paying attention to something else, it's still registers. Those little hair cells, as they're called in your inner ear are fluttering, the eardrum is beating and in concert to that sound frequency. And there's a brainstem mechanism that generates alertness and a kind of vigilant. So when you have a sound that's ongoing in the background, it shuts off, all of a sudden you experienced that peace, which is the turning off of those brainstem circuits that are associated with vigilance, the locus coeruleus, which we talked about earlier, which release epinephrin and norepinephrine and generate the heightened state of alertness in your brain and body, those neurons then can turn off and you experience that as relaxation. So does that mean that we shouldn't listen to white noise or pink noise or brown noise while we're working? Certainly a lot of people do. In fact, if you want to know what white noise, pink noise and brown noise are, they're just different constellations of auditory frequencies that are played together. Most of us think of white noise as the [shushing] on a screen, all the black and white pixels going all around, like they call it visual snow, but pink noise has certain sound frequencies, notched out, taken out, brown noise has others. It has different frequencies that are included at higher amplitude, et cetera. You can look this stuff up on YouTube, if you want, you to just put brown noise. None of it sounds terrific, it doesn't sound like music. It's literally just noise, mixed frequencies in no particular arrangement. There is some evidence that playing white noise in the background or on headphones or pink noise or brown noise can facilitate cognition, but it's mainly through an increase in this overall alertness as a consequence of areas like locus coeruleus and other brainstem areas that are associated with autonomic arousal from that noise. So it's a lot like the air conditioner effect. And I think done in a restricted way, meaning not for hours and hours, but maybe if your focus is waning and you're having a hard time engaging in work, you might put on some brown noise or white noise or pink noise and work that way for 45 minutes or so before you go to your panoramic vision walk and get some sunlight, that should be fine. There's really no reason to suspect, however, that those particular patterns of noise are going to optimize particular mental functions. So what I'd like to turn to next are particular patterns of sounds that indeed have been shown in peer-reviewed studies to optimize certain types of mental processing, because you can incorporate these into your optimized workspace environment, through headphones or through speakers, whatever mechanism that you want, in order to get more out of your work efforts. If you were to search for apps or go online and try and find sounds that can improve thinking or change your emotions. You're generally going to find three types. One are called isochronic tones, these are tones usually of a common frequency. So it might be a beep and then a pause, and then beep of the same frequency, and then beep, forgive my terrible beeping. I don't know what good beeping would sound like, but contrast isochronic tones with monaural beats. Monaural beats would be repetitive, almost percussive like beats delivered to just one ear, [vocalizing], this kind of thing. You can find apps that can deliver monaural beats, you can find also apps that deliver so-called binaural beats. You can also find YouTube scripts or channels that will deliver binaural beats. Binaural beats as the name suggests, are beats delivered to the two ears, one pattern of kind of percussive beat to one ear and a different pattern, or at least a pattern that's out of phase, that's not synchronized, delivered to the other ear. So on one ear you hear, [vocalizing] and in the other ear, you've got [vocalizing]. And what happens is because of the way that the auditory system converges in the brainstem and generates what are called interaural time differences, I'll explain what that means in a moment, interaural time differences, the difference between the two patterns of beats that are heard by each of the two different ears, leads to a third pattern that the brain entrains to, and kind of maps onto and generates particular types of brainwaves. So without going into a lot of detail, interaural time differences are the ways in which if you were to hear something off to your right, like I just snapped my finger just to the right of my right ear, that a signal arrives in my right ear before that's sound signal, those sound waves arrive in my left ear. So there's an interaural between ears, time difference. And there's a brainstem area in which signals from one ear and signals from the other ear converge, and there's literally a math done by your nervous system that says this signal arrived before the other signal. And the difference between those signals is the interaural time difference. So if I were to snap my fingers on both sides on my left and on my right side of the exact same time, and they arrive at the same time, the interaural time difference is zero. Whereas if one goes first on the right and then the left, I'm terrible at snapping on the left, it's a weak snap, but it was there, then there's a delay and the interaural time difference has a particular value. Okay, you get it, it's almost ridiculously simple. Binaural beats have been generated in ways that create a particular pattern of interaural time differences that then cascades up to the rest of the brain and puts the forebrain and other areas of the brain that are involved in cognition and action into a particular rhythm. And some of the rhythms or waves of brain activity are ones that you may have heard of, things like alpha waves or theta waves or gamma waves. Now I don't like to get too attached to particular brain waves as excellent for particular kinds of thinking. This is something that was really popular in the 90s and 2000s, when ways of measuring brain activity, noninvasively with electrodes on the outside, enabled people to identify the indeed alpha brain waves are associated with alertness states. And some are other brainwaves that are kind of larger amplitudes, slow waves like delta waves are associated with kind of sleepiness or relaxation, but in general, the way that the brain works is that different brain waves are generated in different structures at different times. And those combine to give us a sense of happiness or give us a sense of focus or give us a sense of creativity. Nonetheless, if you look across the board at the studies of binaural beats and you ask what sorts of binaural beats appear to be useful for people to enhance their brain function for particular kinds of tasks, we arrive at some very interesting answers. So we'll review what those are now. The frequency of binaural beats that appears to bring about improved cognitive functioning at the level of memory, improved reaction times and improved verbal recall, seems to be 40 Hertz. Now, is it exactly 40 Hertz? We don't know, but if one wants to look up a great reference on this, they reference Colzato, C-O-L-Z-A-T-O et al 2017 describes and here, I'm quoting, so this is a direct quote. "The present findings are in line "with those of a recent study, which also found "faster reaction times in participants "that listen to binaural beats at 40 Hertz." And you can find many examples of this in the literature where binaural beats have about 40 Hertz or exactly 40 Hertz, in some cases, somehow brought the brain into a state that made it optimal for learning, for memory and for certain types of recall, including verbal recall, math learning, et cetera. So for those of you that are interested in binaural beats, there are a number of free apps out there. I'm not going to recommend any in particular, just have to search for one that you happen to like. One thing that you will find is that many of those apps super-imposed binaural beats onto raindrops or ocean sounds or that rather they superimpose ocean sounds and raindrops onto the binaural beats, that does not appear to be as effective as pure binaural beats. There has been an exploration of lower frequency binaural beats. So for instance, seven Hertz, which is theta binaural beats done for 30 minutes with an overlay of rain sound or rain sounds only that's been analyzed and believe it or not, that showed immediate recall memory was significantly decreased. So that's a negative effect of binaural beats on memory. So the idea that binaural beats are just great for us across the board, I think is wrong. It does appear that the higher frequency binaural beats as one moves up toward 40 Hertz are going to be the most beneficial. There are instances in which for instance, 15 Hertz binaural beats increased response accuracy on a spatial verbal memory task. This is a complicated working memory task. Working memory is the kind of memory of remembering a phone number. So if I say for instance, 4932931, and you have to remember that number, keeping it online is what we call your working memory. It's likely that you would forget that two or three days later. You can get improvements in working memory with 15 Hertz binaural beats, whereas the other control conditions, five Hertz and 10 Hertz binaural beats, all decreased accuracy of working memory. However, when I looked at the literature and I examined a number of different studies, what I always seem to come back to was that 40 Hertz or so plus or minus five Hertz seemed to be optimal for generating improvements in cognition, in math performance, and even in various types of memory recall, and even in musical performance. You might wonder, well, how can people do musical performance, they're listening to binaural beats. Here's another surprise, many of the studies that I looked at didn't have people listening to binaural beats while they were doing the tasks, the memory task, or the music learning, et cetera, they would do it beforehand for 30 minutes. There were instances in which people were listening to binaural beats during the task. But if you decide to employ binaural beats, I recommend this 40 Hertz as a great place to start. I don't recommend doing it for all of your work bouts. I think there's a good reason to believe that you can attenuate to it. But if you are going to try it, you might try it both ways. You might try listening to binaural beats for about 30 minutes while doing something else and then maybe eating lunch or something of that sort, or taking a walk and then going into the work about. Because remember the moment that you start listening to these binaural beats, the brain doesn't immediately switch into a particular pattern of oscillation or brain waves, it takes some time. Neural circuits, again, take time to engage. The only neural circuits that are going to engage instantly are going be the ones that are of a sort of reflexive sort, like you step on a sharp object and you have to retract your limb, or you suddenly are stressed by a distressing text message, or you're suddenly delighted about a delightful text message. But when it comes to shifting your whole brain state toward optimizing work, it takes a little bit of time. So again, 40 Hertz binaural beats, many, many apps, many YouTube scripts out there, probably other resources for binaural beats, hopefully zero cost, so you can access those without any need to shell out any money. If you find one that you particularly like, maybe put in the comment section, so other people can find it, YouTube would be the best place to do that. Feel free to put a link or just a description, that will be wonderful. And again, you don't need to listen to binaural beats at the exact same time that you're doing the work, although that could also enhance your productivity. Some of you out there might be craving a little bit more mechanism by which binaural beats can influence things like focus or reduced reaction time. This has actually been explored, this 40 Hertz binaural beats pattern seems to have an effect on what's called striatal dopamine. We have dopamine as a neuromodulator of course, involved in many things in motivation, it's actually involved in adaptation to light in the retina. Something that most people don't know, but it's involved in movement, which is why people with Parkinson's who have a depletion of dopamine neurons actually have movement deficits and so on. But striatal dopamine is closely related to motivation and focus. And 40 Hertz binaural beats appears to increase striatal dopamine release. And this has actually been measured indirectly by what we call spontaneous blink rate. Now I've been accused on various Instagram posts, and even on this podcast of being a non-blinker, let's call it, or a minimal blinker. And as an important aside, there is no evidence whatsoever that people that don't blink very much are sociopaths or lie. Also, you will hear that people who blink a lot are sociopaths and are lying. There's absolutely no evidence that blink frequency correlates with anything except alertness. Now longer blinks are associated with less alertness. As we get tired, we tend to blink longer and longer until we take the long blink that is sleep. I guess the long blink would be death, but the longish blink would be sleep. But it turns out that the more firing of striatal dopamine neurons that's occurring, the more frequently we blink. And so it is associated with a resetting of our visual window, that's what happens when we blink and there's a whole relationship between blinking and time perception that we covered in the episode on time perception. But here's the bottom line for sake of this discussion. 40 Hertz binaural beats appears to increase spontaneous blink rates because it increases dopamine transmission in the brainstem and in the striatum in several locations in fact. And so the way in which these binaural beats set a rhythm in the brain, recruits dopamine release. That dopamine release leads to heightened levels of motivation and focus, why motivation and focus? Well, dopamine is actually the substrate by which epinephrin is made. Dopamine, the molecule is actually converted into epinephrin adrenaline and they work together like close cousins, dopamine and epinephrin in order to put us on a path of movement or if we are doing work, of mental movement toward a goal. So that's a little bit of mechanistic meat to explain at least part of the reason why 40 Hertz binaural beats can enhance our focus, reduce our reaction times and improve indeed learning and memory. Next I'd like to talk about the role of movement in optimizing our workspace and whether or not standing, sitting, lying down, treadmilling or even believe it or not, cycling, can enhance our work output and performance. Before we do that, I want to touch on two aspects of optimizing workspace that will come up at some point in your work or school life. Alas, there isn't a lot of science around this, but I think they are worth mentioning. And I think I can offer a little bit of advice in terms of how to navigate these in a way that would be beneficial to you. The first one is interruptions. If you go online and you ask about how to avoid interruptions, people will say, okay, well, if you have kids at home or even if you don't or at work, you'll have a light, like a recording light with recording is on we're, we're busy now, or have a sign on the door that says bother only in a case of emergency or find to knock or don't knock at all. I've used a different policy throughout the years. I am somebody who works pretty hard to control my time and focus, but of course, as a laboratory director, I have people coming by and who want to talk about things. And of course we have phones and we have computers and people's opportunity to reach us. Interruptions really are deadly to our ability to generate focus. And it's not just about the distraction that occurs of say a minute or two minutes or five minutes when we were interrupted, it's also about the additional time to get those brain circuits to re-engage to a mode of focus. So it's really kind of a double whammy. Now, none of us, including myself want to be harsh or cruel or shut off from the world and oftentimes interruptions bring incredible insights and people are providing support and very useful things that are essential to my workday and presumably to your workday in school day as well. But there's a simple method that I learned from my graduate advisor that works very, very well. Again, no peer review data to support it, this is just my experience, but this is somebody who had immense powers of focus, had a very, very demanding life, a long commute to children, extensive laboratory, et cetera. And what she would do was if I came by and asked a question, or if anyone came by and asked a question, she would acknowledge their presence, but would not shift her body toward them. So she purposely did not position her computer facing the door, which I think is a deadly or I should say, deadly to focus a way of positioning your workspace. So her computer was facing the wall, the door was perpendicular to that. And I would come by and I say, I have a question. She would say yes, so she would acknowledge my presence, but she wouldn't actually orient her body toward me, which told me that this conversation was not going to last very long. And no matter how long I stood there or what I asked, she would never orient toward me, which generally kept these conversations very, very short. We had other designated meetings where we would be face-to-face. The other approach, which I confess colleagues of mine have used before, not necessarily at Stanford, but elsewhere is to simply say no to everything that somebody requests or comes by. So if someone would knock on the door, they would just shout no through the door, or if someone said, can I bother you for a second? They would say, no, or if someone said, I have something I want to tell you, they would just say no. And they would just continue doing this until the person went away. That was actually very effective, these were some of the most productive people I know, not always the kindest, but some of them were very kind. The other approach that I've seen and actually this is an approach that was used by someone who has been a guest on The Huberman Lab Podcast, someone who's immensely productive was that he, so I'm constraining who this might be by saying he, he actually, despite having the option to have a very large office, would place himself in a workspace that was literally a coat closet, cleared out with a desk, small lamp, completely dark. So this violates everything that I've talked about before or prior to this, everything about high ceilings, bright light, et cetera, and would work, still works underneath a desk lamp in a completely dark closet, minimal ventilation. This is my definition of hell. And yet is one of the most productive people on the planet. Also very, very hard to find, I actually know where his closet is, turns out he has several of them that he migrates from in order to avoid distractions. So I mentioned these as kind of extremes, I think that most of us exist on the other extreme. And that's why I mentioned it, which is that most of us like some social engagement and a welcome, or at least set our work environment in a way that welcomes interruption and we have to be very, very careful about this. Now in the digital realm, I already mentioned a few of the things that we can do as practical tools to limit interruptions. One is use the program Freedom, the other would be to simply turn off the wifi. If you do need to be online and navigating, you're doing research of any kind, that's not going to be possible. Turning off one's phone, I've at times, put my phone on airplane mode, if that didn't work, I've locked it in a safe, I've done that, I'd left in the car outside. It all depends on one's levels of self-discipline, which as you probably know, from your own experience, tends to kind of wax and wane. Sometimes we are better at avoiding these distractions than others. So if you find yourself in a place where it's very hard to reduce those distractions, you may need you to go to more elaborate lanes. I will say that a graduate student in my lab who was immensely productive and focused, had the habit of coming in each day, she would take her phone, I don't know if she turned it on, or off or not, and she would just place it in a door, excuse me, in a drawer and would then go start doing experiments. We do experiments all day at 10 courses, engage in discussions avidly with the rest of us, and then would take her phone out at the end of the day and leave. And I don't think that behavior was not correlated with her immense productivity. I think the ability to untether ourselves from the phone is going to be the way in which many of us are either going to succeed or fail in our various pursuits. I'm somebody who engages on with the phone on a regular basis throughout the day for various reasons, but I do try and have large swaths of the day in which it's either on airplane mode or it's completely physically separated from me. When I'm in large swaths, I might do every other hour with the phone on airplane mode or even a two or three hour about where I just am simply not engaged with the phone at all. So is it better to sit or is it better to stand when doing work, at least as it relates to focus and productivity? And the answer is both. There've been a number of systematic studies exploring what are called sit-stand desks. So these are desks that can be set to a height that makes standing the best practice, and then they can be lowered to a height that makes sitting the best practice or the easiest practice I should say. And it turns out that just sitting is terrible for us and there's an enormous number of studies out there that have pointed the fact that people who sit for five or six or seven hours a day doing work, have all sorts of issues related to sleep, neck pain, cognition suffers, their number of cardiovascular effects, even digestion, there may even actually be some almost pressure effects on the pelvic floor and things of that sort, depending on the chairs that one uses. But that people who stand are in a slightly better situation where many of those health metrics improve, but that people that do a combination of sitting and standing at the same desk throughout the day, or move from one desk to another, if they don't have a combination sit-stand desk, that's going to be best. The good news is it's very easy to convert a sit desk into a stand desk, you can just stack some boxes, I've done this at times or stack books. There are also some pedestals and things that you can purchase if that's your preference in order to set your computer at a particular height. And of course there are desks that have motors and they're ones that have cranks, and there are all sorts of variations, both in terms of the types and whether or not they have motors as well as the cost to these things. So they can go from very low cost, like placing boxes or books to create a standing desk, to very high cost in some cases. Now what's interesting, if you look at a scientific literature, is that people who decreased their sitting time by about half each day. So they took, let's say they were working for seven hours a day, three and a half hours of that day, they decide to stand, and it's not even clear that it matters that they do all those three hours in one about, or they divide that up into shorter bouts of a half an hour, and then sit for half an hour, et cetera, alternating back and forth showed incredibly significant effects on reduced neck and shoulder pain, increase in subjective health, vitality in a work-related environments. And perhaps most importantly, for sake of today's discussion improvement in cognitive conditioning and the ability to embrace new tasks and cognitive performance. There are several studies that if one wanted to explore, they could explore this in more detail. I'll put a link to this as well. The article that I'm referring to is called "Effects of a Workplace "Sit-Stand Desk Intervention on Health and Productivity." And I like this paper because many of the papers out there focus on the effects of sit-stand desks on health in trying to get people to burn more calories, improve their posture, relieve neck pain, slumped over, et cetera, but not on productivity. And this particular paper focuses also on the metrics of productivity, it has its own study and also references a number of important studies. What does this mean for you and me? Well, I've long used a standing desk or some variation thereof. What this means is that we should probably spend about half of our work time standing and about half of it sitting, but not all sitting or not all standing. If you had to do all one or the other, standing is going to be better than sitting. What happens if we just stand? Well, that can also generate some postural issues in terms of stabilization and fatigue. I have a good friend who's in the movement and physical rehabilitation and physiology space, his name is Kelly Starrett, he's very impressive in all those domains, and he always says, we weren't designed to sit all day, but we also weren't designed to stand all day. And I think that's true, if we were to look back at our species over tens or hundreds of thousands of years, we would find that indeed, we did sit down, we did lie down. It wasn't that we were standing all day long. That said, almost everybody, at least in the U.S., is not getting sufficient cardiovascular exercise or movement throughout the day. And standing at one's desk can improve some of those health metrics, and again, can improve productivity, probably because of those postural effects that I talked about earlier, that when we lie down, there tends to be less alertness in our brainstem, if you will and there's less activation of those brainstem circuits involved in alertness. And indeed that circuits that involve a kind of a calming effect on the body, get activated. And as we become upright, standing or sitting, but especially standing, then those brainstem circuits for alertness kick on, which are going to make it easier to remain focused. If you are going to start standing for half of your work time, you will notice that it takes a few days to adapt. You'll notice a lot of shifting from side to side, definitely want to wear comfortable shoes. Some people do this on a wooden floor, other people feel uncomfortable unless they're on carpet. You have to figure out what works for you, but it can take a little bit of time to adapt. After say after now, about 10 years of working at a sit-stand desk, I find I can't sit for too long before I want to stand. And my standing bouts can be anywhere from 30 minutes to two hours, although two hours would be a little bit long. And then I catch myself kind of leaning on the desk off to the side. So again, the idea is to stand, but not be leaning on the desk, obviously, if you're typing or you're writing, there'll be some leaning involved, but that's what the literature support. There is also a literature on whether or not physical movement under your desk, meaning treadmilling or in fact, there are now bicycles that allow people to peddle. It's kind of a unicycle like thing, although not a unicycle under the desk, can be beneficial for workplace performance. So let's take a look at what those data say. The study that I'm referring to has a first author, Frod Sham, F-R-O-D S-H-A-M, Frod Sham et al. This is a research article published in plus one, and the title of the article is, "Does Type of Active Workstation Matter: "A Randomized Comparison of Cognitive and Typing Performance "Between Rest, Cycling and Treadmill, Active Workstation." It's amazing that people do this science, I think it's great. Where else would we get peer-reviewed data on these types of questions? First things first, there were no significant differences between cycling or treadmill workstations on any cognitive or typing outcomes. So it does not seem to matter whether or not people are treadmilling under the desk. So these would be stationary treadmills, it's like a little conveyor that people are walking on. Sometimes very slowly, I'm guessing some people walk more quickly, the New Yorkers probably treadmill quicker. The California's probably treadmill a little slower, I'm in Californian, so I can make that quote unquote joke, but nonetheless, there were no significant differences between that and a cycling station where people are sitting and peddling as they type away or as they work, or as they're on phone calls, et cetera. So it really doesn't seem to matter. So if you're going to embrace these active workstations, as they're called, just decide what you would prefer to use. It doesn't seem to matter in terms of outcomes. Now, this study involved looking at 137 young adults. They had multiple sessions where they at first completed cognitive and typing tests, these tests have different names, and you're welcome to look those up if you like, as well as flanker tasks, so these are tasks of attention and things of that sort. And then they either engaged in treadmill or cycling and then there was a comparison. And the statistics were run, and basically what they found was there was a statistically significant improvement in attention and cognitive control scores during any kind of active session, as opposed to just a mere seated session. So they compared seated to cycling to treadmilling. However, verbal memory scores actually got worse during active sessions. So I'll repeat that, treadmilling or the cycling workstations, improved attention and cognitive control scores as compared to people that were just seated and working. However, verbal memory scores got worse during the active sessions, and again, just to repeat, there was no difference between cycling and treadmill workstations. So this is interesting, I suggest that as the author say that active workstations, whether walking or cycling are not only useful to improve caloric output and physical activity, circulation and so on, but particularly when completing tasks like cognitive tasks or tasks that require focus that do not require verbal memory recall. Now why verbal memory recall was negatively impacted, we don't know, it could be because people were breathing a little bit harder. It could be that there's something about walking and talking that seems incompatible in the nervous system, although I'm not aware of that. I know a number of people who can walk and talk at the same time, but if you are going to explore these treadmills or you're going to explore these cycling stations, you probably wouldn't want to do that for highly verbal work, maybe more for mathematical work or for analytic work or even creative work. But anything that involves very precise or detailed verbal recall, sitting or standing seems to be the better option. And if you're wondering why cycling or treadmilling would enhance various aspects of cognition, we can speculate. I've talked before about this, but anytime we are generating forward movement through our own actions, our own efforts, typically, if we are outside, we're not on a treadmill or we're out on a bicycle or running, or even on a motorcycle or in a car, we have what's called optic flow. And that optic flow is known to quiet certain areas of the brain that are associated with vigilance and indeed fear. This is the basis of things like EMDR, eye movement desensitization reprocessing. However, the mere act of engaging what are called our central pattern generators, the neurons in our brain stem and in our spinal cord that engage repetitive movements also can reduce some of the areas of the brain that are associated with anxiety and vigilance. So one pure speculation, but nonetheless grounded speculation would be that treadmilling or cycling at a desk would reduce anxiety that would allow performance to improve. The other, what I think is more likely explanation is that anytime we are in ambulation, we recruit the release of neuromodulators like epinephrin dopamine and things of that sort, that further increase overall levels of alertness. I think that's the more likely explanation because it's hard to imagine how just a reduction in anxiety could lead to these improvements in cognition in a direct way. Whereas the subjects in the study, I just mentioned on average experienced an increase in cognitive performance merely by movement. And this does not include any optic flow because it's stationary, the treadmill or the cycle is stationary. And so we can rule out that optic flow, and that points to the idea that when we are in movement, we recruit neuromodulators associated with the so-called reticular activating system, the striatal system and so forth, that would place the brain into some pattern. We don't know, we only can speculate some pattern, perhaps it's gamma waves or some other wave pattern that would engage heightened levels of focus and attention. Nonetheless, treadmilling, cycling at a desk, does improve cognition. So we've been discussing workspace optimization with the understanding that you're not always going to work in the same place every day. What I've tried to do is give you a set of high potency tools that can improve your focus and cognition, and to place that within a framework for particular kinds of work. Let's just review some of the basic elements of what we've covered today. First of all, in the first part of your day, that zero to nine hours after waking, you want bright lights, especially overhead lights, as bright as you can keep them without feeling uncomfortable, or certainly not without feeling any pain in your eyes or elsewhere in your body. Bright lights will make for the maximum state of alertness. In addition, try and place, whatever it is that you're focusing on directly in front of you, but not have it extend too far out to either side of your eyes, try and generate a fairly restricted visual window as we call it. And if you can, try and place whatever it is you're focusing on at least at nose level or above, that it might take some engineering or some ingenuity and creativity in order to figure out how to do that, but that's going to be most beneficial. Try and avoid reclining, try and avoid sitting, try and stand for at least half of your work day. That's a good goal, and it may take some time to work up to that goal. In addition, if you're going to use sound as a stimulus for increasing focus and alertness, trying to avoid exposure to white noise, pink noise or brown noise for extended periods of time, for more than an hour or so, that might actually be damaging to the auditory system. And at the very least, is kind of stressful, even though you might not notice it, it's kind of a background level of anxiety and stress that is not going to serve you well. Rather, if you're going to pursue particular types of sound frequencies consider using 40 Hertz binaural beats, not monaural beats, but 40 Hertz binaural beats done during a particular work about or for 30 minutes prior to that work about. I would not rely on binaural beats all the time, every day, I think that could cause them to lose their potency, just because of the way the auditory system attenuates. And actually you've experienced that attenuation, the mere fact that you can go into an environment where there's an air conditioner, blowing, blowing, blowing, and then it stops, and you feel that relaxation, but you weren't thinking about the air conditioner before, it tells you that your auditory system had kind of attenuated to it and yet it was still impacting your system. You were sensing it, we would say, but not perceiving it. There are other things that you can do to improve your workspace optimization such as standing for half the day, as I mentioned before, but if you're interested in this or you feel like it suits you to treadmill, find a stationary treadmill that you can walk on. I've never tried this before, maybe after this episode, given what I've read in the peer-reviewed research, and it's pretty compelling, that treadmilling seems like an interesting way to increase alertness and cognitive performance. I'm not sure that I would do the cycling method because I can't imagine just cycling and typing at the same time, that sort feels like, like I actually can do the rub here, tell me pat your head kind of thing. But it still feels like a little bit of a sort of a cognitive motor collision for me for whatever reason, but that's just my bias. I do know how to ride a bicycle, but anyway, you pick your preference. Some other things that you could do in order to improve your workplace performance would be to consider the cathedral effect. If you're going to do analytic work for any part of the day, phase one or phase two, as I described them, but really in any time of day, that detailed analytic work for which there is a correct answer, learning scales of music, learning mathematics, trying to figure out the solution to a problem where there is indeed a solution. It could be an interpersonal problem as well, then try and get into an environment with a relatively low ceiling. If you don't have access to a low ceiling environment, you might consider using a brimmed hat or even a hoodie, or even just facing down, or even putting your hand above your eyes, as you will, at the level of your eyebrows. In other words, lower the ceiling, that's the basis of the cathedral effects on analytic performance. In contrast, if you're interested in doing brainstorming, creative work, you're writing new things, you're creating new things of any kind, artwork, consider getting into a high ceiling or no ceiling environment, or if you're wearing a brimmed hat or you're wearing a hoodie, maybe peel that back. Again, the data within the peer reviewed literature are there to support these sorts of practices. And if you'd like to start layering these protocols, by all means, please do that. There's no reason why you couldn't do one or just two of these protocols. There's no reason why, for instance, you couldn't use binaural beats and try and get into a low ceiling environment to do detailed work a couple times a week, but you could also employ all of these. Now, of course, there are an enormous number of other things that you can do to improve work performance and productivity, and I've talked about those in previous episodes, in particular, in the episode on focus and the episode on motivation, there are supplements you can take that can increase dopamine, for instance. There are tools that you can use to increase your focus, for instance, focusing your visual attention on one location for 30 to 60 seconds prior to entering a focused work about, this has been shown again and again. The work from Emily Bell, that's at NYU in the episode on focus, I cited a number of studies where this has actually been tested and deployed in various schools. Having kids do a focus task where they look at a particular visual target for 30 to 60 seconds, then doing some mathematics and seeing pretty impressive improvement in focus and attention, even in people that have attention deficit, hyperactivity disorder and so on. So there's no reason why you can't and shouldn't combine the sort of practical workspace optimization solutions that we talked about today with the kind of neural optimization solutions that we talked about in the episode on focus and the episode on ADHD and the episode on motivation. By all means, layer those together, that's how you're going to achieve the optimal focus bouts, that's how you're going to achieve the optimal creativity bouts. I do want to acknowledge again, the fact that I realized people are showing up to this challenge of workspace optimization with different budgets, with different constraints. Some people have kids at home, there are a lot of interruption, some people do not. Nonetheless, I hope that the information I was able to provide today will allow you to make subtle or maybe even drastic rearrangements in your workspace environment. There's one other point related to that, that I did not cover and that I'd like to cover just briefly, which is that there's nothing to say that you have to always work in the same location all the time. You can move from house to cafe if that works for you, you can move from office to home, you can also move from different locations within your home. I have a brief anecdote about this. I used to attend a lot of scientific meetings when a lot of scientific meetings were in person, and there were always a few individuals that seem to stay engaged throughout these very long meetings. And we're talking seven, eight hour day, sometimes evening sessions, and sometimes these meetings would go on for, four or five or even six days. These are long meetings and the quality of talks vary tremendously, and I always notice the individuals that manage to stay engaged and awake for the entire meeting. And I noticed that people that could maintain high levels of alertness in this one conference room had a habit of moving to a different seat after each session, sometimes even between talks. And I actually discussed this with one of my colleagues who was doing this, I said, is this conscious, are you always moving from place to place? And he said, yeah, if I just stay in one place and I just look from this one particular visual angle of the screen, I find after one or two talks, regardless of how interesting the talks are, that I start take on of draft, my mind isn't as engaged and indeed, sometimes can fall asleep. And so I started this practice of moving from space to space, or I should say, seat to seat within an auditorium and it works quite well. And I think it works quite well because again, of the relationship between our visual system driving the majority of our cognition, our visual system drives our thinking and that novel visual environments are going to lend themselves to heightened levels of alertness. Now, you don't want things to be so novel and scary or threatening or anxiety-provoking or loud that they draw your attention away from your work. But I think this is part of the reason why turning on music or moving to an office or a cafe or an outdoor environment from an indoor environment or vice versa, maybe even within a single day, can bring about more heightened levels of productivity. I'd also like to acknowledge that what I covered today is most certainly not exhaustive for all the types of workspace optimization tools that one could create. For that reason, I'd love for you to suggest any of your workspace optimization tools that you found useful. Please put those in the comment section on YouTube, that would be the best place than other people can see them. Also read through those, and perhaps in a future episode, I'll call about some of the ones that I've tried on the basis of your suggestions. If you're learning from, and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. Also on YouTube, you can put comments in the comment section, so give us feedback. You can make suggestions for future guests that you'd like us to host on The Huberman Lab Podcast. And in general, you can ask questions. We do eventually read all the comments and they do influence our future content. Please also subscribe on Apple and/or Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this podcast episode, that's the best way to support the podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. We also have an Instagram and a Twitter account, it's Huberman Lab, and there I teach neuroscience and neuroscience related tools. Oftentimes that information and those tools overlap with themes on the podcast, but sometimes they are distinct from themes and topics covered on the podcast. So please follow us on Instagram and Twitter. This episode, we didn't talk too much about supplements, but on many previous episodes of The Huberman Lab Podcast, we talk about supplementation and while supplementation isn't required or great for everybody, some people do derive tremendous benefit from supplements. We talked about supplements for focus, for sleep, for creativity, all sorts of things. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E.com/U/Huberman, there, you can see the supplements that I take, you can get 20% off those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that portal, Thorne thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off. Any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. The reason we partner with Thorne is because one of the major issues in the supplement industry is that many of the supplements out there don't contain sufficient quantity, or they contain too much of a given supplement. And the quality of the ingredients can vary tremendously. With Thorne supplements, there is immense stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients and the precision of the amounts of those ingredients that they include in each product. Once again, thank you for joining me for this discussion about the science and peer-reviewed literature on workspace optimization. I hope some, if not, all of the tools will be beneficial for you, and as always thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 291 ---
Video ID: dFR_wFN23ZY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFR_wFN23ZY
Title: Dr. Alia Crum: Science of Mindsets for Health & Performance
Published: 2022-01-24 13:00:19 UTC
Description:
My guest is Dr. Alia Crum, Associate (tenured) Professor of Psychology at Stanford University and Director of the Stanford Mind & Body Lab. Dr. Crum is a world expert on mindsets and beliefs and how they shape our responses to stress, exercise, and even to the foods we eat. We discuss how our mindset about the nutritional content of food changes whether it is satisfying to us at a physiological (hormonal and metabolic) level. She also tells how mindsets about exercise can dramatically alter the effects of exercise on weight loss, blood pressure, and other health metrics. Dr. Crum teaches us how to think about stress in ways that allow stress to grow us and bring out our best rather than diminish our health and performance. Throughout the episode, Dr. Crum provides descriptions of high-quality peer-reviewed scientific findings that we can all leverage toward better health and performance in our lives.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Mindset

Thank you to our sponsors:
Thesis - https://takethesis.com/huberman
ROKA -  https://roka.com - code "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman

Dr. Alia Crum Links:
Twitter - https://twitter.com/AliaCrum 
Stanford Mind & Body Lab - https://mbl.stanford.edu 
Support Dr. Crum’s research at Stanford (tax-deductible) - https://mbl.stanford.edu/support 
Dr. Crum’s published work - https://mbl.stanford.edu/publications 

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Toolkit for changing stress mindsets - http://sparqtools.org/rethinkingstress/ 
Publication on mindsets & side effects - https://bit.ly/3AnUkGY
Changing patient mindsets about non-life-threatening symptoms during oral immunotherapy - https://bit.ly/3FT4Irh
Stress, mindsets, and success in Navy SEALs special warfare training - https://bit.ly/3IAnS7d
Nutritional analysis of foods and beverages depicted in top-grossing US movies, 1994-2018 - https://bit.ly/3ItrrMn
Nutritional Analysis of Foods and Beverages Posted in Instagram Accounts of Highly Followed Celebrities - https://bit.ly/3nU42f0

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Alia Crum from Stanford University
00:03:15 Thesis, ROKA, InsideTracker
00:08:26 What Is a Mindset & What Does It Do? 
00:14:45 Mindsets Change Our Biological Responses to Food
00:22:28 Beliefs About Our Food Matter
00:25:57 Placebo vs Beliefs vs Nocebo Effects
00:28:57 Mindset (Dramatically) Impacts the Effects of Exercise
00:33:44 Motivational Messaging & Mindset About Fitness
00:39:30 The Power of a ‘Potency & Indulgence’ Mindset
00:42:03 Mindsets About Sleep, Tracking Sleep 
00:45:00 Making Stress Work For (or Against) You
01:01:50 Mindsets Link Our Conscious & Subconscious
01:04:50 3 Best Ways to Leverage Stress
01:10:40 4 Things That Shape Mindsets, Influencers & Mindsets
01:19:40 Mindsets About Medicines & Side Effects
01:26:25 How to Teach Mindsets
01:31:47 Dr. Crum’s Research, Clinical & Athletic Backgrounds
01:36:20 The Stanford Mind & Body Lab, Resources for Stress
01:38:30 Synthesis, Participating in Research
01:39:04 Subscribe, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is, Dr. Alia Crum. Dr. Crum is a tenured professor of psychology at Stanford university, and the founder and director of the Stanford Mind and Body Lab. Her work focuses on mindsets. How what we think and what we believe shapes the way that our physiology, our biology reacts to things like what we eat or stress or exercise. Indeed, as you will soon learn from my discussion with Dr. Crum, what you believe about the nutritional content of your food changes the way that food impacts your brain and body to a remarkable degree. And the same is true for mindsets about exercise and stress, and even medication. For instance, recent work from Dr. Crum's laboratory shows, that what we believe about the side effect profiles of different drug treatments or different behavioral treatments, has a profound impact on how quickly those treatments work and the effectiveness of those treatments. I just want to mention one particular study that just came out from a graduate student in Dr. Crum's laboratory, Lauren Howe, H-O-W-E, showed that, how kids react to a treatment for peanut allergies, can be profoundly shaped by whether or not those kids were educated about the side effects of the treatment, such that if they learned that the side effects were a by-product of a treatment that would help them. And they learned a little bit about why those side effects arose and that the side effects might even help them in route to overcoming their peanut allergy, had an enormous impact on how quickly they move through the treatment and indeed how much they suffered or in this case did not suffer from those side effects. And that is, but one example that you will learn about today as we discuss what mindsets are, the number of different mindsets that exist, and how we can adopt mindsets that make us more adaptive, more effective, allow us to suffer less and to perform better in all aspects of life. I personally find the work of Dr. Alia Crum to be among the most important work being done in the fields of biology and psychology and the interface of mind, body. Everything that she's done up until now and published, and indeed the work that she continues to do, has shaped everything within my daily routines, within my work routines, within my athletic routines. And we probably shouldn't be surprised by the fact that Dr.Crum works on all these things. She's not only an incredibly accomplished tenured research professor, she's also a clinical psychologist and she was also a division one athlete and an elite gymnast at one period in her life. So she really walks the walk in terms of understanding what mindsets are and applying them in different aspects of life. I'm sure you're going to learn a ton from this conversation as did I, and come away with many, many actionable items that you can apply in your own life. In fact, as we march into today's conversation, you might want to just put in the back of your mind, the question, what is my mindset about blank? So for instance, ask yourself, what is my mindset about stress? What is my mindset about food? What is my mindset about exercise? What is my mindset about relationships of different kinds? Because in doing that, you'll be in a great position to extract the best of the information that Dr. Crum presents, and indeed to adapt those mindsets in the way that is going to be most beneficial for you. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science, and science related tools to the general public. And keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor, is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics that are ideal for the particular brain states that you want to be in. The term nootropic means smart drug, and it is not a term that I like because there is no such thing as a universally useful smart drug. The reason for that, is that our brain can be creative. We can be focused, we can be good at task switching. And each of those different things, creativity, focus and task switching, involves different neurochemicals in different states of mind and body. So the notion that there's one best nootropic is just not accurate. There's just no way that could possibly be. Thesis understands this. And for that reason, designs custom nootropics that are designed to bring your brain and body into the states that you want, and that are specifically designed to your neurochemistry. They use only the highest quality ingredients, many of which I've talked about before on the podcast. Things like DHA, Gingko Biloba, phosphatidylserine, Alpha-GPC, is one that I particularly like, and is in several of the formulations that are customized for me. However, Gingko Biloba, which has a lot of research to support it and is well tolerated by many people, doesn't work well for me, it actually gives me headache. So that one is not included in any of the custom formulations that Thesis has made, particularly for me. Thesis has this tremendous asset, which is that they give you the ability to try several different blends over the course of a month and discover which nootropics work best for your unique brain chemistry and genetics. So the formulas that work for me, may not be the best ones for you and vice versa. But in a short period of time, you can dial in the exact nootropic formulas for the states of mind and body that you want to be in. I've been using Thesis for close to six months now, and I can confidently say that their nootropics have been a total game changer. I love the motivation formula, I also like the energy formula. I use those for different things, it turns out, but I love those. And I use their logic formula and their clarity formula that they've customized for me. In addition to their personalization, Thesis takes it a step further, they'll offer you a free consultation with a brain coach to help optimize your experience with the nootropics and dial in the best formulas for you. To get your own personalized nootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take their brief three minute quiz, and Thesis will send you four different formulas to try in your first month. That's takethesis.com/huberman, and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is also brought to us by Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that our visual system has to contend with a huge number of different challenges, not the least of which is when we go from a very bright, sunny spot outside into the shade, our visual system has to adapt in order for us to continue to see clearly. Many sunglasses out there just don't allow that adaptation to occur in a seamless way. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed with all of the biology of the visual system in mind, so that you always see things with crystal clarity, no matter what environment you're in. They also have a terrific aesthetic. They have many, many different styles to choose from. So their eyeglasses can be worn to dinner, or out to lunch or to work. Their sunglasses can be worn essentially anywhere. They're very stylish and they were designed for performance. They won't slip off your face if you get sweaty, indeed, you can wear them while running or while cycling. They're really terrific, they're really versatile. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, go to Roka that's R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code Huberman, to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's Roka, R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyze the data from your blood and DNA, to help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done. For the simple reason, that many of the things that impact your immediate and long-term health, can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get a window into how your genes are impacting your health in the short and long term, and the various things that you should do in order to adjust your health in the right direction. Now, one of the major issues with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, is you get numbers back. And you learn whether or not your lipids or your hormones, et cetera, are within the proper range or not. But there aren't a lot of directives about what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes all of that very easy. They have a personalized dashboard that allows you to, of course, see the numbers that come back to you and to make various changes in nutrition, various changes in exercise, various changes in all sorts of lifestyle factors, that can bring those numbers into range. And so, if you have a particular value for a particular metabolic factor or hormone or so forth, you click on that, and it will actually bring up the full menu of things that you can do in order to adjust that factor into the ranges that you like, all based on quality peer reviewed research. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code, Huberman at checkout. And now, my conversation with Dr. Alia Crum. Great to have you here. - Great to be here. - Yeah, for the record, it's Alia Crum, but you go by Allie, correct? - That is correct. - Right, Dr. Allie Crum. - Or just Allie. - Okay, great. Well, I've been looking forward to talking to you for a long time. Just to start off, you've talked a lot and worked a lot on the science of mindsets. Could you define for us what is a mindset, and what sort of purpose does it serve. - Of course, yeah. Mindsets have been described or defined in a lot of ways. We define mindsets as core beliefs or assumptions that we have about a domain or category of things, that orient us to a particular set of expectations, explanations and goals. So that's kind of jargony, [chuckles], a little. I can distill it down for you. So mindsets are an assumption that you make about a domain. So take stress, for example. The nature of stress. What's your sort of core belief about that? And mindsets that we've studied about stress, or do you view stresses enhancing good for you, or do you view it as debilitating and bad for you? Those mindsets, those core beliefs, orient our thinking, they change what we expect will happen to us when we're stressed, how we explain the occurrences that happen or unfold when we're stressed, and also change our motivation for what we engage in when we're stressed. So we have mindsets about many things, mindsets about stress, mindsets about intelligence as Carol Dweck's work has shown. Mindsets about food, mindsets about medicine, you name it. It's sort of distilling down those core assumptions that really shape and orient our thinking in action. - I've heard you say before, that mindsets simplify life in some way, by constraining the number of things that we have to consider. And it sounds to me like we can have mindsets about many things as, as you said. What are some different mindsets? I think many people are familiar with our colleague, Carol Dweck's notion of growth mindset. That if we're not proficient at something, that we should think about not being proficient yet. That we are on some path to proficiency. But what are some examples of mindsets, and how early do these get laid down, or do we learn them from our parents? Maybe if you could just flesh it out a bit for us in terms of what you've observed in your own science or your own life. - Yeah, sure, so I think it's important with Carol Dweck's work. A lot of people kind of get focused on growth, motivation and all these things, but her work really originated from thinking about, what she called as implicit theories or core beliefs about the nature of intelligence or ability, right? So do you believe that your baseline levels of intelligence or your abilities, are fixed, static, set throughout the rest of your life? Or do you believe that they can grow and change? Now, those are over-simplified generalizations about the nature of intelligence. And the reality is as it always is complex, and it's a bit of both and it's all the things. But as humans, we need these simplifying systems to help us understand a complex reality. So those assumptions that we jumped to, oh, intelligence is fixed or intelligence is malleable, they help us to simplify this complex reality, but they're not in consequential, right? They matter in shaping our motivation. And as she has shown, if you have the mindset, that intelligence is malleable, you're motivated to work harder, to grow your intelligence. If you have a setback in your learning, you think, okay, there's something there that I can grow and learn and build from. If you have the mindset that it's fixed, you know, why work harder at math, if you don't think you're good at it. So, in retrospect, it's pretty clear how these mindsets can affect our motivation. What our work has and to do is to expand the range of mindsets that we are studying, focused on, and also understand and expand the range of effects that they have. So by and large, we focused on mindsets in the domain of health and health behaviors. So I mentioned mindsets about stress, we've also looked at mindsets about food and healthy eating. So do you have the mindset that foods that are good for you, healthy foods are disgusting and depriving, or do you have the mindset that healthy foods are indulgent and delicious? Now, it could be a variety of different foods. You might have different thoughts about different healthy foods. But generally people, at least in our culture in the West, have this view that, stress is debilitating, healthy foods are disgusting and depriving. And those mindsets, whether or not they're true or false, right or wrong, they have an impact. And they have an impact, not just through the motivational mechanisms, that Dweck and others have studied, but as our lab has started to reveal, they also shape physiological mechanisms by changing what our bodies prioritize and prepare to do. So those are just two examples. Mindsets about stress, mindsets about food we've looked at. Mindsets about exercise, do you feel like you're getting enough, or do you feel like you're getting an insufficient amount to get the health benefits you're seeking. Mindsets about illness. Do you view cancer as an unmitigated catastrophe, or do you view cancer as manageable or perhaps even an opportunity. We've looked at mindsets about symptoms and side effects. Do you view side effects as a sign that the treatment is harmful, or do you view side effects as a sign that the treatment is working? Again, these are sort of core beliefs or assumptions you have about these domains or categories, but they matter because they're shaping, they're synthesizing and simplifying the way we're thinking, but they're also shaping what we're paying attention to, what we're motivated to do, and potentially even how our bodies respond. - Yeah, I'd love to talk about this notion of power of the mindset shaping how our bodies respond. And maybe as an example of this, if you could share with us this now famous study that you've done with the milkshake study, if you wouldn't mind sharing the major contours of that study and the results, because I think they're extremely impressive and they really speak to this interplay between mindset and physiology. - Certainly, yeah. This was a study that I ran as a graduate student at Yale university. I was working with Kelly Brownell and Peter Salovey. Peter Salovey had done a lot of work on really coining the term emotional intelligence, studying [mumbles]. - He's now the president of Yale, right? - He's now the president of Yale, yes. - So he's done well. - He's done well for himself and for the university and society. And Kelly Brownell, who was doing a lot of research on food and obesity. And I had come in doing some previous work on mindsets about exercise and placebo effects in exercise, and was in this sort of food domain and this emotions and food domain. And it really occurred to me, that there was a very simple question that hadn't been probed yet. And that was, do our beliefs about what we're eating change our body's physiological response to that food, holding constant, the objective nutrients of that thing. So that question might sound outrageous at first, but it's really not outrageous if you're coming from a place of having studied in depth, placebo effects. Placebo effects, in medicine, at least, are these sort of a robust demonstration in which simply taking a sugar pill, taking nothing, under the impression that it's a real medication that might relieve your asthma, reduce your blood pressure and boost your immune system, can lead to those physiological effects even though there's no objective nutrients. And we have more evidence on placebo effects than we have for any other drug. - Really? - Because of the clinical trial process, in which all new drugs and medications are required to outperform a placebo effect. So we have a lot of data on the placebo effect. Now, you know, we can get nuance there. We don't have a lot of data comparing the placebo effect to doing nothing, which is important for distilling mindset effects or belief effects from sort of natural occurring changes in the body. But anyways, going back to this question, it was like, all right, we've moved from medications solving our health crisis to behavioral medicine solving our health crisis, increase people's exercise, get them to eat better. To what degree are these things influenced by our mindsets or beliefs about them. So to test this question, we ran a seemingly simple study. This was done at the Yale center for clinical and translational research. And we brought people into our lab under the impression that we were designing different milkshakes with vastly different metabolic concentrations, nutrient concentrations, that were designed to meet different metabolic needs of the patrons of the hospital, right? So, you're going to come in, you're going to taste these milkshakes, and we're going to measure your body's physiological response to them. This was within subjects design. So it was the same people consuming two different milkshakes, two different time points separated by a week. And at one time point, they were told that they were consuming this really high fat, high caloric indulgent milkshake. It was like 620 calorie, super high fat and sugar. The other time point, they were told that it was a low fat, low calorie, sensible sort of diet shake. In reality, it was the exact same shake. It was right in the middle. It was like 300 calories, moderate amount of fats and sugars. And we were measuring their body's gut peptide response to this shake. And in particular, we are looking at the hormone ghrelin. So as you know, ghrelin, medical experts call it the hunger hormone, rises and ghrelin signal, you know, seek out food. And then theoretically, in proportion, the amount of calories you consume, ghrelin levels drops signaling to the brain. Okay, you don't need to eat so much anymore, you can stop eating, and also revving up the metabolism to burn the nutrients that were just ingested. What we found in this study was that, when people thought they were consuming the high fat high calorie indulgent milkshake, in response to the shake, their ghrelin levels dropped at a three-fold rate stronger than when they thought they were consuming the sensible shake. So, essentially their bodies responded as if they had consumed more food, even though it was the exact same shake at both time points. So this was really interesting and important for two reasons, really. One was that it was, to my knowledge, one of the first studies to show any effects of just believing that you're eating something different on your physiology. Lots of studies have shown that believing you're eating different things changes your tastes and even your satisfaction and fullness after. But this shows that it has a metabolic or a physiological component. But the second piece was really important as well. And especially for me, this was one study that really transformed the way I think about how I approach eating. And that was the manner in which it affected our physiology, was somewhat counterintuitive. So, I had gone in thinking, the better mindset to be in when you eat is that you're eating healthy, right? Like, you know, just makes sense. Like placebo effects think you're healthy, you'll be healthy, you know. But that was a far too simplistic way of thinking about it. And in fact, it was the exact opposite because thinking that they were eating, when these participants thought they were eating sensibly, their bodies left them still feeling physiologically hungry, right? Not satiated. Which could potentially be corresponding to slower metabolism and so forth. So, if you're in the interest of maintaining or losing weight, what's the best mindset to be in? It's to be in a mindset that you're eating indulgently. That you're having enough food, that you're getting enough. And at least in that study, we showed that has a more adaptive effect on ghrelin responses. - So interesting. And especially interesting to me as a neuroscientist who has worked on aspects of the nervous system that are involved in conscious perception, like vision and motion and color perception and so forth. But also, our lab has worked and is increasingly working on autonomic functions that are below our conscious detection. In this case, a lie about how much something these milkshakes contained affected a subconscious process, because I have to imagine that the ghrelin pathway is not one that I can decide, oh, this particular piece of chocolate is going to really reduce my ghrelin 'cause it's very nutrient rich, as opposed to one, if you told me that a different piece of chocolate, for instance, is a low calories or sugar free chocolate or something that sort. The ghrelin pathway, however, it seems based on your data, that the ghrelin pathway is susceptible to faults, which is incredible. But then again, there must be crossover between conscious thought and these subconscious or kind of autonomic pathways. So, it's really remarkable. It raises a question that I just have to ask, because it increasingly, so I'm involved in online discussions and social media, in one of the most barbed wire topics out there, and that's being generous, is this topic of which diet or nutrients are best? You've got people who are strictly plant-based, you've got people who are omnivores, you got people who are carnivores. You have every variation. You have intermittent fasting, also called time restricted feeding. And it seems like, once a group and it plugs into a particular mode of eating that they feel works for them, for whatever reason, energy wise, mentally, maybe they're looking at their blood profiles, maybe they're not. But once they feel that it works for them, each camp seems to tout all the health benefits and how great they feel. Could it be that mindset effects are involved there? That people are finding the nutritional program that they feel brings them the most enrichment of life, but also nutrients. And that their health really is shifting in a positive direction, but not necessarily because of the food constituents, but because of the community, and the ideas and the reinforcement. - Yeah, and the belief that this is the right way of doing something. I think, a hundred percent it has something to contribute. I'm not going to weigh in on the debate. What I will most certainly weigh in on, is the notion that, look going back to the placebo effect, right? We have a outdated understanding of what that is, which is based on this randomized controlled trial, you compare a drug to a placebo. If the drug works better than the placebo, you say, great, the drug works. If the drug doesn't outperform the placebo, you say the drug doesn't work. That's really over simplified. It's a good test for the specific efficacy of the drug. It's not a good test for understanding the total impact of that drug. Because in the reality of things, if a drug outperforms a placebo, then you start prescribing it. But the reality is, that the total effect of that drug, is a combined product of the specific chemical attributes of that drug and whatever's going on in the placebo effect, which is, at least from our perspective, its beliefs, its social context, and it's your body's natural ability to respond to something. So, that's in the placebo effect example. The same is true for everything we do or consume. So when it comes to what diet you're eating, both are true. It does matter what it is and it matters what you think about that diet and what others around you in our culture think about that diet. Because those social contexts inform our mindsets, our mindsets interact with our physiology in ways that produce outcomes that are really important. So let's not get dualistic and say, it's either all in the mind or not in the mind. Let's also not be unnecessarily combative and say, oh, it should be all plant-based or keto or whatever. It's all of those things are a combined product of what you're actually doing, and what you're thinking about. If you believe in it, if you don't, if you're skeptical, or in some cases, you think you should be eating a certain way and then you don't live up to that. It might have even an adverse effect because of the stress and the anxiety associated with that. - Very interesting. Along the lines of belief effects, could we call these belief effects or mindsets? - Sure, yeah. - Is there a difference between these what I'm calling belief effects and placebo effects? I mean, are placebo effects distinctly different from mindset effects or they more or less the same thing. - They're related? So I think placebo effects, maybe should be reserved for the conditions in which you're actually taking a placebo, which is inactive substance. When you get out of that sort of placebo versus drug realm, and you start looking at placebo effects, I use quotes with my hands here, in behavioral health, the term kind of becomes confusing because you're not-- In the milkshake study, we didn't give people a placebo milkshake, right? We just changed what they believed about it. So, how I like to think about it is that, placebo effects, as they're traditionally construed are made up of three things. It's the social context, mindsets or beliefs, and the natural physiological processes in the brain and body that can produce the outcomes. And so, we could just call them belief effects because the beliefs are triggering the physiological processes, and the beliefs are shaped by the social context. Does that make sense? - It makes sense. - Yeah. - Yeah, there was a paper a year or two ago published in science magazine about brain regions involved in psychogenic fever. That if people or you can actually do this in animal models to think that they are sick, you get a genuine one to three degree increase in body temperature, one to three degrees Fahrenheit increase in body temperature is pretty impressive. - Yeah. - And I guess it plays into symptomology generally. So, I'm a believer in belief effects. - Just say that, you know, the term that we use in our field is nocebo effect for that, which is sort of the placebo's ugly stepsister. It's when negative beliefs cause negative consequences. So, you are told you will have-- It's very well demonstrated that when people are told about certain side effects, they're far more likely to experience those side effects. When people think that they're sick or going to get sick, sometimes that can create the physiological symptoms. And there's various debates. That it's not only that physiology changes, it's also that your attention changes. So we're experiencing things like fatigue and headache and upset stomach all the time. And then when you take a drug and somebody says, you're going to feel fatigue and headache, you start noticing that you're tired, and that headaches attributed to the drug. So, some of the mechanisms are attention, and some of them are real changes in physiology. - I'd love for you to tell us about the hotel workers study. - Yeah, sure. - I know you get asked these questions all the time, but I find just these results also amazing. - Yeah, no, I think that this is a really good example of this phenomenon, right? That the total effect of anything is a combined product of what you're doing and what you think about what you're doing. So this was a study that I ran with Ellen Langer way back when I was an undergrad actually. We started this study. Ellen Langer is a professor of psychology at Harvard, and she's done a lot of really fascinating work on her flavor of mindfulness, which is distinct from a more Eastern mind, Buddhist sort of mindfulness-based work. She actually was the one who said to me originally, you know, I was an athlete at the time. I was an ice hockey player and I was training constantly. And one day I'll never forget it. She said, you know the benefit of exercise is just a placebo, right? And I was like, well, that's outrageous. Ellen's known for saying very provocative, but also very wise things. And that statement really got me thinking about that. So we designed this study together and that was to look at, how would you study? If the benefits of exercise were a placebo, how would you even test that? Because, what does it mean to give a placebo exercise? So we sort of flipped it on its head. And we found a group of people who were getting a lot of exercise, but weren't aware of it, that they were, right? So this, we settled on a group of hotel housekeepers. So these are women working in hotels who were on their feet all day long, pushing carts, changing linens, climbing stairs, cleaning bathrooms, vacuuming. It was clear that they were getting above and beyond at least the surgeon General's requirements at that time, or which were to accumulate 30 minutes of moderate physical activity per day. But what was interesting was when we went in and surveyed them and asked them, Hey, how much exercise do you think you're getting? A third of them said, zero. I don't get any exercise. And the average response was like a three, on a scale of zero to 10. So it's clear that even though these women were active, they didn't have that mindset, right? They had the mindset that their work was just work. Hard, maybe thankless work that led them to feel tired and in pain at the end of the day. But not that it was good for them, that it was good exercise. So what we did was we took these women and we randomized them into two groups, and we told half of them that their work was good exercise. In this case, it was true factual information. We oriented them to the surgeon General's guidelines. We oriented them to the benefits that they should be receiving. And then we had measured them previously, on their physiological metrics, like weight and body fat and blood pressure. And we came back four weeks later and we tested them again. And what we found was that these women, even though they hadn't changed anything in their behavior, at least that was detectable to us. They didn't work more rooms, they didn't start doing pull-ups or push-ups in between cleaning hotel rooms, as far as I'm concerned. They didn't report any changes in their diet, but they had benefits to their health. So they lost weight. They decreased their systolic blood pressure by about 10 points on average. And they started feeling better about themselves, their bodies and their work, not surprisingly. - That's amazing. How do we conceptualize that result in light of all of our efforts to get more out of exercise, right? Because earlier you mentioned it from the milkshake study and our perceptions about nutrient density, that the right message that is actually a little bit counterintuitive. That if you think, oh, this is very low calorie, nutrient sparse, then it's good for me in the context of losing weight for instance. But it turns out the opposite is true, because as you told us, the body responds differently when you think something is nutrient dense and can actually suppress hunger more. So, in light of this result, if I were to say, okay, my current understanding of the literature is that getting somewhere between 150 and 180 minutes per week of cardiovascular exercise is probably a good idea for most people. If I tell myself that it's not just a good idea, but that it's extremely effective in lowering my blood pressure and maintaining healthy weight, et cetera, et cetera, according to these results, it will have an enhanced effect on those metrics. Is that right? - Definitely. So this is a really important point, because what this reveals is that we have to be more thoughtful in how we go about motivating people to exercise or teaching people about the benefits. Our current approach is just to basically tell people, writ large, here's what you need to get. Here's what you need to get good for. To get enough exercise to receive the health benefit. The problem with that approach is that, most people aren't meeting those benefits yet, they aren't meeting those requirements yet. And the risk with that is that, well, the intention with that is to motivate them because public health officials think, well, if I just tell people you need to get more exercise because it's good for you, they'll do it. We know now that that doesn't work, that these guidelines are not motivational. They don't change our behavior. And what our work adds to that, is that not only is it not motivational, it also creates potentially a mindset that makes people worse off than they were without knowing about the guidelines. So again, it's tricky. I'm not saying that mindset is everything. Certainly exercise is good for us and is helpful for us. It's one of the things we have the best data on. So I'm not saying, oh, exercises all a placebo. What I am saying is that, we need to be more mindful about how do we motivate people to exercise, but how do we help people to actually reap the benefits of the exercise they are already doing? Now, Octavia, who is a grad student in my lab, ran a number of interesting studies along these lines. One in which she looked at three nationally representative data sets, which had this interesting question in them, which was how much exercise do you get relative to others? Do you get about the same, a little more, a lot more, do you get a little less or a lot less, right? So, the audience, your listeners, you could all answer this. And then in these datasets, what she did, was she had pulled from data that tracked death rates over the next 21 years. And a couple interesting things revealed themselves. One was that, the correlations between these perceptions of exercise relative to others, and people's actual exercise as measured through accelerometer data, as well as more rigorous sort of what did you do today, kind of data. Those don't correlate much at all. - People lie. - Well, people lie, but also... - Or misperceive. - ...They misperceive. Or who's to say, it's misperceiving, everything's relative, right? I used to do triathlons very seriously. So if you were to ask me now, I feel like I'm totally inactive, right? Because I'm not doing anything near what I used to. And if that's my focus set, right? I feel like I'm not exercising much. But if I think about, you know, compared to other people, given what I know about national representative statistics, and I could feel like, oh, I'm getting a lot, right? So you can see how these perceptions are decoupled from objective reality. And what we found in these studies, is that, that one question mattered in some cases, more than objective activity, but in all cases controlling for objective activity and predicting death rates. And in one of the samples, it was a 71% higher risk of death rate. You know, if people rated themselves as feeling like they were getting less activity than others. - Wow. That's a big deal. - It's a big deal. And again, that study is cross-sectional, longitudinal, it was not experimental. But combined, these really sort of coalesced to say, Hey, this is important too, right? Like, let's figure out ways to be active and get people active, but let's also not make people feel horrible about themselves when they're not getting enough. And going back to the hotel study again, I mentioned that I did that at a time when I was a division one ice hockey player at the time. We were training all the time. And I was in an unhealthy mindset about that, I never felt like I was getting enough. I would come off a two hour practice into a weightlifting session. And then I would get on the elliptical for 30 minutes, 'cause I thought I had to do that also. My teammates who were with me at the time could attest to that. And so, that study was really helpful for me, to realize that I needed pay attention, not just to what I was doing, but also take care of my mindset about that. And I think the essence is how do you get people to feel like they're getting enough? It's a sense of enoughness that really matters. - Yeah, I can see the dilemma because you don't want people thinking that exercise and its positive effects are so potent that they can get away with a three minute walk each day. And that they're good because most likely they are not. But again, you don't want them to be so back on their heels psychologically that they don't even do that or that they never exceed that by very much. But it seems like the message from the milkshake study and what we're talking about now in terms of exercise would be to really communicate to the general public that food has a potency, even healthy foods have a potency to give us energy, to fuel our immune system and endocrine system, et cetera. And that exercise has a remarkable potency, and that that potency can be enhanced by believing in or understanding that potency. - Exactly. - Is that an accurate way to state it? - Totally, that's exactly right. And that's where I really feel like we need to push. And what I try to do in our research, is to not just show, oh, mindset matters, isn't that interesting? But it both matter, right? Both exercise and what you think about it matter. Both what you eat and how you think about what you eat matter. And so, we really, as individuals and as a society need to work on, what is the right way to cultivate both behaviors and mindsets about those behaviors that serve us? And in the food context, this-- Again, that milkshake study really changed me on a personal level, because I had been somebody who was constantly trying to restrain my eating, right? I wanted to maintain or lose weight, look fit. And so, I was like, well, I should diet and I should have low calorie, low carb. Low this, low that. But what that was doing, was putting me into this constant mindset of restraint. And what that study suggested, was that that mindset was potentially counteracting any benefit or any objective effects of the restrained diet. Because my brain was saying, okay, you're restraining. Maybe my body was responding to that. But the brain was also saying, eat more food, stay hungry 'cause you need to survive. And so, the answer isn't, oh, we'll throw everything into the wind and just drink indulgent milkshakes all day long. The answer is, eat healthy foods, right? Based on the latest science and what we know to be true about nutrients and our body's response to them, but try to do so in a mindset indulgence, a mindset of satisfaction, a mindset of enjoyment, right? That is really the trick. And that's what I at least try to do in my own life. - I love that, and as I get more involved in the anti-public facing health communications, this comes up again and again, you know, how should we conceptualize our behavior? How should we think about all these options that are offered to us? And I'm excited that the potency of mindsets are coming through again and again. So, I have a question about this. I don't know if this study has ever been done, but a lot of these mindset effects are something that years ago, I felt I did vis-a-vis sleep. Because I was in graduate school, and as a postdoc, and even as an undergraduate, I had so much work to do that I decided I would sleep when I was "dead". Not a good idea from what we know. However, I found that a couple nights of minimal sleep or even an all-nighter and I could do pretty well. Eventually it would catch up with me. Has there ever been a study exploring whether or not the effects of sleep deprivation can be impacted by these mindset effects? Because over the years, I keep learning more and more about how much sleep I need and I've really emphasized it, but I do feel much better when I'm getting it. But as new parents know, or students know or athletes know or anyone that lives a normal life find sometimes that they don't get a good night's sleep. Would believing that we can tolerate that and push through it and function just fine, and that it's not going to kill us or give us Alzheimer's. Could that help us deal with a poor night's sleep or even two or chronic sleep deprivation? - Certainly I would guess. There's been one study to my knowledge that's tested that. [indistinct] and colleagues, and they looked at-- They had people come in and they gave them sort of a, I think it was a sham sort of EEG test to figure out how-- This was done a number of years ago. Now we actually have devices to test this, but there's was this sham test. And then they gave people fake feedback about the quality of their sleep and how it had been the night before. And they also asked the participants how they felt about their sleep. And essentially what they found was that this sham feedback, if they were told that they had gotten and let lower quality sleep led to deficits in variety of cognitive tasks. And that was sort of decoupled from their actual [laughs] qualities of sleep, at least as self-reported. So that's one study that attest to this, I think certainly, I would bet a lot of money, I haven't run those myself, but that your mindsets can push around your cognitive functioning, physiological effects of sleep. But once again, it's not all or nothing, right? There are real important benefits of sleep, and how far we can push around that through our mindset, is an open question. - You know what? The result that you mentioned is really interesting because a lot of people use these sleep trackers now. They're using rings or wristbands. In fact, my lab has worked pretty closely with a company that they supplied us data on how well people are sleeping, and you get a score, people get the score back. When they see that score, they might think based on these results, oh, my recovery score, my sleep score is poor. I shouldn't expect much from myself today, or it makes sense that my memory would be going. For this reason, and I'll probably lose a few friends for saying this, but hopefully I'll gain a few as well. That's why I like to just do a subjective score for myself. If I wake up in the morning, I just decide, okay, did I sleep well or not? I don't like seeing a number. I don't like getting a readout from a device. That's me, I know a lot of people like it, and they can be very useful. But gosh, it seems that these belief effects are weaving in at all levels. I'd love for us to talk about stress, because your lab has worked extensively on this. And if you would, could you tell us at some point about the study that you've done about informing people about the different effects of stress. But also, if there's an opportunity, some takeaways about how we could each conceptualize stress in ways that would make it serve us better as opposed to harm us and our mental and physical performance. - Great, yeah, so I'd come off the heels of doing some research in exercise and diet and finding these provocative and also counterintuitive effects with respect to how we should try to motivate people, right? And, as I was thinking about this, and this grouping of going from medicines to saving us to behaviors to saving us, and how those behaviors might be influenced by mindsets. The obvious next thing to think about with stress, right? Because it's like, okay, well you want to be healthier and fix your diet, fix your exercise and stress less. And so I started doing some digging into the nature of stress and a couple things were clear. One was that the public health message was very clear, right? That stress was bad, right? Unmitigated and harmful on our health, our productivity, our relationships, our fertility, our cognition, you name it, right? And the messages that were out there, by and large over-simplified messages focused on the damaging consequences of stress. But as you know, if you actually dive deeper into the literature on stress and the origins of stress, what you find is that, the literature like most literatures is not so clear cut. And in fact, there's a large amount of evidence to support the fact that the experience of stress, meaning encountering adversity or challenge in one's goal related efforts, does not have to be debilitating. And in many cases, the body's response was designed to enhance our ability to manage at those moments, right? So some research showing that stress narrows our focus, increases our attention, speeds up the rate at which we're able to process information. There was some research out there showing this phenomenon of physiological toughening, the process by which the release of catabolic hormones and the stress response recruit or activate anabolic hormones, which help as you know build our muscles, build our neurons, to help us grow and learn. And there was a whole body of emerging research on post-traumatic growth or this phenomenon in which even the experience of the most traumatic stressors, the most chronic and enduring stressors, could lead not to destruction, but in fact, to the exact opposite, to an enhanced sense of connection with our values, connection to others, sense of joy and passion for living. And so, I found that to be interesting. And my work since then has been not to try to argue that stress is enhancing and not debilitating, but try to point out that the true nature of stress is a paradox. The true nature of stress is manifold and complex, and lots of things can happen. But to question, what's the role of our mindset about stress in shaping our response to stress. So some work had already been done looking at your perception of the stressor, right? So, do you view a stressor like a challenging exam or a health diagnosis as a challenge or a threat. And that had shown pretty convincingly that when you view stressors more as a challenge, less as a threat, that your brain and body responds more adaptively. What our question was, was to take the sort of psychological construal one step higher in abstraction. So not just the stressor, but the nature of stress, right? At that core level, do you view stress as something that's bad, is going to kill us and therefore should be avoided, or do you view some stress as natural and something that's going to enhance us? And so, we set out to design a series of studies to test the extent to which these mindsets about stress mattered. We first, this again was with Peter Salovey and Shawn Achor, originally. We designed a measure to test people's mindsets about stress. Simple questions like, what extent do you believe or agree or disagree with statements like, stress enhances my performance and productivity. Stress heightens my vitality and growth, things like that. And we found in a number of correlational studies that a more enhancing stress mindset was linked to better health outcomes, better wellbeing and higher performance. So then we set out to see if we could change people's mindsets. And in our first test of this, we decided to do so by creating these multimedia films that showcased research, anecdotes, facts about stress, all true, but oriented towards one mindset or the other, right? So you can imagine one set of films showed basically the messages that were out there in the public health context. The other showed, Hey, you know, stress has been linked to these things, but in fact, the body's stress response was designed to do this. Did you know it could do that? And we had empowering images like LeBron James making the free-throw in the final minute versus missing it, right? So all of these things are true possibilities but oriented to two different mindsets about stress. - So either people saw a video that basically made it seem like stress will diminish you, crush you, reduce you, or a video very similar, stress will grow you, bring out your best, and maybe even take you to heightened levels of performance that you've never experienced before. - Exactly, exactly. So, yeah, examples in the sports, we also had like true leaders emerge in the moments of greatest stress, you know, Churchill. And so, all those examples are out there for both the enhancing nature and the debilitating nature. And our question was, does orienting people to different mindsets change how they respond to stress? So this study was done in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. We worked with UBS, a financial service company that was undergoing pretty massive amounts of layoffs. So these employees were stressed about being laid off. They were taking on more pressure. It was just a tough time. And we randomized them into three conditions. And this was all pre-work before getting training on stress, but the three different conditions, some watched no videos, some watched the stressful crushy videos and some watched the stress could enhance you videos. And what we found was that just-- It was a total of nine minutes of videos over the course of the week, led to changes in their mindsets about stress, which led to changes in their physiological symptoms associated with stress. So people who watched the enhancing films had fewer backaches, muscle tension, insomnia, racing heart, and so forth. And they also reported performing better at work compared to those who watched the debilitating videos. Now interestingly, we didn't make anyone worse with the debilitating videos. - Wow, that's good. - Which was good. We were told that the IRB we didn't expect that because that message was already out there, that's what they were already seeing, that wasn't new to them. It was more of this enhancing perspective that turned out to be inspiring. - I love that study, and I know we both have friends and ties in the special operations community through just sort of happenstance and maybe we'll get into that a little later, but a good friend from that community always says, there are only three ways to go through life at any moment, which is either back on your heels, flat-footed or forward center of mass. And I said, well, well, what's the key to forward center of mass? And he said, "Stress is what places you "in forward center of mass," meaning leaning forward and into challenge. And I know that you've actually looked at that community and it does really seem like that's a mindset that either they have going in or that they cultivate through the course of their training. But this notion that stress is what puts us in forward motion, is true physiologically, right? I mean, adrenaline's major role is to place us into a moment of, or bias us towards action, that's why we tremble. It's the body trying to initiate action. But actually this is probably a good opportunity. If there was anything interesting to extract from the study on SEAL teams, what was it? - Yeah, no, I loved working with the SEALs. And one of the interesting things we found, so we've studied this, measured this mindset in several different populations. And in every single one that we have tested so far, the average had been on the debilitating side of the scale. - People just saying stress is bad. - Stress is bad, right? Like with measures of growth and fixed mindsets about intelligence, people are in the middle, but oftentimes have a more positive mindsets about intelligence. That was not the case with stress, [chuckles]. It's still not the case. I'm trying to get the message out there. Except for this group of Navy SEALs. When they were actually recruit, so people who were going through basic training in order to become Navy SEALs. And we found that they on average had stresses enhancing mindset, perhaps not surprisingly, right? If you're going in to devote your whole life to being a Navy SEAL, you must have some inclination that stress is a source of strength for you. But what we found with them, we measured this at the beginning of their basic training, of buds training, and then looked at how well they succeeded through that program. So as you know, this is an extremely rigorous program. At the time it was only like 10 or 20% of trainees. - Still is, the numbers have never shifted from about that. No matter how hard pressures on the community change, the numbers are still about on average, about 15%. - Yeah, wow. So, what we found was that our measure predicted that rate. So people even within that range had a more stresses enhancing mindset were more likely to complete training, become a SEAL. They also had faster obstacle course times, and they were rated by their peers more positively. So, again, let's break this down, right? This doesn't mean, and people get this wrong sometimes. They think that I'm saying, that a stresses enhancing mindset means you should stress, right? Well, maybe SEALs do. But that's not what we're saying, right? Having a stresses enhancing mindset doesn't mean the stressor is a good thing, right? It doesn't mean it's a good thing that you have to go into combat and it's not pretty, right? It doesn't mean that getting a cancer diagnosis is a good thing or being an abject poverty is a good thing. These are not good things. But the experience of the stress associated with that, the challenge, the adversity, that experience can lead to and enhancing outcomes with respect to not just our cognition, but our health, our performance and our wellbeing. So that mindset, right? How does that work, right? Well, it works through a number of different pathways. One is that it changes fundamentally what we're motivated to do. So if you just imagine we're stressed about something, maybe a global pandemic, for example. - For instance. - For instance. And you think that stress is bad, then what's your motivation, right? Your motivation is to, well, first you get worried about the stress, right? Now not only do you have the pandemic, you're stressed about the stress of the pandemic. But second is, your reaction is typically to do one of two things. It's either to freak out and do everything you can to make sure that this doesn't affect you negatively, or to check out and say, oh, it's not a big deal. I'm not going to deal with that. You're basically in denial. So, people who have a stresses debilitating mindset and we've shown this in our research, tend to go to one of the other of those extremes. They freak out, or they check out, why? Because if stress is bad you need to either get rid of it and deal with it or it needs to not exist, right? If you have a stressors enhancing mindset, the motivation changes, right? Then the motivation is, how do I utilize the stress to realize the enhancing outcomes? What can we do here, right? To learn from this experience, to make us stronger, fitter, have better science and treatments for the future, deepen my relationships with others, improve my priorities and so forth, right? So the motivation changes, the affect around it changes, it doesn't make it easy to deal with. But what we've shown in our research is that, people who have a stresses enhancing mindset have more positive effect, not necessarily less negative effect, and it potentially changes physiology. We have a few studies that show that people who are inspired to adopt more enhancing mindsets, have more moderate cortisol response, and they have higher levels of DHA levels in response to stress. So, more work needs to be done on the physiology, but I'd love your take on the mechanisms through which that's possible. - Yes, and DHA of course is an anabolic hormone in both men and women. Very interesting, because we had a guest on this podcast. He actually he's a PhD scientist who runs the UFC Performance Training Institute, his name is Duncan French. And his graduate work at Yukon stores was very interesting. It was in exercise science and physiology. What he showed was that, if you could spike the adrenaline response... I think they did this through first time skydive or something like that. ...That testosterone went up. Now, this spits in the face of everything that we're told about stress and testosterone levels, right? And this has also been looked at in females with estrogen. Although of course, there's estrogen and testosterone, both males and females, but that's how they had designed the study. So it turns out that at least in the short term, that a very stressful event can raise anabolic hormones. And I think that people forget at a mechanistic level that adrenaline is epinephrin, and epinephrin is biochemically derived from the molecule dopamine. If you look at the pathway, and even just Google it and go images, you'll see that adrenaline is made from dopamine. And dopamine and these anabolic hormones they're sort of close cousins. They work together in the pituitary and hypothalamus. So it makes sense that one could leverage stress toward growth, and towards anibalism as opposed to cannibalism, which is not saying cannibalism as in eating other people, but catabolic processes, is I guess, the right way to refer to it. But what's again remarkable to me, is that all of these brain structures that control dopamine, epinephrin, testosterone and estrogen, they're all thought to be in the subconscious, meaning below our ability to flip a switch and turn them on or off. - [Alia] Right. - And yet mindset seemed to impact them. So I've all that to say, that there's a clear mechanistic basis by which this could all work. So on the one hand I'm surprised, because these are incredible results. On the other hand, I'm not surprised because there's a physiological substrate there that could readily explain them. - Yeah, and I think figuring out exactly how it works is really, [chuckles]. - We should do that. - We should do that. - We should collaborate. - Let's do it. - We've got common friends in both departments, so we should do it. - But I did want to mention, the way I think about mindset, and again, I think we need to study this. I'm not a neuroscientist, so I haven't looked at this, but this is something we could do. But the way I think about mindset, is that mindsets are kind of a portal between conscious and subconscious processes. They operate as a default setting of the mind, right? So, if sort of programmed in there, you have stress equals bad, right? That is going to be something maybe conscious, right? But it doesn't have to be conscious, right? People don't have to know their mindsets about stress until they're asked really. That's been programmed in through our upbringing, through public health messages and through media and other things. And it kind of sits there as an assumption in the brain, and the brain is then figuring out how should it respond to this situation? And if the assumption, the default, the programming is, stress is bad, that's going to, through our subconscious trigger, all the things that's like, okay, well, I need to rev up the things that protect me versus rev up the things that help me grow. And so, that's at least how I think about it. And what's cool about it is that, because it operates as a sort of portal, it communicates with more subconscious physiological processes, but it can also be accessed through our consciousness, right? So just talking about this, right? For your listeners, they're now invited to bring their stress mindsets up to the consciousness and say, what is my stress mindset? How am I thinking about stress? Can I reprogram that? Can I start to think about it as more enhancing? That takes a little bit of a conscious work potentially, but then once you do that, that can kind of operate in the background, influencing how your body responds and you don't have to say, okay, I'm stressed, I better tell my anabolic hormones. - Right, right. - That doesn't work that way. - No. - But these mindsets can help with the translational process. - I love the idea that mindsets are at the interface between the conscious and subconscious. And I think there's a lot to unpack there. But it clearly is the case, that the mindset, they sort of act as heuristics, right? And as we talked about earlier, they can limit what the number of things to focus on. Because one thing that is really stressful is trying to focus on everything all the time. I've been trying to navigate the public health around anything. The public health information around anything it's kind of overwhelming. As you mentioned for stress, you see a lot in the stresses will crush you, and then you can also find evidence that stress will grow you. How should we, the listeners, think about stress and what's the most adaptive way to think about stress? And should we talk about our stress? Should we not talk about our stress? Is there a short list of ways that we can cope with stress better? - Yeah. - I should be careful with the word cope. Is there a way that we can leverage stress to our advantage? - Great, yeah, and that's an important nuance in your language, which people have by and large come from a place of how do you manage stress? How do you cope with it? Which implies, how do you fight against it, right? - Vacation, massages, yoga classes. - Fight against or check out from it, right? - Exactly, exactly. - And yeah, the real challenge is, how do we leverage it? How do we utilize it? How do we work with it? And yeah, I have a lot of thoughts on this. The first and most important thing is to clarify our definition of stress. So I think people often associate-- The negative stress mindset is so insidious, that now people define stress with its negative consequences. So the first step is to decouple that, and to realize that stress is a neutral, right? Yet to be determined effect of experiencing or anticipating adversity in your goal related efforts. So let me unpack that a little more, you can be in the midst of it, or you could just be worried about something happening. That's one aspect. Second is, adversity or challenge, or something that's working against you. But the third piece is critical, and that is in your goal related efforts. What that means is that, we only stress about things we care about, things that matter to us. So this is really important, right? Because stress is linked with, it's the other side of the coin of things we care about, right? And so, I think that's the first thing to realize, right? That as humans, we stress because we care, and we don't stress about things we don't care about. So the simplified example I like to use is, you know, if Johnny was failing school, that wouldn't stress you out, unless Johnny was your son or you were Johnny, or you really cared about educating the Johnny's of the world, right? It only becomes stressful to the extent that you care about it. So, why are we trying to fight or run away or hide or merely cope with our stress or overcome it through our massages, when the stress is connected to the things we care about. So then the question becomes, okay, if that's true, how can I better utilize or leverage or respond to the inevitable stresses that we're going to experience? I'm not saying go out and seek out more stress. What I am saying is that, you're going to experience stress if you have any cares or values or passions and most all of us do. And so, then what do you do? And we've developed a three-step approach to adopting a stresses enhancing mindset, and briefly, the first step is to just acknowledge that you're stressed, to own it, see it, be mindful of it. The second step is to welcome it. Why would you welcome it? You welcome it because inherently in that stress is something you care about. So you're using it as an opportunity to reconnect to what is it that I care about here? And then the third step is to utilize the stress response, to achieve the thing that you care about, not spend your time, money, effort, energy, trying to get rid of the stress. Does that make sense? - Makes sense and I love it. As somebody who's laboratory studies, the physiological effects of stress, the effects that impressed me the most are for instance, the narrowing of visual attention, that it then drives a capacity to pass time more finely, which then drives the capacity to process information faster. It's almost like a superpower. - Right. - And yes, it can feel uncomfortable often, but I love the idea that, acknowledging it, embracing it and then understanding its power and leveraging that power. I think what I like so much about that framework is that the stress response is very generic. Unlike the relaxation response, we don't actually have to train up the stress response. So we all kind of get this as a freebie. And then it sounds like it's a question of what we end up doing with that. - Right, and Hans Selye, father of stress said himself, it's a nonspecific response, right? So it occurs, it's what you're doing with it. It's how you're channeling it. And yeah, like we talked about before, what most people do is they stress about the stress, which then over exacerbates it, or they check out from the stress, which leads to depression and anhedonia. Because by checking out from stress, you're also checking out from the things we care about. - And substance abuse. - Exactly. - Our colleague Anna Lembke, who also we had the good fortune of having as a guest on this podcast, talked a lot about this. I mean, so much of substance abuse, because she runs the addiction clinic over on the med side of campus. It takes over people's lives because of this increased stability to find a solution to the stress, that then eventually becomes its own stressor and its own problem. Well, I love that mindset and framework. I'd love for you to tell us just a bit about what you're up to right now, and what's most exciting to you now. If you are able or willing to talk about some of the work that's on the way. I saw a brief mention of something on your publications website of a paper about influencers, online influencers and nutrition. Now, that might not be the main thrust of what you're up to, but if you're able to tell us about it, sort of interesting given that a lot of the communication in and around this podcast takes place through social media. And I've kind of launched into this landscape now where constantly bombarded with health information and influencers, right? At the time I didn't even know until couple of [mumbles]. - You are one. - One could argue one way or the other, but what is the deal with influencers? Are they doing something good for health information or are they ruining the landscape? And don't try and protect my feelings. 'Cause I now know that stress is actually an asset. - Yeah, well, that work is part of a body of work that we've been sort of venturing into, which is to understand where do these mindsets come from, right? And I mentioned sort of public health entities as one source of, say our mindsets about stress. But I think that our mindsets are influenced by four different sources. First is our upbringing, how our parents talked about, things like when we're stressed or food or other things. Second is culture and media. So movies, podcasts, and now social media. Third is influential others. So what doctors say to us or close friends or peers. And fourth is your conscious choice. So, we talked about that a little. We have as humans have the ability to be mindful of, and to change our mindsets. But the social media and influencer stuff has been in part in attempt to understand where do our mindsets about things like healthy foods come from. And Brad Turnwald, who was a former grad student in my lab has done a series of really interesting studies on this, showing that, if you rate the nutritional quality of the top grossing movies in the last 20 years, or you look at the Instagram accounts of all the most influential people on Instagram, and you analyze the nutrition content of what they're eating, what he's shown is that, depending on the study, 70 to 90% of those movies or influencers would fail the legal standards for advertising in the UK. So they're putting out their nutrition contents that are, maybe not surprisingly, but undeniably unhealthy. And to me, that's interesting and important. It shows that where are we getting this mindset that those unhealthy foods are pleasurable, desirable. What's maybe even more interesting than that is some of the work that he and others in our lab have done to show that the ways people are talking about the foods they're eating really matter too. So generally what we've found is that when people talk about unhealthy foods, they use a language that connotes a sense of excitement, fun, sexiness, danger, indulgence, basically anything good and desirable, right? - These should be cookies, cakes, high sugar. - Exactly, like truly unhealthy foods. That's actually-- The objective, what? Helped me is it's challenging, but yeah, high fat, high sugar. - Yeah, I think there's pretty good agreement now that excessive sugar isn't good. - Yeah, and highly processed. - Yeah, highly processed, et cetera, et cetera. I think there's general consensus. I'm sure someone will-- If you're going to come after anyone come after me, I'll stand behind [mumbles]. - But on the other hand, when people are talking about, if they do, which, you know, healthy foods aren't portrayed in media, they aren't portrayed by influencers rarely ever. And when they are, they're often talked about with language that conveys a sense of deprivation. It's nutritious, but it's sort of boring, it's bland. It's not tasty. - Recovering from the holidays. Sort of the post-holiday reset, right? - Exactly, and this is really important because you're doing all this work trying, and others are doing all this work, trying to inform people about what actually is good for them. And meanwhile, there's this hurricane of other force that's telling people, that seeping in our minds, sure, those might be good for you, but those foods are not fun or sexy or indulgent or desirable in any way, shape or form, right? And it's also paid advertising for fast foods and sugary beverages and other things. So it's not surprising that we have this mindset, that healthy foods are the less desirable thing to eat because of those cultural and social forces. What our work has just tried to do is to reveal that, quantify it, as a way to say, all right, let's maybe be a little bit more mindful about how we talk about healthy foods. If you're a movie producer, can you be a little bit more mindful to showcase healthy and delicious foods and have the characters talk about them in ways that are more appealing? There's a lot of room for people who produce this content to have an impact, not just on what people do, but what they think about the foods they're eating. - It's really interesting. I hadn't thought about it until now, but it makes sense that any food that's packaging can be sold as, can be woven into a film or promoted by a celebrity influencer, not a health influencer per se, but a celebrity influencer because they'll get paid, right? It's part of the ecosystem that allows them an income and it feeds back on sales to the company. Whereas things that can't be commoditized, it's more difficult, right? It's hard to the whoever makes oranges and sells oranges is unlikely to promote oranges in a celebrity post or in a movie because oranges can be purchased from many, many sources. That there's no identifiable source of oranges as there is with a packaged food, for instance. - Yeah, but the interesting thing we found in those studies is that it wasn't driven by promoted content or branded content. There was some of that certainly, and yeah, all of the promoted and branded content is usually for processed high sugar foods. But 90% or more of these foods that they were showing were not promoted or branded. And so, there's a lot of flexibility in what these producers or influencers could show on their media. Although it goes both ways, right? It's not just the producers and the influencers responsibility, the public is reacting to this. And we showed too that people respond more positively, there are more likes on posts about unhealthy foods. So it's a sort of distasteful and in neck it, you know, it's a distasteful culture around healthy eating and we really have a lot to do to change it. - Yeah, it's dopamine circuits through and through, just the site of some very calorie dense, extremely tasty food drives those dopamine circuits. And I realized that there are people out there who derive the same sort of, or similar levels of pleasure from healthy foods. And that's a wonderful thing if one can accomplish that. So we just need more of that, is what it's sounds like. - Yeah, exactly. And that's what's really inspiring. To me at least, is that, it is possible, right? I mean, people think, oh, well, vegetables are just inherently less tasty than ice cream. And it's like, well, that's not necessarily true. Also it doesn't have to be a competition, right? I don't have to get my three-year-old to hate ice cream in order for it her like broccoli. There's a lot more I can be doing to help shape a more positive approach oriented, indulgent mindset around healthy, nutritious vegetables and fruits and other foods, right? In addition to having her like ice cream, right? And that's totally fine. - So, it's a really interesting study. When it's published, let me know and all. - Yeah, I think it was actually released this week, yeah. In JAMA Internal Medicine. - JAMA Internal, okay, great journal. I will definitely talk about it on social media and elsewhere, sounds very interesting. What else are you up to lately? My favorite question to ask any scientist or colleague by the way, is what are you most excited about lately? What are you up late thinking about and getting up early thinking about? - Yeah, so hands down, the thing I'm most [mumbles], well, I guess there's so many things. The thing that I'm most into right now, we're doing the most work in is, you know, I started by getting inspired by placebo effects in medicine. I did a long stint in placebo or belief like effects in behavioral health. And now we're moving back into medicine. So I'm really interested in looking at how we can work with active drugs and treatments, to make them better and make the experience of them better by instilling different mindsets. So, one study we did along those lines, we worked with kids or undergoing treatment for food allergies. So allergies to peanuts, for example, this was with Kari Nadeau, who's the head of the Stanford Allergy Center here. She has a great treatment for food allergies. Basically kids take gradually increasing doses of the thing they're allergic to, like peanuts. And over the course of six or seven months, these kids become less reactive to peanuts. And the problem with that treatment is it's really difficult because they're having all sorts of negative symptoms and side effects. These kids are getting itchy mouths and upset stomach, they're puking and it's scary, because they're literally eating the thing that they've been told might kill them, right? And what we did in the study, was we attempted to improve the experience and outcomes of that, by reframing mindsets about the symptoms and the side effects. So as it was being conducted before, the kids were told, look, these side effects are just an unfortunate by-product of this treatment, and you have to sort of endure them to get through it. But what we found in our conversation with Kari, was that the reality of those side effects was not so negative. In fact, they were mechanistically linked to the body learning how to tolerate peanuts or the allergen. And so what we did was we worked within a trial. They were all getting the treatment, but half of them were helped to see this more positive mindsets. That symptoms and side effects from this treatment, were a positive signal that the treatment was working and their bodies were getting stronger. And what we found was that that mindset led to reductions in anxiety, fewer symptoms, when at the highest doses and most interestingly of all, they had better outcomes. So based on immune markers, that were assign of the allergic tolerance, those who had this mindset throughout had better outcomes to the treatment. So that's just one example. I think, my goal is really to move us beyond the placebo versus drug, mindset versus behavior, to get to a place where we can blend them together and maximize the benefit of these treatments. So we're doing a lot of studies like that, you know, how can we improve treatment for cancer with different mindsets? We've done some work recently with the COVID-19 vaccine, and symptoms and side effects. So that's what I'm really passionate about right now. - It's incredible. I can't wait to read that study. Is that one out or on the way? - Yes. - Okay, well then I will also read and communicate with you and then about that. So who knows, maybe you would come on Instagram and do a little Instagram live to make sure that I don't screw up the delivery and that we can hear it direct from the person who ran the study. I find this issue of side effects really interesting. I don't take a lot of prescription drugs, but recently I was prescribed a few, and the list of side effects is, it's incredible and it just goes on and on and on. I realize some of that is legal protections. It's hard for me to believe that they're actually expecting anyone to read those because you need a high powered microscope to read this, print is truly fine print. But I did realize that in reading over the side effects that one prime is themselves, to experience those side effects. And so now I just rip up the side effects thing or the sheet, and just throw it away. I just take it as recommended. Do you think it works in the other direction to where if an effective medication is supposed to have result A, B or C, and you are told again and again, how effective it is for that treatment, that it could amplify the effect. So in other words, it's strictly a placebo. It's not nocebo, as you described before. But that perhaps at a lower dose, a given medication could have a amplified effect or at a appropriate dose, if you will, it could have a super physiological effect. Has that ever been demonstrated? - To some degree. I think where it gets tricky is, for a long time, people thought the effects of placebos were expectancy based. So you expect to get a benefit and that benefit occurs. There's certainly some, some truth to that, but I think the mindset approach is more powerful because it helps us understand the mechanisms, right? So if you just expect that your blood pressure will go down, what are the mechanisms through which that expectation would lead to your blood pressure going down way? It's hard to even understand that, right? But if you have the mindset that, you're in good hands, that this is being taken care of, that this illness is not going to kill you, right? That you're being treated well. Then you can start to unpack the mechanisms through which blood pressure could be relieved. Maybe it's anxiety reduction, maybe it's changing the sort of anticipation of what are the prioritization of what the body needs to focus on. And so, I really think that, the work of the future needs to be on getting more sophisticated about what is the mindset that we're instilling when we say something will work or it won't work. And how do we understand the mechanisms through which that changes physiology? So to answer your question, I think that that could be true, but it depends on what actually is the mindset you're evoking. - I know you're a parent, and to the other parents out there, but also the kids and people who don't have kids, what is the best way to learn and teach mindsets? I mean, clearly a conversation like this informs me and many other people out there about mindsets and how we can adopt them. But it also seems to me that if we have the opportunity to teach mindsets and really cultivate certain mindsets, that the world will be a much better place. - Yes. - How does one go about that? Given that there were kids and we are all being bombarded with conflicting information all the time, how do we anchor to a mindset? - Yeah, and you're getting at my other major passion right now, which is what we're calling in our lab, meta mindset. I'm working on this with Chris Evans and others. And that is, how do we consciously and deliberately change our mindsets? And the first step is really simple, and that's just to be aware that you have them. That the world, your beliefs, aren't sort of an unmitigated reflection of reality as it objectively is. They are filtered through our interpretations, our expectations, our frameworks, and simplifications of that reality. And as you know, your work and then you're as you know, so well that most of what goes on in our brain is an interpretation of reality. Mindsets are just the simplified core assumptions about things. And the first step is to realize that we have them. The second step is to start to think about, what the effects of those mindsets are on your life to sort of play out the story, right? Okay, I have this mindset that stress is debilitating. How is that making me feel? What is that leading me to do? Is this mindset helpful or harmful? The question isn't is the mindset right or wrong? Because you can find evidence for her against it. We can fight about it until we're exhausted. The question is, is it helpful or harmful? And then, you can go about seeking out ways to adopt more useful mindsets. So, we've been doing a lot of work on how to actually do that. How do you consciously change it? Sometimes it's really simple. I think in cases where we don't have a lot of prior experience, like the kids with allergies who are getting treatment, they didn't have any other mindsets about symptoms. So we just had the luxury of setting it, right? When it comes to healthy food, I think it's harder to change people's mindsets because we have a lot of baggage weighing us down. As a parent, for me, I guess my number one piece of advice is to lighten up, trying to get your kids to do certain things and focus more on helping them to adopt more adaptive mindsets. So, I'm by no means an expert at this, but I'm testing it with my own child. - Your child real, real child. The real kind of experiment. - It's how do I resist the urge to force my child to eat her dinner so that she can have her dessert, right? Because that's the real urge. It's like, no, you need - Or you're negotiating. - to do that. Because when you start thinking about it in terms of mindset, you realize, oh, that's just reinforcing to her, that the dessert is the exciting, fun thing to have. And this thing that I have to do must be horrible. So horrible that my parent is forcing me to do it, right? So it's letting go a little bit of the behavior, the objective reality, and really thinking about the subjective reality and focusing on adaptive mindsets. So my goal as a parent has been to try to help her instill a healthy mindset about eating, that healthy foods are indulgent and delicious. That the experience of stress is inevitable, that it's natural. And that going through stressful experience can help her learn, grow, and become a more connected and happier individual. And with exercise and physical activity, we haven't really gotten to that yet, but [laughs] we will with time. - Yeah, that's great. I wrote down and I'm going to keep this in the front of my mind, going forward, to continually ask what is the effect of my mindset about X? And just to evaluate that. About exercise, about food, about school, about stress, about relationships, about relationship to self, et cetera. And to really think about that in a series of layers that you think that would be a useful exercise? - Definitely, and you know, and your work speaks to this. I mean, the mindful, it's not-- I would really urge against people getting dogmatic about their mindset also, right? Like, oh, I need to have the right mindset. Or, and if I don't have the right mind-- It's like, okay, mindset is a piece of the puzzle. It's a piece of the puzzle that's really empowering because we have access to it and we can change it. But it is just one piece of a puzzle. So treat yourself like a scientist, look at your life, look at your mindsets, see what's serving you, see what isn't. Find more useful, adaptive, and empowering mindsets and live by those. - I love it. Now, in one version of this kind of discussion, I would have asked the question I'm going to ask next at the beginning, but I'm going to ask it now close to the end, which is, you're unique constellation of accomplishments and attributes, and I only know a subset of them, of course, because today's the first time that we've met in person, even though I've known your work for a long time and we're colleagues across campus. So you run your laboratory, where you do research. You were also an athlete in university, a serious athlete, and then you're also a clinical psychologist, is that right? - I was trained as a clinical psychologist. So my PhD is in clinical psychology. And I did all my pre and post internships that dealt with stress and trauma. - Do you see patients or did you see patients at that time? - I did. Yes, I don't anymore. - Okay, that's a very unique constellation of practitioner and researcher. So what are the mindsets that you try and adopt on a regular basis in as a consequence or in relation to those things, sort of athlete, researcher, clinician? For yourself as you move through life, do you have an overarching mindset that all challenge's good, or do you have any kind of central mindsets that help you navigate through, you know, it was passed to be a pretty complex set of daily routines given everything that you juggle. But I think that people like you are unique, in that you have the inside knowledge of how this stuff works, and you've also existed in these different domains. And I know a lot of listeners have a more athletic slant to their life or a more cognitive or some are raising kids, or some people are doing any number of things. So, this is where I think it would be useful for people to hear kind of, what do you do? This is what I'm asking. - Yeah, well, it's certainly true in my case, that research is me search. Everything that I study as an intellectual has come from my own experience or my own failings, right? And when I was really intensely exercising and training, those were the questions I asked when I was dealing with eating and concerns about my weight, those were the questions I asked. When I was stressed about my dissertation. I decided to do my dissertation on stress, right? Now I think we're in the midst of a global pandemic. How can our mindsets be useful here? I don't think there's a obvious answer to your question other than the guiding light for me has been an undercurrent of understanding that our mindsets matter. I think I got that very clearly and deeply as a child, both through my experiences as an athlete. I know many of you listeners are athletes. Any athlete knows that you can be the same physical being from one day to the next one moment to the next, and perform completely differently, just depending on what you're thinking. I was a gymnast growing up. And if you can't visualize, if you can't see something in your mind then you have no chance when you get up there on the balance beam, right? And also, my father was a martial artist, a teacher of meditation. So this kind of mind body work was baked into me from an early age. And I think what I've done recently, is to try to understand it scientifically, and more importantly, to figure out how can we do better with this, right? We're all talking about AI taking over the world, and technology this and all the personalized medicine that, and it's like, we have done so little, relatively, so little with the human resource, our human brains, that the potential for which is so great. And we've done almost nothing. Take the placebo effect, we know a lot about what it is. We've done almost nothing to leverage that in medicine consciously and deliberately. So, what keeps me going, what gets me through the hard times is just that burning question of, what is going on here and what more can I do with the power of my mind? - Well, I and millions of other people are so grateful that you do this work. It's so important and it's truly unique. Tell us where people can learn more about your research, where they can find you online. I'm going to try and persuade you to take more of a social media presence going forward. But whether or not I succeed in that effort or not, where can people find you, ask questions, find your papers, learn more. I'd love to have you back for a conversation in the future, but in the meantime. - Yeah, it's been such an honor getting to chat with you and just you have such an impact on the world. And I look forward. I hope we can do some science together also. - Absolutely, absolutely. - Yeah, all our papers and materials and interventions are housed on our website, mbl.stanford.edu. We also have a link there too, that takes you to Stanford SPARK, which stands for social psychological answers to real world questions. We have a lot of toolkits on that website, including a toolkit for this rethink stress approach of acknowledging, welcoming, and utilizing your stress. And then I guess I'm on Twitter, Alia Crum, [chuckles], I don't do much there, but maybe I will start to. - Well, those are all great resources. We will provide links to all of those for our listeners and viewers. And I also hope to convince you to write a book or many books in the future. The world needs to know about this, but thank you so much for taking time out of your exceedingly busy schedule to talk to us about these ideas. I learned so much. I'm going to definitely think about what is the effect of my mindset about blank in every category of life and really, on behalf of everybody and myself. Thank you so much. - Yeah, thank you. And I guess I just want to end by saying, I think this work is really the tip of the iceberg of what can and should be done. And so, I really invite you, your listeners, and anybody who's inspired by this work. If they want to share stories or want to partner on a collaboration to please reach out. - Great, well, and the comments section on YouTube is a great place to do that as well. You will hear from them. - Great, [laughs]. - All right. Thank you so much, Allie. - Thank you. - Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Alia Crum. I'm guessing by now, you can appreciate the enormous impact that mindsets have on our biology and our psychology, and how those interact at the level of mind and body. If you'd like to learn more about Dr. Crum's work, and perhaps even be a research subject in one of their upcoming studies on mindsets, you can go to mbl.stanford.edu. There, you will also see a tab for support, where if you like, you can make a tax deductible donation to support the incredible research that Dr. Crum and her colleagues are doing. If you're learning from and are enjoying the Huberman Lab Podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. On YouTube, you also have the opportunity to leave us questions and comments in the comment section below any of the episodes. You can also make suggestions about future guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Please also check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. If you're not already following us on Instagram and on Twitter, we are Huberman Lab at both Instagram and Twitter, and there I teach neuroscience in short form, sometimes videos, sometimes texts, slides. Some of that information overlaps with what you find on the podcast. Some of it is distinct from what you find on the podcast. On previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I often discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary or used by everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them. An important consideration when using supplements is that they be sourced from the highest quality sources. For that reason, we partner with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E. Because Thorne supplements use the highest quality ingredients and the greatest degree of precision, in terms of what's listed on the bottle is actually what you will find in their products. And that is not true for all supplement companies. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorn, that T-H-O-R-N-E.com/U/Huberman, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. In addition, if you navigate into the Thorne site through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. In closing, I'd like to thank you once again for joining me for my discussion about mindsets with Dr. Alia Crum, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 292 ---
Video ID: t1F7EEGPQwo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1F7EEGPQwo
Title: The Science of Setting & Achieving Goals
Published: 2022-01-17 13:00:34 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the science of setting, assessing, and pursuing goals. I explain the neural (brain) circuits that underlie goal setting and pursuit. Then I describe nine science-supported tools anyone can apply toward their goals. I explain when and how to use goal visualization, when to use multitasking and how to use specific rewards to improve the likelihood of reaching your goals. I also explain why envisioning failures and their consequences are effective and how to set goals of the appropriate level of challenge. I also explain how the molecule dopamine is used to gauge our progress toward milestones and long-term overarching goals and how to leverage dopamine for goal pursuit. Finally, I explain a unique tool called 'space-time bridging' that can be used to support all aspects of goal setting, assessment, and pursuit. This episode ought to be useful for anyone seeking to improve their performance in work, school, exercise, athletics, or personal development.

#HubermanLab #Goals #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors:
LMNT - https://www.drinkLMNT.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
The 85% Rule for Optimal Learning - https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-12552-4 
Effects of Narrowing Visual Attention on Goal Pursuit Behavior - https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0146167219861438 

Timestamps:
00:00:00 The Neuroscience of Goals
00:01:56 Tool 1: Learn Fast(er) by the 85% Rule 
00:06:04 LMNT, Athletic Greens, ROKA
00:13:55 Brain Circuits for Setting & Pursuing Goals
00:21:52 Determining the Value of Goals 
00:24:33 Psychology of Goal Setting: Assessing Value, Action Steps
00:30:29 Peripersonal Space vs. Extrapersonal Space
00:35:39 Visually Focusing on a Goal Line Improves Performance
00:43:50 How Vision Improves Performance: Blood Pressure
00:51:55 Tool 2: Use Focal Vision to Initiate Goal Pursuit
00:54:40 Tool 3: Use Aged Self-Images to Self-Motivate 
00:59:33 Tool 4: Visualization of Goals is Only Helpful at the Start 
01:02:05 Tool 5: Visualizing Failure is the Best Ongoing Motivator
01:07:26 Tool 6: Make Goals Moderately Lofty 
01:13:05 Tool 7: Avoid Goal Distraction; Focus on 1-2 Major Goals Per Year
01:15:57 Tool 8: Ensure Specificity of Goals, Weekly Assessment
01:19:57 Dopamine, Motivation & Pleasure in Seeking Goals
01:22:43 Dopamine Reward Prediction Error, Controlling Dopamine
01:34:26 How Dopamine Influences Vision & Vice Versa
01:38:10 Interim Summary of Goal-Pursuit Steps
01:39:50 Tool 9: Space-Time Bridging 
01:49:59 Summary
01:51:50 Subscribe, Sponsors, Patreon, Supplements: Thorne, Instagram, Twitter, Newsletter


Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're talking all about goals and the science of goal setting and achieving your goals. There's a tremendous amount of information on the internet and in books and so forth, about how to set goals and assess your progress towards goals and update your goals and so forth. In fact, there are so many programs out there, that includes so many different acronyms that it can be a little bit overwhelming. Today's conversation about goals, is going to be quite a bit different. Indeed, we are going to talk about setting goals. We are also going to talk about how to assess progress towards goals. And we are going to talk about goal execution. However, we're going to do all of this in the context of neuroscience, because it turns out that there are not hundreds or dozens or even several neural circuits in your brain, that control goal setting and movement toward your goals. There is one and while it includes many different brain areas, that one circuit is the same circuit, that's responsible for pursuing all goals. And it relates to some very basic neurochemical mechanisms that are understood. So while there's a wealth of information out there about goals and goal setting and goal achievement and so forth, there's comparatively little information that's been available to the public about the neuroscience of goal setting and goal achievement. So that's what we're going to focus on today. I promise that we're going to get into the neuroscience, we're going to touch on a little bit of the psychology and how the neuroscience relates to what's known in the psychology literature. And we are going to establish several, in fact, four specific protocols that you can use for goal setting, goal assessment and goal execution in an ongoing basis, regardless of what your personal goals happen to be. Before we dive into our conversation about goals and goal setting and goal achievement, I'd like to highlight some recent scientific findings, that I think are going to be interesting and actionable for many of you out there. In earlier podcasts, we talked about neuro-plasticity, which is the brain's ability to change in response to experience. In fact, neuroplasticity underlies all forms of learning, whether or not it's language learning or learning music or math or a physical skill, all forms of learning involve the reorganization of connections in the nervous system, the brain and spinal cord and body. One of the key principles of neuroplasticity, is this notion of making errors as a good thing toward neuroplasticity. It is a little bit counterintuitive, but what the scientific literature tells us, is that whenever we're trying to learn something new, if we make an error, we know it feels frustrating, but that state of frustration, actually queues up particular brain areas to be more alert, so that on subsequent attempts to learn that thing, we have a heightened level of focus and a higher probability of learning the new skill, regardless of what that skill is. And I've talked about this before in various episodes, as encouraging people to embrace errors or pursue errors, not as their own end goal, but errors as an entry point for making the brain more plastic. And if you think about it really makes sense, why would the brain change at all, if it's performing everything perfectly? When you make errors, well in the immediate seconds and minutes after those errors, you are in a better position to learn. A common question I get, however, is what should be the rate of errors? Which is really just a way of saying, how hard should the given task be that you're trying to learn or perform? And it turns out there's an answer. There's a recent paper that was published in a great journal, "Nature Communications". This is a paper, our last author, Jonathan Cohen, and the paper is entitled, "The Eighty Five Percent Rule for optimal learning". This paper, we will make available by a link in the show note captions, but basically what this paper shows, is that when trying to learn something new, you want to make the difficulty of what you're trying to learn, such that, you are getting things right about 85% of the time. That you're making errors about 15% of the time. And the reason I like this paper, is it really points specifically to some protocols that we can implement because people always say, okay, you want to set a high goal. You want to try and achieve something that's really lofty, but you don't want to make the goal so lofty that you don't make any progress at all. Other people say, you really want to start with really small goals and make things very, very incremental. Only set out to do things that you know you can accomplish and that will feed back on your self-esteem and all these positive feedback loops. And then, you know, layer by layer, layer by layer, you'll eventually get where you want to go. Well, it turns out that neither is true you need to set the level of difficulty, such that you're making errors about 15% of the time. And I want to emphasize about 15% of the time, because there's no way to figure protocols for sport or language or math or anything else, where you're going to have exactly 15% errors. So, anyway, this paper, the 85% rule for optimal learning, again, we will supply the link, but it really points to the idea of making things pretty hard, but not so hard that you're failing every attempt or even half of the attempts. Failing about 15% of the time seems optimal for learning. Hopefully that information will be useful to any of you that are trying to learn something. Hopefully it will also be useful to those of you that are teaching kids or other adults. If you're teaching, keep in mind that you want to keep the students reaching for higher and higher levels of proficiency in whatever that is that you're teaching. And that 15% of the time they should be failing, if it gets to 20%, that's probably okay. If they start failing about half the time, then probably what they're trying to learn is too difficult for them at that point. Now, of course, this is going to be controlled by all sorts of external factors, like whether or not they slept well the night before, whether or not you slept well the night before and you're being clear in your instructions to them, et cetera. But I think the 15% rule as we may call it, is a good metric to aim for and it can serve both students and teachers. In other words, it can serve both those teaching and those that are learning. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast, is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort, to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is LMNT, LMNT is an electrolyte drink mixed with everything you need and nothing you don't. That means lots of salt, some other electrolytes and no sugar. As I've mentioned before on this podcast and in various interviews, I'm a big fan of salt. I sort of discovered this a few years ago, when "Science Magazine", one of the pre-eminent magazines out there, that publishes research on science, but also news articles about science, talked about the myth of salt research. It turns out, that contrary to what I had believed, which was that salt is going to cause hypertension or that salt is really bad for us. There's an innate need for salt in our system and indeed, if you dive into the textbooks on salt balance, we have entire biological systems of our kidneys and fluid management, et cetera, that are involved in making sure that we get enough salt. In fact, neurons, nerve cells, function because salt, sodium actually enters those cells quickly and that's what causes them to fire action potentials. The common syllable or a language of neurons, if you will, when we are low in sodium, our neurons don't work as well. And a few years later, I had the experience of feeling kind of shaky and I thought I had blood sugar issues. I went and got my blood sugar checked and it was fine. And a physician made the recommendation, that I actually up my salt intake. My intake wasn't particularly low, I didn't think, but I quickly found, was that if I consumed enough salt, usually I would do this in the form of putting a little pinch of salt into some water, adding a little lemon juice or something like that, or salting my food a little bit more. That I lost any kind of shakiness in my hands, that my mental functioning was better, my sports performance was better, et cetera. So it was really interesting to see that shift simply by increasing my salt intake, something that's really counterintuitive, to a lot of what's out there. Salt isn't just important for the function of neurons, it's important for blood volume and working alongside the other electrolytes, magnesium and potassium, it ensures that cells in our body function properly. And I think we're starting to see a shift out there now, in the perception of what salt and the other electrolytes do. And really seeing magnesium, which is one of the electrolytes, potassium and especially salt, as not necessarily something to avoid, but in fact something to embrace, provided that they're used properly. LMNT is formulated to help anyone, reach their electrolyte needs and is particularly well-suited to people following a keto, low carb or paleo diet. For people following a low carb diet or doing intermittent fasting, what many people don't know, is that carbohydrate holds water. It actually brings water into the system and you don't want your system to be low on water, that's one form of dehydration.. Salt holds water as well, meaning it keeps the water in your system, which is beneficial for brain and body function. LMNT contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of 1000 milligrams, that's one gram of sodium, 200 milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium. And they use the very best forms of salt, potassium, and magnesium that are out there. So the way I use LMNT, is I usually will mix up one packet into about 16 to 30 ounces of water in the morning and drink that first thing in the morning when I wake up or around breakfast time, doesn't really matter. I kind of sip on it through the morning or if I'm really thirsty, I'll drink it all at once. And then I always make sure to drink a volume of water with an LMNT packet in it, somewhere around my exercise. Sometimes it's during the exercise, if I'm running, I'll wait until afterwards. I'll hydrate with it before and after, if it's a really hot day. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt, that's L-M-N-T.com/huberman, to claim a free element sample pack. You only cover the cost of shipping, otherwise it's completely free. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman to claim a free sample pack. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral, probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens, is that it covers all of my foundational vitamin, mineral, probiotic needs. We of course need vitamins. We of course need minerals and we do need a healthy gut microbiome and probiotics, support a healthy gut microbiome. There is now a wealth of quality scientific published data, showing that the microbiota, meaning the little microbes that live in our gut, are good for us. And our gut when it functions properly, communicates with our brain and our brain communicates with our gut through the so-called, gut-brain axis. And that gut-brain axis, is vital for things like immune system, endocrine system, meaning hormones and for mood and overall brain function. With Athletic Greens, I get my vitamins, my minerals and the probiotics I need, to support a healthy gut microbiome and gut-brain axis without having to worry about taking a bunch of other things. In fact, when people ask me, what's the one supplement I should take, that's going to make me feel better? I always say Athletic Greens because indeed it makes me feel better and it happens to taste terrific. I drink it twice a day, typically, I'll have one in the morning, I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. And I'll typically have it again in the afternoon or late afternoon, again, mixed with water, some lemon or lime juice. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens, while you're in the car or traveling by plane, et cetera. Plus, they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 + K2. Many of us are deficient in vitamin D3 and even for those of us that are getting sufficient sunshine, many of us still need to supplement with vitamin D3. Vitamin D3 is involved in metabolism, immune system, brain function, hormones, et cetera. It has so many important functions, and K2 has been shown to be important for a variety of things, not the least, which is cardiovascular health. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, plus a year supply of vitamin D3 + K2. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman, to claim this special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses, that have the absolute highest quality. I spent a lifetime working on the science of the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system everywhere from your eyes to your brain, includes a ton of different mechanisms, so that as you move through different environments, you can see things clearly. And even if it's bright out or there are shadows or it's really dim outside, or it's getting dark, that your visual system can try and manage, to resolve what's out there in the world, so you can see things clearly. Many people need corrective lenses, they need eyeglasses. Other people, they need sunglasses as well, or just simply need sunglasses because if it's too bright, it's very hard to see things. One problem with a lot of eyeglasses and sunglasses out there, however, is they don't take into account, the nuanced biology, the visual system. You may have experienced this. Have you ever put on a pair of sunglasses that aren't so great? You move from a really bright area into a dimly lit area and you have to take the eyeglasses off, your eyes just don't seem to adjust. With ROKA, eyeglasses and sunglasses, everything they've done to design those glasses and lenses, is with the science of the visual system in mind. So you can move seamlessly from one environment to the next and you always see things with crystal clarity. Their sunglasses and eyeglasses are really terrific because they can be used for anything. They have a terrific aesthetic, so you can wear them, to work to dinner, et cetera, they look great. And, they're also designed for athletic performance, you can use them while running or while cycling, if you get sweaty, they won't slip off your face. They're extremely lightweight, in fact, I often forget that they're even on my face. I wear readers at night and sometimes when I drive and I wear sunglasses when it's really bright outside and I need sunglasses. If you want to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roka.com That's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman, to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Let's talk about the science and in particular, the biology and neuroscience of setting and achieving goals. Setting and achieving goals, is not a uniquely human endeavor. Other animals set and attempt to achieve goals, a honeybee attempts to collect honey and bring it back to the hive. A herbivore will go out and forage for plants and will also have a need to reproduce at some point in its life. So, will need to find a mate and maybe even raise the young, depending on what species that is. Predators will have to hunt and kill and eat their food and they have to avoid getting injured in that process. They also have to raise young, et cetera. So humans are among the other animals, or we could say the animals are among us in the need to set goals and to make efforts to achieve those goals. Now, why do I emphasize this commonality of process? The reason I emphasize this commonality of process, is that it turns out that there is one basic system by which all animals, including humans, set and attempt to achieve goals. Now humans are unique in our ability to orient our mind toward immediate goals, moderately termed goals, meaning things that might exist on the scale of a week or a month or even a year and very long-term goals, like a lifetime goal or a goal that lasts a decade, or it takes a decade to achieve. That's what makes us unique. And of course we don't have access to the mindset or the thinking or the emotions of other animals, but what we do know is that, common neural circuits, meaning brain areas, that are present in animal species and in humans, are responsible for orienting our thinking and our action toward particular goals. Another thing that's really unique about the human brain, is that we are able to have multiple goals interacting at once. So, for instance, we probably all have fitness goals, goals in relationships of different kinds, friendships, and romantic partnerships as well as maybe scholastic goals. Maybe you're in school or you're pursuing some kind of learning outside of the school environment or indoor, you have business goals or financial goals, we are able to have multiple goals at once. And other animals do this, but humans are unique in the ability to juggle a lot of goals. And actually one of the major challenges in pursuing goals, is that goal pursuit often interacts, meaning if you can spend 100% of your time chasing one particular goal, that might be very effective for that goal, but then we tend to fall back on some of our other goals. You can imagine how this plays out. If you're working very, very hard, you're solely focused on business often, your health will suffer. If you're solely focused on your health often, other things will suffer. And so we have to juggle both our goal setting and our goal pursuits. And so today, we're going to talk about a number of different ways, to work with what could very well be called, these interleaving goals, by focusing on a common practice or common set of mechanisms that are present in all aspects of goal seeking. What is that process? Well, it turns out, it's a neural circuit. A neural circuit, is simply a collection of brain areas, that when active in a particular sequence give rise to a particular behavior or perception. So for instance, when you feel happy, it's not because you have a brain area, that's the happy brain area, that is electrically active. Rather, it's going to involve numerous brain areas, being active in concert and to different degrees. In the same way, that the keys on a piano, together, played in the appropriate sequence, represent a particular song. You would never say that one key on the piano represents that song, but that key is necessary. Similarly, in the brain, we can say that a brain area might be necessary, but not sufficient to give us a particular experience or generate a particular behavior. So when we think about goal seeking and the pursuit of goals of any kind in the brain, it doesn't matter what the goal is. It involves a common set of neural circuits and the neural circuit that I'd like to orient us toward today. And we will return to it a few times, involves learning a couple of names, but you don't have to worry so much about memorizing these. Just more important is to understand the logic of how it's put together and I will explain that and make it very clear. If you want to learn the names, that's great. One of the brain areas is the so-called, amygdala. The amygdala is most often associated with fear, so you might say, wow, how is that involved in goal directed behavior? Well, a lot of our goal directed behavior, is to avoid punishments, including things like embarrassment or financial ruin or things of that sort. And so the amygdala and some sense of anxiety or fear, is actually built in to the circuits that generate goal seeking and our motivation to pursuit goals. The other areas are the so-called, ventral striatum. The striatum is part of what's called, the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia, is a neural circuit, that can very simply be described as a neural circuit that helps us generate go, meaning the initiation of action and no-go, the prevention of action type scenarios. Let me make that even simpler. The ventral striatum is part of this thing called, the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia has sort of two circuits within it. One circuit is involved in getting us to do things, like I'm going to get up tomorrow and I'm going to run five miles first thing in the morning. I don't know if I'm actually going to do that, but I'm just using that as an example. Another circuit within the basal ganglia, is a no-go circuit, it's the one that says, no, I'm not going to go for the second cookie or the third cookie. I'm not going to eat that. And then the go circuit would be the one that's responsible for instead eating something else. Okay, so we have go and no-go circuits within the basal ganglia. So we've got amygdala, so what you think of as kind of fear and anxiety and avoidance. We've got, the basal ganglia, which are for initiating action and preventing action. And then there is the so-called, cortex. The cortex is the outer shell of the brain, and there are two sub regions of the cortex, that are involved in goal-directed behavior. One is the lateral prefrontal cortex, prefrontal cortex is involved in, so-called, executive function, things like planning. Thinking about things under different timescales, so not just what we want in the immediate term, but what we might want tomorrow or the next day and how our actions currently are going to relate, to the future. And the so-called, orbitofrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex has a large number of functions, but one of the key functions of the orbitofrontal cortex, it's involved in meshing some emotionality with our current state of progress and comparing that emotionality to where it might be, when we are closer to a goal. So, there are basically four areas, one involved in anxiety, one involved in emotion, one involved in planning and another involved in this go, no-go action. So that's a bunch of detail, but if I wanted to make it really simple for everyone, I would say there are four areas. One is an area associated with anxiety and fear, it's the amygdala. The second is involved in action and inaction, remember go, and no-go, so that's the basal ganglia. The other one is involved in planning and thinking across different timescales, so that's lateral prefrontal cortex. And then the fourth one, is involved in emotionality, where we sit emotionally present, compared to where we think we will be emotionally, when we reach some particular goal and that's the orbitofrontal cortex. Again, you don't need to know all those names. You don't need to know all the details, just understand that those different elements are involved in the decision-making processes that lead us toward particular goals and have us update our goal seeking, et cetera. One key thing is it doesn't matter what the goal is, the same circuits are involved. So whether or not you're trying to build a company, that's a billion dollar company that's going to go public, or you're thinking about planning a craft day at home with the kids or for yourself, or you're thinking about what movie to go see. Goals, goal seeking and assessing progress towards goals, all involve the exact same neural circuits. It's really remarkable. It's also very convenient for our discussion today. What's going on in these circuits, can basically be boiled down to two particular things. The first is, value information, trying to understand whether or not, something is really worth pursuing or not. So, placing a value on a particular goal. The other component of this neural circuit, is associated with action, which actions to take and which actions not to take, given the value of a particular goal in a given moments time. I want to say that again. The other component of the circuit is involved in action, whether or not you should act or should not act, based on your assessment of the value of a goal at a particular moment in time. And you're going to hear me say over and over again, in this episode, the value information about a goal is so key. Here's why, there is basically one neuro-transmitter or rather neuromodulator system, that governs our goal setting, goal assessment and goal pursuit. And that is the neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is the common currency by which we assess our progress toward particular things of particular value. In fact, dopamine, is the way that we assess value of our pursuits. And so, as we take a moment and we shift our attention, to the psychology of goal setting. The things that you've probably heard a bit more about, about what sorts of goals are good and how to set goals and how to categorize goals. I want you to think about how dopamine, could possibly be involved in these different processes. And the reason I want you to do this, is that all of the psychology of goal setting and goal pursuit, is wonderful because it places things into different categories. It allows us to parse our thinking and organize our thinking. But what's not often seen, in fact, I'm not aware of any literature out there, scientific or literature in the popular press or in popular books, is an understanding of how the underlying neurobiology, can be layered on top of the psychology of goal setting, to allow us to set and pursue our goals more effectively. And that's what we're going to do today. We are eventually going to arrive at a set of four practices, that when performed on a regular basis, will allow you to assess, what is the value of this next particular action step? How worthwhile is it, to do behavior A versus behavior B in order to achieve a particular goal? If any of this is vague now, I'm going to make it all very clear for you. You're going to come away with some very specific lists of takeaways that you can put down on paper, if you like. And that you can use to set goals, assess goals, and execute goals more effectively, using the neuroscience of the circuits I just described and an understanding of the neuromodulator dopamine. Let's take a look at the psychology of goal setting and goal pursuit. This is an enormous literature, meaning there are tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of scientific papers about the topic of goal setting and goal pursuit. There's also a lot of information on the internet about goal pursuit. And in looking over this information, one comes to appreciate pretty quickly, that acronyms are a big thing. Acronyms, seem to dominate the area of goal setting, especially as it relates to things in the business sector, but also in the relationship sector. Now, acronyms are wonderful, they allow us to organize our thinking into less and conceptually they can be very useful. But as I moved through this literature, I started to see some redundant themes. And so what I've attempted to do, is distill out the redundant themes, that regardless of the person teaching or the scientific laboratory that happened to come up with these acronyms, that they boil down to some common features. So let's talk about that literature and I think we'll come away with an understanding of some basic elements that are common to all goals. Now, the modern science or the modern psychological science of trying to understand goal setting and pursuit, actually dates back to the 1930s. And we have to be sure that members of our species, were focused on goal setting and goal pursuit, long before the scientific literature emerged. It just stands to reason that, since the human brain hasn't evolved that much, we don't think, in the last 10,000 years, that people would be thinking about these things. They just didn't get them down into papers, that we could evaluate on PubMed and so forth, but now we can, so we can look at those papers. And what you find is that acronyms are abound in the psychology literature about goal setting and goal pursuit. So for instance, you'll hear about the work of Larkin Small, for instance, these are the last names of various researchers. The so-called, ABC method, that a goal should be achievable, it should be believable, and that the person be committed. It's sort of obvious once you hear about the ABC method. Then people came along and expanded on that, they talked about the so-called, SMART method. SMART being another acronym, that it be specific, that the goal be measurable, that the goal be attainable, that the goal be realistic and that it be time-bound, meaning that you set up certain period of time in which a given goal should be performed. And then people come along and modify these, this is the way that psychology research is done. I'm not laughing at it. I'm just chuckling because, it seems like the acronyms get longer and longer and longer. They developed the, SMARTER approach, adding an ER to the acronym, SMART, S-M-A-R-T-E-R. They added ethical and rewarding, which fortunately, are good things I believe, ethical and rewarding. What does all this mean? Well, what it means is that any kind of goal pursuit, any kind of goal setting, really has to involve a number of different states and neural circuits in the brain and body, at least that's how I view this literature. Why would I do that? Well, let's think about the very modern version of the kind of acronyms that I talked about a moment ago, dating back to the 1930s and extending into the 1990s. You can find beautiful talks online from people who have worked with some of the biggest companies and greatest high performers out there, to achieve incredible things. And they will talk about generating a sort of objective mindset for goal setting. They'll talk about goals needing to be significant. That it has to be a big goal. That it has to be concrete, so you have to be able to describe what the goal is. It has to be action-oriented, has to be inspirational, has to be time-bound. You have to have reasonable, realistic, verifiable measures. You have to constantly up the ante. If it's starting to sound repetitive, it's because it is repetitive. There are basically only three or four elements, to goal setting and goal pursuit. Basically, an individual or set of individuals, has to identify a specific thing that they're going to attain. In some communities, they talk about, knowing what right looks like, meaning being able to define a very specific goal. You can't just say, I want to be a champion athlete. You have to say what sport, and you have to understand what the path to that is. So any big goal of course, is broken up into a series of smaller goals, but the whole thing starts with thinking about the end in mind. And in a few minutes, we will talk about, whether or not visualization of the end in mind, is actually beneficial or detrimental to achieving goals. There's actually great neuroscience and psychology data on that now. So, I mentioned all these acronyms, not as an attempt to disparage them. I think they're wonderful. And I mentioned all that psychology literature, not in an attempt to disparage it, but rather just say that, goal setting is the first step, assessment of whether or not one is making progress towards those goals is the second but necessary step. And then there's the business of goal execution. And that brings us back to the neural circuit components, remember, this neural circuit, involving those four things earlier, the amygdala, striatum, orbitofrontal cortex and the prefrontal cortex. They work together, to divide the whole process as I mentioned before, into two general categories. The first is, assessing value, knowing whether or not where one is at one given moment, relates to some external thing. Are things going well or things going poorly? And knowing how to gauge that accurately. And then, action steps, goes and no goes, do more of this, do less of that, do this, don't do that, et cetera. So, now we are going to shift back to the neuroscience and we're going to talk about the practical applications of the information I just described. Because I've given you a lot of kind of academic information. And as we do this, I'd like you to keep in mind, what are some things that you've either accomplished or that you'd like to accomplish going forward? Because as we do this, we can build toward a set of protocols, that at the end, you'll be able to very quickly plug in, your particular goals and a route to those particular goals, that's grounded in the science. That I think are going to be very effective in allowing you to reach those goals, more quickly and with indeed less effort. In fact, let's start with a tool now because as we move through all this information, I want to make sure that people are coming away with some practical things that they can implement. And indeed, some things that you can even do during the course of listening to or watching this podcast. The first thing to do, is to understand the difference between peripersonal space and extra personal space. Peripersonal space, is all the space, literally, that's within inside your body, the surface of your skin and in your immediate environment. Peripersonal space, is a key concept in neuroscience because you have particular neural circuits and particular chemicals, that are geared toward, what are called consummatory behaviors, meaning, using things and consuming things and enjoying things, that are in your immediate peripersonal space. Let me give you an example of this for myself, just to make it concrete. You can imagine similar examples for yourself right now. Within my current peripersonal space, is my interoception, my understanding or perception of my internal body. So, how quickly I'm breathing, my heart rate, the feelings on the surface of my skin, et cetera. But also, within the confines of my peripersonal space, is this coffee mug, that if you're listening to this, you can't see this, but I'm lifting up a coffee mug, I'm going to take a sip of coffee. That's a consummatory behavior, I have the coffee, I don't have to do much or motivate much to get it. I have other things here, pens and computer, et cetera. So things in your peripersonal space and consuming those things, is generally governed by a set of neurochemicals, that center around the neuromodulator serotonin. And there are a few others as well, things like oxytocin, but mainly serotonin. Contrast that, with the so-called, extra personal space. Extrapersonal space is everything beyond the confines of my reach. It would be something in the next room. It will be something down the street. It will be something at some other location, in space and time. And the neuromodulators and neurochemicals, that are associated with any kind of thinking about, anything in the extra personal space, are distinct from the neurochemicals and neuromodulators, that are involved in thinking about or making actions towards the peripersonal space. And the molecule that's most associated with thinking about or orienting toward the extra personal space, again, things beyond the confines of my skin or your skin, is dopamine. And this is a vitally important concept to understand, when you're setting goals and seeking goals. If we are to be good at goal seeking, if we are to be good at setting goals and assessing goals, if we are to achieve our goals, we have to be able to toggle back and forth between a clear understanding of our peripersonal space, what we have and how we feel in the immediate present. And our ability to understand what's out there in the extra personal space and our ability to move into that extra personal space. And a simple way to conceive of all this, is that we evaluate our progress in the peripersonal space. We evaluate how we feel, about some pursuit, even if we haven't initiated that pursuit yet. How we feel about a particular goal, is truly a feeling that we experience in the here and now, even though the goal is in the future. If we are going to evaluate whether or not, we made progress today or yesterday or not, that's an evaluation of how we feel in the immediate peripersonal space. However, moving toward any goal, involves orienting our thinking towards the extra personal space. And as we go through today's episode, I'm going to teach you a technique or rather a neuroscience-based tool, that will allow you to continually transition back and forth between the peripersonal space and the extra personal space in a way that will allow you to update and evaluate and better execute your goal seeking. The whole principle behind this, is that human beings, like other animals, have to make evaluations about whether or not they are on the right track. However, the important thing to understand, is that humans in particular can do this over different timescales. We don't just pursue food 'cause we are hungry, we pursue food, excuse me, for a particular meal, that we might be having with people tomorrow. We can modulate the timescale in a way that other animals don't. That's how we adjust our goal seeking, to different timescales. And in addition to that, humans are exquisitely good at biasing our behavior toward particular goals over very long periods of time. But there are a lot of mistakes out there, in fact, things that are outright wrong in the literature and in particular, in the internet, and then the kind of wellness and fitness and cognitive fitness space, that send people down the wrong path and those things we will talk about in a few minutes. But things like visualization, that visualization and visualization of this big goal, is the best way to achieve your goals. In fact, that's not the case, there's a much approach to doing all this. So now I'd like to shift gears towards talking about a few of the things, that most people get badly wrong in setting and assessing and executing goals. This is based on peer reviewed research, so I think it's very solid. I know it is very solid. And it runs counter to what many of us have been taught. Let's start with a simple one. We've all heard that multitasking is bad. We've heard multitasking is bad, it doesn't allow for focus. If you want to achieve anything, if you want to accomplish anything, you should not multitask. Well, it turns out, that's wrong. It turns out that there is a role for multitasking, but the multitasking has to be placed at a particular time within your goal seeking behavior in order to be effective. Really nice studies done at Carnegie Mellon University, and the Davis Lab, evaluated how long people are able to focus in different environments. How long they were able to stay concentrated on their work. And it turns out that number is exceedingly low. It turns out that most people, whether or not they're doing computer work or whether or not they're doing writing or accounting work or anything of that sort, can hold their attention for about three minutes at a time before they shift their attention off. And that's ridiculously low when you first hear it, but, that probably reflects a basic state of brain function. That hearkens back to a time when we were hunter gatherers, I doubt that we were maintaining focus solidly for hours and hours and hours, unless we were under some particular threat or in some particular crisis. Rather, you could imagine that people collected seeds and nuts and berries for about three minutes and then probably stood up, looked around and then kept going. Or that they were hunting animals or in some sort of pursuit, fishing, et cetera, and focused, focused, focused and every three minutes or so, they might've looked up and, you know, take a look at the sky or looked around to make sure that other people were there or not there, et cetera. It all stands to reason that that will be the case. Again, the neural circuits haven't evolved much. Now, multitasking, has been shown to have a very interesting physiological signature, when we multitask, when we jump back and forth between things, there is an increase in the level of the neurotransmitter, also sometimes called a neuromodulator, but basically same thing for sake of this discussion. There's an increase in the neurotransmitter epinephrine, which is adrenaline. And so, there are really nice studies now, pointing the fact that doing a bit of multitasking prior, to jumping into some focused, goal directed behavior, whether or not it's mental behavior or physical behavior, can actually be useful because it gets us into action. So we've all been told that multitasking is terrible, but if you, for instance, find yourself cleaning up your house and also checking your phone and doing a number of things, right at the point where you should be sitting down to write or do some focused work. It probably reflects some adaptive mechanism, where you use action and somewhat varied multitasking action in order to generate adrenaline in your system, because adrenaline just gets you in the action. Now, that's great, but, you don't want to multitask throughout any kind of goal seeking or goal pursuit behavior. Because, what's also very clear and we're going to talk about this in exquisite depth today, is that visual focus and in particular contracting your visual window, bringing the aperture of what you see, to a very fine point, can absolutely increase your clarity of goal seeking and the likelihood that you will pursue your goals. I've talked about this a little bit before on the podcast as a way of increasing focus for any kind of pursuit. I've talked about a practice, whereby you can literally look at a dot or a line, placed on a wall or on your computer in front of you for 30 to 60 seconds, and then moving into some dedicated work, where you need to focus. And indeed, just looking at a narrow piece of the visual world, a small piece of the visual world for some period of time and forcing yourself to hold that gaze on that location as best you can, can increase your level of cognitive attention and your ability to focus and stay focused. And this is not magic. It is the consequence of the fact, that most of your cognition follows your visual perception. For those of you that are low vision or no vision, meaning you're blind, or you have trouble seeing, my lab does a lot of work with people, who are low vision, no vision. They tend to use their auditory system, their hearing, as a way to anchor their attention to particular things. But most people out there can see and see pretty well and visual focus is the way to do that. Now, earlier, we were talking about this notion of peripersonal space versus extra personal space. And I'm just going to seed a little bit of the later conversation by saying, that when we focus on an external point. We are in a process of exteroception, is the focus on the extra personal space, not the peripersonal space. So when we focus on something, say a line on the wall for 30 to 60 seconds or at our computer for 30 to 60 seconds and just look at it and then move into any kind of action, whether or not it's work action or physical action. We are at its very core. We are engaging in this pursuit of extra personal space. We are placing our focus outside our body and therefore we are placing the brain into goal pursuit mode. Work at NYU, in particular, in the laboratory of a phenomenal researcher in their Psychology Department, by the name of Emily Balcetis, B-A-L-C-E-T-I-S. Emily Balcetis, has done really nice work on this. They've done is, they've had, people focus their visual attention on a goal line of some sort and then to engage in some sort of behavior, that requires a lot of effort. And they've done a lot of different experiments like this, but I'll just explain one. They always include a control group, where people have to go through the same physical effort or mental effort, but they don't focus their attention just on one location. The long and short of these studies is that, when people have to focus their attention on one location, like a goal line, they are much more effective in reaching those goals and they achieve them with the perception, that they expended less effort. I'll give you an example of one particularly nice study from the Balcetis Lab. So this particular study involves, physical exercise. Although, as I mentioned before, they've done similar studies looking at cognitive type work. And what they did is they had a group of people, exercise, wearing 15 pound ankle weights, and they had to basically move a certain distance or run a certain distance to reach a goal line. One group was focused on the goal line, visually focused, on the goal line. The other group was not told to visually focus on the goal line. And what they found, was that the group that focused on the goal line, was able to achieve reaching that goal with 17% less effort. They measured effort and they got there 23% quicker. That's a remarkable difference. So same distance traveled, with same workload because everyone's wearing the same 15 pound weights on their ankles. One group is simply looking at the goal line, the other group is not told to look at the goal line, simply by looking at the goal line, does something to the psychology and end physiology of these people, that allows them to move forward with less perceived effort and to do it more quickly. That's remarkable. And in this case, they're focused on the goal line, but in a few moments, we'll talk about how one can use updating of goal line, so incremental goal line. Starting with an intermediate goal, and then extending the goal line further and further. But just sit back for a second and think about that, just by changing where a person looks, they changed their perceived effort and their ability to do something, more effectively, more quickly, than a group that is not deliberately focusing their visual attention on one location. That's incredible. And it's so incredible, in fact, you might say, well, how could that possibly be? Well, it turns out, it has a very specific, underlying physiological reason and that has to do with changes in our so-called, autonomic nervous system. The aspects of our nervous system, that prepare us for readiness and action, or that prepare us for resting and relaxing. So what is special about focusing one's visual attention at a given location? Well, it turns out that we have two branches of our visual system. So visual information all comes in through our eyes, but then it can head down two different pathways. One pathway is engaged when our vision is brought to a common point, what we call, a vergence eye movement. So if we're focusing very intensely on a given point, regardless of how far away from us that point is, our visual system engages a certain set of neurons, neural circuits that are involved in resolving fine detail and that can evaluate small changes over small periods of time. Just think of it as a very detailed camera of the visual world. It tends to be very restricted. The other pathway through the visual system, is the so-called, magnocellular pathway. And this is a pathway that's involved in taking in global information about lots of things, that are happening around us. Movement of things to our right, movement of things to our left, things are happening down on the ground and all around us. And that pathway involves a sort of relaxation, if you will, of the neural circuits that are associated with alertness and attention. When you walk down the street and you're not thinking about much, provided you're not looking at your phone, you're not focusing on one location, you're more or less in a relaxed state, compared to when you're looking for a particular sign, you're looking for a bus or a train that's coming, or a particular person. And that should inherently make sense, when your level of attention and alertness goes up, there's sort of a small, but perceptible increase in your level of arousal. It's not really stress necessarily, but arousal of alertness. And it turns out that the visual system, accomplishes this increase in alertness by communicating with your circulatory system and the system that delivers blood and nutrients and oxygen to the rest of the tissues in your body. So let's talk for a second about what focusing our vision on a particular location does because in this study from the Balcetis Lab, what they found was, focusing on a goal line allows people, to move more effectively toward that goal. This is something you can leverage in all aspects of all goal pursuits. What happens when we focus on a particular location? Believe it or not, there's an increase in a particular feature of our blood pressure. Now your body has, of course, arteries, veins and capillaries, and your heart pumps blood, first to the arteries, and then to the other components of your vascular system. And we have so-called, blood pressure. Blood pressure is just how much, the fluid volume is pressing on those arteries, veins and capillaries. So you can imagine a pipe with very little fluid moving through it, that's low pressure. You have a pipe with a lot of fluid moving through it, that's even more pressure. You have a pipe with a lot of very viscous, meaning, very kind of sticky, thick stuff, moving forward, that's even more pressure. We have blood pressure and you've probably had your blood pressure measured. There's always two numbers. You have a top number, which is the systolic blood pressure. And then there's the bottom number, below the line, which is the diastolic pressure. So the important thing to understand, is that your blood pressure will rise when your heart beats, because there's more fluid moving through those pipes that are your arteries or veins and your capillaries. And that top number is called the systole or the systolic blood pressure, because that's the pressure at the time, when your heart contracts. So the top number, which normally, if you have a healthy blood pressure, is somewhere in the range of 90 to 120 millimeters of mercury. Millimeters of mercury is just the way, that pressure is measured. That top number, your systole, or your systolic blood pressure, is what's measured when the heart contracts. So, that's the amount of pressure when there's a heartbeat and it's moving through your vasculature. Now, between beats, the heartbeats, but then it relaxes, your blood pressure is going to drop to a lower value because fluid isn't being pumped through the system at those moments. And that's the bottom, the diastolic pressure. And typically for healthy people, that's going to be 60 to 80 millimeters of mercury. So you might hear about a normal blood pressure being about, again, this is an approximate, 120 over 80. What that means is, at the point where blood was being pumped through there, your arteries and veins, boom, that it's 120 millimeters of mercury, but then, when the heart relaxes for a second before the next beat, then it drops to 80. So there's high pressure, low pressure, high pressure, low pressure. The fluid is being pumped through the system. Now, why am I telling you all this? Well, it turns out, that there are neural circuits that link your visual system and focusing on a particular point with that top number, the systolic blood pressure. And when you focus your eyes on a particular location, that systolic blood pressure goes up, and there are some other systems that are coordinated with it in your brain and body, that start releasing adrenaline, low amounts of adrenaline in most cases. And that adrenaline, further readies your body for action. So, bringing our visual focus to a particular location, does a number of things to the brain and the whole system of the body, to prepare it, to place it into a state of readiness that makes us more likely to lean into our goals into action. And if we step back and think about this, this makes perfect sense. The brain and body need to be coordinated. We can't just think about a goal. In fact, a deer or a lion, can't just think about a goal. It has to think about a goal and then has to feel some sort of activation energy, some willingness or desire to move forward in pursuit of that goal. So imagining a goal, has to be coupled to the physical pursuit of the goal. So our visual system in a beautiful way, brings together a focus, literally, a visual focus on a particular point outside us. Then it recruits an increase in systolic blood pressure, which creates a systemic, a body-wide and brain-wide increase in fuel utilization, in oxygen availability, in our willingness to move forward as a body, as a whole coherent system. And then there are also neurotransmitter systems, like epinephrine, as we will soon see dopamine, that get recruited as well to place us into a continual mode of action. This to me is a remarkable feature of our physiology and it gets right to the point of some of the psychological phenomenon that we were talking about earlier. Let's just recall what some of those are. I won't list them all, but, a goal has to be significant, they say. All the psychologists, all the popular stuff online says, it has to be significant, has to be inspirational and has to be action oriented. So let's say you look out into the landscape of what's available to you, whether or not it's just in your mind, or you look at a specific point, you say, I want to go to that particular restaurant, to eat that particular food. And you orient towards it and you move towards it. This is the way that your brain and body, are coordinating their actions together. Conversely, when our visual system, is in a mode of looking at everything. When the aperture of our visual system is very broad, we know that there's also a reduction in our goal directed behavior and a reduction in the systolic blood pressure. It's as if our peripersonal space is sufficient, we don't need to get beyond our current state. We're not oriented toward any one thing in particular. So I've now described some of the psychology and some of the underlying physiology. Now, I'd like to mesh this within the context of actual specific goal setting and goal pursuit. Because what many of you are probably thinking is, well, that's some physiology, there's some psychology, but how do you actually apply this towards setting and achieving goals? Well, you do that, by understanding that your mental frame and your attention are always either positioned, to your peripersonal space, focused on your immediate possessions and state, or towards things outside you. But then you also have the ability, to dynamically travel back and forth between those. And so next, we're going to talk about, what the literature says about things like visualization, immediate and intermediate goals, long-term goals and how to best achieve those. And then we're going to move specifically into the protocols that you can use. It's a protocol that I've specifically developed for you, the listeners, in order to incorporate all the signs into a best practice, that you can do any time, any place, to really identify what it is specifically, that you want to pursue and the best route to pursue and achieve that goal. Focusing our visual attention on one particular point, is incredibly effective for all types of goal pursuit. And if you'd like to read some of the scientific studies or read a review of the scientific studies, that have looked at how, narrowing one's visual attention, can really enhance the effectiveness of pursuing goals, I'll put a link to this study. The title of the study is, keeping the goal in sight, testing the influence of narrowed visual attention on physical activity. And this is a paper from Emily Balcetis's Lab, focuses mainly on physical activities, but it mentioned some other things as well. This is an article published in Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin in 2020, so it's recent. It's an exceptional paper in my opinion, really gets to the heart of how all this works and some of the examples of where it's been implemented. So let's apply this visual tool, in a very simple way, to any type of goal that you want to pursue. If you already know what goal you want to pursue, maybe it's a workout, maybe it's a cognitive work of some particular sort. Again, the process is very simple. You're going to focus your visual attention on one point beyond your peripersonal space, so it could be on your computer. It could be on the wall, it could be a horizon. It could be at a distance and you're going to focus your visual attention there. And with some effort you're going to hold your visual attention for 30 to 60 seconds, you might blink, that's okay, but you're going to try and hold your visual attention there. So no moving your head around. No diverting your attention to other locations. Some people will find it very easy to do. Other people will find it quite hard. Your mind may drift cognitively, that's okay, but try and bring your visual attention to that common point. Several episodes ago, I talked about how, there are actually studies looking at developing this kind of training in students, for ADHD and the data on that are actually quite encouraging. So for people who have ADHD and focus issues and attentional issues, this can be effective. For people who don't, this can also be effective. Again, it places your brain and body into a state of readiness and then the idea is to move into the particular actions, that bring you closer to your goal. We haven't yet talked about how to set goals and how to assess progress. This is simply how to pursue goals. But the visual component is important, in fact, I would argue that the visual system and harnessing your visual attention to a narrow point, is going to be the most effective way, to get your brain and body into a mode of action, to pursue whatever goal it is you're trying to pursue. That practice is in stark contrast to multitasking, where by definition your attention is moving from place to place to place. I mentioned that multitasking can be effective in getting your system into somewhat of an increased level of activation, so that you can pursue a more focused goal. But the visual attention to a particular point, is going to be the most effective way to bring your system into a state of readiness and action for goal pursuit. There's another really interesting way, that you can leverage your visual system toward long-term goals. The Balcetis Lab has also done, some really interesting experiments, looking at people's ability to set and stick to long-term goals. And the long-term goal that they looked at, was one related to saving money for later in life. This is something that a lot of people struggle with, a lot of people have a hard time investing money or saving money for later in life. Simply because as human beings, we vary in the extent to which we worry about what's going to happen later. There's also a phenomenon of so-called, delay discounting. Delay discounting, is the fact that goals, become less rewarding when they exist further out in the future. You may have experienced this walking past a donut shop. I love donuts I'm just going to admit it, over and over again on the spot. I love the smell of them. I love the taste of them. I try to eat them 'cause I'm told they're not that good for me and indeed, I don't think they are. I occasionally cave and I'll eat one or many. But in general, I try not to cave to the immediately rewarding properties of the smell and the taste of the donut. But, what we know is that if you smell a donut or you smell a wonderful piece of food, in the immediate term, it brings your level of focus, your mental focus to the immediate phase. And it feels very rewarding, like if you had it now, it would just be so good. But if you actually extend that reward out to tomorrow or the next thing you think, today happens to be a Saturday, that we're recording, but, on Tuesday morning, I'm going to get a donut. It doesn't have the same value because the reward system, doesn't work as well for long-term goals. It's not as salient. It's not as tangible, a goal, especially for something like a donut. Whereas the kinds of goals that work, when you place them out to the longer term and can create a heightened sense of motivation, tend to be things that are much more rewarding to us. So delay discounting simply says that, the further out in time that a given goal is, the less effective that reward will be in motivating one's behavior. And indeed you see this with saving money for retirement, you see this with all sorts of long-term investment, The Balcetis Lab, therefore did an experiment, where they looked at people's tendency to save money for later in life. But the groups that they created in this study, were really interesting. They had one group, imagine, what it would be like to be 30 or 40 years older. And then to invest a certain amount of money, according to whatever it is they thought that they would need. And they measured the amount that they had set aside and saved for later in life. The other group, actually viewed photos of themselves, so picture, images of themselves that were artificially, digitally aged, so that they could see themselves 30 or 40 years into the future. And it turns out that people in that second group, simply by perceiving their own image, in the future, invested far more money into later life. They set aside more money. Somehow it bridged the gap between their immediate experience of life and the longer arc toward what it was going to be like in 30 or 40 years. So very powerful result in my opinion, because what it says again, is that our visual perception of the future or our visual perception of the present, is what allows us to anchor our goal directed systems and our motivation to take on things that in the immediate term might not seem that useful. So, you can imagine all sorts of variations on this. You can imagine that every time I want a donut, I'd see a vision of myself or an actual physical picture of myself as a consequence of having eaten many donuts every day for the next 10 years. I don't know what that image would look like 'cause I've never seen it. That's not an experiment that I necessarily need to do because I'm not that motivated to eat donuts, but I have to confess, I am somebody who I think I'm pretty good at managing resources. But I think if I were to see an image of myself at 70 or 75, there's so many things that are associated with visual images. Like what our body must feel like, what our needs are probably going to be like in that state or in that age. What sorts of things we may or may not still be able to do at that age. And that anchors back to immediate goal-directed behaviors, such as setting aside money for retirement. Such as investing in one's health practices. And indeed there's a study that has looked at how people will invest in exercise and healthy eating. If they just think about the future and what they might be like in the future versus seeing images of themselves in the future, if they were to go down a healthy or unhealthy route. So again, the point is that the visual system, what we see, is principally important in defining what we do in the immediate term. Even if what we see relates to something in the far off distance. I think these are phenomenal studies and they get right down to an important issue that's been kicked around over and over in the literature and in the discussion about goal seeking, which is visualization. We here keep the big goal in mind, focus on the big goal. So now we're going to address, what does the science say about visualizing big goals? If you're somebody who's interested in business, or let's say you're focused on relationship, is thinking about the perfect relationship and what that would look like and the family that you would have and where you would live. Is that effective in generating the kinds of behaviors that will lead you to that? Is it effective to think about the big win at the end? Well, it turns out it is, but you have to be very, very careful with when and how you implement that visualization. 'Cause if you do it correctly, it can really serve your goal seeking well. And if you do it incorrectly, it can undermine the entire process. So, does visualization work? Well, turns out, that visualization of the big win, the end goal. So the Superbowl win or eight gold medals in the Olympics or graduation from the university of your choice or making a certain amount of money or finding the partner of your choice, et cetera. That visualization is effective in getting the goal pursuit process started, but it actually is a pretty lousy and maybe even counterproductive way of maintaining pursuit of that goal. Meaning continuing to engage the sort of actions that are going to get you to eventually achieve that goal. I think this is going to be surprising to people, at first, but if we think back to our discussion about the physiology of the blood pressure system, it'll make sense. Good scientific studies have been done where people are told to imagine, or even script out their long-term vision and goal for themselves. What is the big goal? And they're talked to, or told to imagine it with a rich amount of detail. To think about how it's going to feel in their body and the big win. And basically what happens is, if you measure people's blood pressure or other metrics of physiology, you see an increase in that systolic blood pressure. There's an kind of a ramping up of the readiness and excitement for that goal, but that increase in blood pressure quickly wanes. And over time, that visual of the long-term goal, becomes a poor thing to rely on in order to generate the actions that are required to reach that goal. In fact, there's a much better way to maintain ongoing action toward a goal that also involves visualization, but it turns out it's not about visualizing success. It's about visualizing failure. The Balcetis Lab and other labs have looked at whether or not people make progress toward goals of different types. Whether or not they're thinking about the goal. They're thinking about that goal line and what they want to achieve, that long-term goal and all the wonderful things associated with it, or whether or not they're thinking about all the ways in which they could fail, en route to that goal. This is not typically what we are encouraged to do. Typically, we are told don't imagine failure, push failure out of your mind, only focus on success. Fake it till you make it, or is a phrase that I absolutely hate, frankly, because it's not even clear what that means. And it's not even clear what the ethical form of that is. I think it means continue despite any anxiety or fear that things won't work out. But if you look at the literature, the scientific literature, what the Balcetis Lab and other labs have shown, is that there's a near doubling, near doubling in the probability of reaching one's goal, if you focus routinely on foreshadowing failure. You think about the ways in which things could fail, if you take action A or you take action B and instead, therefore, you take action C. You're supposed to think about how things could fail, if you don't get up and run each morning, if your goal is, say a fitness goal. So let's use that as an example, because even though I realized, people are in pursuit of many things, not just fitness. Fitness goals and physical goals are a very concrete thing that we can all get on the same page about 'cause they're related to actions. Let's say, somebody sets a goal of running five miles, four times a week, minimum, and as many as seven, four times a week, minimum before 8:00 AM. In a previous podcast on habits, I talked about the benefits of not necessarily setting specific times that one will do things, but setting time blocks that one we'll do things. So you say before 8:00 AM, you're going to run five miles and that's going to happen up to seven days a week. One version of this would be, okay, sit back in a chair and think about how great you're going to feel and look, if you're doing this every day. How your health is going to improve. How everything's going to be, your blood markers, of lipids, et cetera, are going to improve, okay, fine. That's the visualization goal of visualizing the end point. It turns out that is far less effective and maybe even counterproductive, compared to thinking about what's going to happen, if you don't do this. The negative health outcomes that are going to occur, the disappointment you're going to have in yourself. The fact that you're going to wait until 7.30, that's not long enough for many people to run five miles. You got to put on your shoes as there could be pouring rain or even hailing or snowing, outside. And now you're not going outside unless you're somebody who's particularly motivated to do that. So, foreshadowing failure turns out to be the best way to motivate toward goal pursuit. In fact, as I mentioned before, there's a near doubling in the likelihood that people will reach goals of any kind. When they're constantly thinking about how bad it's going to be, if they fail. If we think back to the neural circuit associated with assessing value in our goal pursuits, this makes perfect sense. The amygdala, that center of the brain that's involved in anxiety and fear and worry. Well, the amygdala, is one of the four core components of our goal setting and goal pursuit circuitry. And there's no bypassing that. there is no one listening to this or watching this who's amygdala is not involved in their goal setting and goal pursuit behavior. And so, while I'd love to be able to tell you that all you should think about is rainbows and puppies and all the wonderful, rewarding things that are going to happen when you achieve your goals. The truth is, you should be thinking mainly about how bad it's really going to get, if you don't do it. How disappointed in yourself, you're going to feel. How it will negatively impact you, if not in the immediate term, in the long-term, if indeed your goal is to reach your goal. So, I want to emphasize that I'm not interested in encouraging people to flagellate themselves. I'm encouraging people to achieve their goals. And it turns out the best way to do that, is by foreshadowing failure. And the more specific you can get by writing down or thinking about or talking about, how bad it will be if you don't achieve your goals, the more likely you are to achieve those goals. Part of the reason for that almost certainly has to do with increases in systolic blood pressure and increases in readiness in your system, when you imagine failure. The brain and body are much better at moving away from fearful things than towards things we want. I wish I could tell you that wasn't the case, but there is a true asymmetry in the way we are built. In fact, the brain and body can engage in what's called, one trial learning. When something bad happens, we eat a food that makes us sick. We have an interaction with a person or place that we really don't like. It only takes one trial to really... One event, one time to reorient or rewire our neural circuitry, so that we have a bias toward moving away from that thing in the future. When things go well, unfortunately, that doesn't often occur. If things go really, really well, it might orient our brain and body toward wanting more of that thing. And we'll have neural circuitry changes that will lead us to engage in that particular behavior or interaction again, but it is never as effective as these avoidance circuits. So again, foreshadow failure, if you're going to visualize in a positive way, do that at the very beginning of some goal pursuit. Maybe intermittently every once in a while, you imagine the big win of scoring perfect on exam or winning the championship or the great relationship. But most of the time, if you want to be effective, you should be focusing on avoiding failure and you should be really clear about what those failures would look like and feel like. Now, let's talk about goal setting. Going back to that prominent literature, the psychology and popular literature, again, we can hear some of these themes start to emerge. The goal should be significant, we are told. It should be inspirational. It should be aggressive, yet realistic. Well, okay, that's all fine and good, but let's get semi quantitative about this. Let's at least get biological about this. How inspirational does it need to be? Does it need to be the kind of thing that is so inspiring to me that I can't sleep at all? Well, that wouldn't be good because as I believe and I know, many of you have heard me say many, many times before, regular deep sleep, 80% or more of the nights that you go to sleep, is going to be crucial to your cognitive and mental functioning and your ability to achieve your goals in the long-term. That's absolutely clear. So, it's got to be, inspirational and exciting, but what does that really look like and what does that correspond to and how do we actually make that happen? Well, once again, there is a mismatch between what the real data show and what we're most often told. Turns out, that again, work in Balcetis Lab, but also other laboratories, has addressed whether or not the probability of achieving a goal, goes up or down, depending on whether or not one visualizes or sets a goal that is easy, moderate or impossible. An impossible goal would be, for instance, if I say, I'm going to jump from my front driveway, all the way up to the road, the road's, quite a distance away, it's more than 20 meters away. It's just not going to happen. It's not going to happen in this lifetime, it's not going to happen in any other lifetime. Not unless it involves some elaborate technology that I'm not aware of, a jet pack or something like that. It's just not going to happen. An easy goal would be something like, can you jump? Or could I jump, two feet in front of me, obviously, yes. Now I'm using a trivial example here, but this could be translated to any kind of goal, school goal, physical goal, et cetera. It turns out that, when people set goals, whether or not they are nutritional goals, eat more of this or eat less of that. Whether or not they're fitness goals, run more, lift more. Some other goals, swim less, swim more, whatever it is their goal happens to be. Some learning goal, some relationship goal, some attempt to modify their behavior. It turns out that if the goal is too easy, it's too within reach, it doesn't recruit enough of the autonomic nervous system to make pursuit of that goal, likely. Now that might be surprising, at least it was surprising to me, you think, well, something is really, really easy. there's a very low bar to achieve it. People are probably more likely to do it. But turns out that's not the case, when we hear that a goal needs to be inspirational, what do we mean? When we hear that something's too easy, to recruit our action, what do we mean? Well, Balcetis Lab measured, systolic blood pressure, and found that, when goals were too easy for people to attain, they didn't get that increase in systolic blood pressure and recruitment of the other neural and vascular systems, meaning the blood systems and the nervous system that would place them into ongoing effort. And so they quickly gave up. Also, if a goal was too lofty, if it was too far from their current abilities, it didn't recruit enough systolic blood pressure. Even if people could get very excited about something mentally, it simply didn't place their body into a state of readiness because it wasn't tangible that they could actually perhaps really achieve it. So it turns out that when goals were moderate, when they were just outside of one's immediate abilities or that one felt that yeah, that would take a lot of effort. But it's within range or maybe in range, like maybe I can do it, maybe I can't. Then there was a near doubling of the systolic blood pressure in the good sense. It didn't go into the unhealthy range and a doubling or more of the likelihood that they would engage in the ongoing pursuit of that particular goal. So here we're talking about goal setting., what we're saying is, set goals that are realistic, but that aren't so realistic, that they're easy. The goals need to be realistic and truly challenging. Don't set goals that are so challenging and so lofty that they crash that blood pressure system in the other direction and make you or anyone feel unmotivated. In hearing this, it makes sense, but I don't think I would have predicted it, had they not done this very controlled study. I would have thought, the loftier the goal, the bigger the goal, the more that it recruits the autonomic system and the more that people are likely, to lean into the energy and effort to pursue and attain that goal. I also would have thought that if a goal is really easy to achieve, that it would engage the systems of action in the brain and body enough that people would sort of get into motion and pursue that goal. But neither is the case. Again, set goals that are difficult to achieve, but that are not so lofty, that they collapse your system and that you feel overwhelmed. And the important thing here, is that how we perceive a goal, whether or not we think it's within reach or not, of course will vary, depending on whether or not we are rested. Depending on whether or not other aspects of our life are going well. I mean, we can think that we are hot on the heels of a lifetime goal and everything's going well, and then there'll be some crisis interpersonal crisis, or there'll be a health crisis and you'll be shut down. And then that goal seems very, very hard to attain. So we will talk about how to update goals under different context in a few minutes. But, of course this is going to be an averaging, this isn't something that you do just once. But the takeaway again is very simple, set goals that are moderately hard to hard, but not so hard nor so easy that they don't engage your brain and body properly. Moderate goals are best, if you want to achieve your goals. Now I'd like to talk about three particular areas of scientific study, that point to goal pursuit, goal assessment and goal achievement. Previously I told you, that it's great to foreshadow failure. That that's a great way to get your system into a state of activation. I also told you that you want to set goals, that are challenging but possible. And again, here, I'm paraphrasing from the work of Emily Balcetis. I want to be very clear. There are a few other things that one can do in order to bias the likelihood, that you will succeed in trying to achieve your goals. First of all, limit your options, trying to pursue too many goals at once, can definitely be counter productive. Now I realized that life is complicated. We all have multiple goals that we're trying to pursue, but if we have particular goals that are important to us, we have to be careful to not get distracted by other goals. And many people run into this problem. So setting one or two or maybe three major goals for a given year, is going to be more than enough for most people and is actually going to be challenging for most people. Now, of course we have daily goals and monthly goals and yearly goals, but if we have big lofty goals, we need to be careful not to contaminate our mental space and our visual space with too many goals. And why do I say visual goals? Well, what various department stores and supermarkets have discovered is that, the greater, the number of things in our visual attention, the more that we can draw our attention and our goals off a line of pursuit. What does that mean? Well, let's think about it in the practical context. This has actually been done. Big department stores have figured out that if they stock their shelves, chock-a-block with many, many options of food or clothing items or objects or anything like that, people simply buy more stuff. People are very prone to orienting their attention to whatever's in front of them. You put a lot of stuff in front of them, their attention drifts, you put fewer things in front of them, their attention is more narrow. In a later episode, we'll talk about designing a workspace, that's optimized on the basis of this. It doesn't mean being in a room with nothing except just your desk and a computer. Doesn't have to be that sparse, but visual sparseness, actually can help us orient our focus and our behavior. When we have a lot of things in our visual environment, or a lot of things in our cognitive environment. It's the same thing. And so if you're going to try and pursue a fitness goal, a relationship goal, an academic goal, and a longterm life financial goal all at once, that's four things. And you're going to have to come up with systems that allow you to isolate those goals in a very rigid way. And if you do have multiple interleaving goals and overlapping goals and simultaneous goals, in a few minutes, we're going to talk about a process that will allow you to use your visual system, to align towards each of those goals, sequentially, in a way that makes it much more likely that you'll achieve them. So now let's talk about specificity of goals. We've all heard that the more specific a goal is, and the more specific we are about when and how we are going to execute that goal, the higher probability that we will actually achieve that goal. And indeed that's the case, but there's an additional feature, that's not often discussed. That is vitally important. And in fact, maybe more important than having a specific time of day or a specific end point in mind. There's a really nice study, that was done looking at recycling. This is something that a number of groups, businesses, households, and individuals are trying to do more of. They're trying to lower carbon footprint or contribute to the world in some general way by throwing away fewer things that could potentially be recycled. So this has been studied in the context of the work environment, where a business decides and lets everybody know, that there's going to be a greater effort toward recycling cans or bottles or bottles and cans, et cetera. And then, the way these studies were done, is that the janitorial staff was swapped out temporarily for researchers that actually measured the number of recyclable items that showed up in the trash and not in the recycle, as a function of the total amount of trash. Why'd I say, as a function of the total amount of trash? What's a way of controlling for differences in beverage consumption from one week to the next? Anyway, the point is they were able to very carefully measure, how much people are recycling before and after this call to action to recycle more. And what they found was, if they said, we are going to try and recycle more, try not to put cans and bottles in the trash. There of course was an improvement in recycling, but it was pretty modest. Whereas when there was a very concrete plan and everyone knew what that concrete plan was, for instance, to place all bottles and cans into the recycle, not the trash or to limit the amount of trash by 50%, or to eliminate all recyclable items from the trash. So when they made it very concrete, exactly what the action steps were, there was a remarkable, I mean, close to a hundred fold or more improvement in recycling behavior that lasted many months after this call to action was made. The takeaway from this is quite straightforward. It means that having a concrete plan is essential. You can't just say, I'm going to become a better recycler or I'm going to do things that are better for the environment or I'm going to become more physically fit. It has to be a specific set of action steps that get right down to details about what success would look like. I've heard this before described as what does right look like? What is the actual outcome that one would like to achieve in terms of action steps? So not necessarily feeling states, it wasn't that they all sat around and said, how great we're all going to feel about ourselves in the world when we accomplish this goal? It was very concrete statements, very concrete plans about action steps that would deliver one to one's goal. Somewhat straightforward and intuitive, but nonetheless worthwhile. What it suggests is that for all of us, if we have certain goals that we want to achieve, we need to be exquisitely detailed about what the action steps are, that we are going to take and to constantly update those action steps, so that we have a higher probability of meeting those action steps. Some of you may be asking, how often should one assess progress? Well, that of course will depend on the given goal that you're trying to pursue. But in the studies that I've been referring to here, the assessment of progress and the updating of concrete plans was done weekly. So it seems like weekly is a good starting place, to address how well one performed in the previous week. And then based on that performance to update the action plan for the upcoming week. So weekly seems like a good solid rule of thumb for setting particular action goals and assessing one's progress towards the immediate and longer term goals. Any discussion about goals and goal pursuit, would be incomplete without a discussion about the molecule, dopamine. Dopamine is often thought of as the molecule of pleasure and reward, but actually it is the molecule of motivation. This is best illustrated by a classic set of studies, that have been carried out in both animals and in humans. The animal study can be described the following way, two rats, each in a separate cage. You can provide those rats with the opportunity to indulge in something that they like, like food or mating. Or heat, if it's cold in the environment, or a cool spot in the cage, if it's warm in the environment and so forth. And what you find is that, rats will very readily approach the rewarding thing. They will, mate. They will eat. They will pursue something that is of pleasure. Now, if you are to take one of those rats and deplete its dopamine neurons, you can eliminate it's dopamine neurons or block dopamine in the brain. What you find, is that those animals will still enjoy pleasure. They will consume the food, they will mate, et cetera. However, their motivation, to achieve pleasure is vastly reduced. In fact, if you place the item of pleasure, the mate, the food, et cetera, even just one rat's length away from that rat, the rat without dopamine will not even move one length of its own body in order to achieve that pleasure. And there are naturally occurring experiments in humans that mimic that result, very accurately. There are certain conditions in humans where there's a depletion of dopamine. And what you find is that, the depletion of dopamine does not inhibit an ability to experience pleasure, necessarily. It inhibits an ability to pursue or go through the series of action steps in order to achieve pleasure. So dopamine, really sits at the heart of our motivational state, to seek out goals and to seek pleasure. And this is true for immediate goals that take place within a timeframe of minutes or a timeframe of a day, or the timeframe of a week or the timeframe of a lifetime. Dopamine, is the common currency by which we pursue goals. Now, dopamine does a number of things that are very interesting. I'm going to describe a few of them as they relate to goal seeking behavior. First of all, there's a fundamental feature of how our brain releases and uses dopamine, that's called, reward prediction error. And the simplest way to think about dopamine reward prediction error, is that dopamine is released in the greatest amount and places us into a greater state of motivation, when something happens that's positive and novel. Now, an important thing to understand about dopamine, is that it's not always released on the same schedule. There are a couple of different ways that dopamine is released. And when it is released relative to your anticipation of a reward, is key. If you don't expect something positive to happen, you're just going about your day and something positive happens, dopamine and a lot of dopamine is released. I had this happen recently. I had no idea that I was going to be receiving something in the mail, but I went to the mail. I looked in the mail and I got something very positive. And I was really, really excited about this. This is a real event that happened, just today. However, if we anticipate something positive is going to happen and then that thing happens, we experience dopamine as part of the anticipation. So even before we get the reward, there's an increase in dopamine. It's not as high as it would be, if something really novel and unexpected and positive happened, but we do get an increase in dopamine. And then, when we actually experience the reward, we experience the positive thing, there's a smaller increase in dopamine. So again, the biggest increases in dopamine are response to things that are positive and unexpected. Lesser dopamine is released when we anticipate something good will happen and when that happens, yes, we get some dopamine. And we also get some dopamine when the positive thing happens, think about anticipating a great meal with friends. We have some dopamine churning, our friends come over, then we have the meal and we also get some dopamine from that, but not nearly as much as we would, if it had all happened as a part of a big surprise. Then, there's also the case in which we predict that something good will happen, when that happens, there's an increase in dopamine just as it was before, but then if that thing doesn't happen, for instance, our friends don't show up for dinner, then there's a drop in dopamine below our initial baseline. That drop in dopamine, is the chemical essence of what we call, disappointment. Now, this dopamine reward prediction error, as it's called, can be leveraged toward trying to reach our goals because it tells us where we should set our milestones. We can't be in a mode of simply being focused on the finish line. Very few people can do that over long periods of time in a way that's effective. Now, earlier I talked about a study where people were focused on a finish line visually, and they were moving through space with these ankle weights on, but that was a very short-term goal. So, if a goal is within minutes, or maybe even within an hour or as in with our immediate visuals environment, maybe we can do that. But most goals of the sort that most people are pursuing, fitness goals, academic goals, business goals, relationship goals, et cetera, involve some milestones. So, understanding what we know about reward prediction error, we can make better choices about where to place the milestones, how far out in the future to place milestones. So then the question becomes, how often or at what intervals should one assess progress? And it turns out this is very subjective, but that there's a way to make it objective. Now, in a previous episode of the "Huberman Lab Podcast", I had a discussion with the great Robert Sapolsky and we were talking about, how the brain can subjectively change whether or not a given behavior or experience, is positive or negative. And the example that Robert gave, is a really phenomenal one. It's a study that's been done in rats and also in humans where they took a rat and they had a rat run on a running wheel. Rats turns out like to run them running wheels and the blood pressure of that animal, the health metrics for that animal, the lipid profiles, many, many things improved. The rat was exercising and it got healthier and presumably happier, we don't know, we could've asked it, but we wouldn't know. It doesn't know how to tell us, but we can measure blood lipids. We can measure blood pressure and all sorts of things. And indeed, when that rat exercised or when people exercise, they generally get healthier. Except, in that particular experiment, they had another animal where every time rat number one, ran, rat number two was forced to run. It was on a running wheel and it was forced to run, not because it wanted to, but because it was forced to. And what was remarkable, is that the physiological effects of being forced to do something, were in the complete opposite direction as they were when those same behaviors were undertaken voluntarily. In other words, the rat that was choosing to run, got healthier and the rat that was forced to run became unhealthy, blood pressure went up in a direction that wasn't effective and useful. Blood lipids got worse. Stress hormones went up, et cetera, et cetera. And you see the same thing in humans. Now, what this says, is that our subjective understanding of why we are doing something, is fundamentally important for the effects that we will get from that behavior. And indeed the effects of that behavior will have on us. So this has two major implications. First of all, in terms of reward schedules, we can decide to use any reward schedule that we want for a given behavior. We can decide that the milestones for a... Let's say a plan of getting in really terrific cardiovascular shape over the next year. We can decide to assess every day and ask ourselves how good was our progress. And if we made progress, then we're going to reward ourselves. We could do that every third day. We could do it every week. We could do it every five minutes, if we actually had the time to do that. The reward schedule, the dopamine system, is highly susceptible to the subjective effects. These so-called, top-down effects of when we decide that something is going to be good for us, if we analyze it on a given timeframe, well, then it's going to be good for us. So, what I suggest people do is pick a particular interval at which they are going to assess progress. And if you've been making regular progress towards a goal that you reward yourself and the reward indeed is all cognitive. It's all mental. It's telling yourself, yes, I'm on the right track. Now, some people will say, wait, but I want to know exactly how often I should do that. You need to do that at an interval that you can maintain consistently. So you're not going to reward yourself every minute or every step of every jog that you take, unless you can do it, every minute of every step of every jog that you take. For that reason, I think that daily or ideally, weekly assessments are going to be best. I think that checking in at the end of a week, looking back on the previous week and assessing how well you performed in pursuit of a given goal. How many times a week you ran, or how many times you studied, or how many times you did something that you wanted to do or avoided something that you didn't want to do. I think that's a reasonable and tractable schedule to assess once a week. So that's one point, that pick a milestone that you can maintain consistently throughout the pursuit of a goal. The second thing, is that the subjective effects that were described by that Sapolsky study or that Sapolsky described rather, are absolutely essential for all aspects of goal seeking behavior. We cannot underestimate the extent to which the dopamine system and our sense of whether or not we are on the right track, is under our cognitive control. If we constantly place ourselves into a mode of thinking that we are failing, well, then indeed, we are not going to churn out much dopamine. Now, earlier, I said, we need to predict and visualize failure, but that is not the same thing as thinking about ourselves as failing. We need to predict what the outcome would be if we failed, but then encountering that and in behaving in a certain way, and thinking in a certain way, in pursuing our goals in an effective way. Maybe checking in on that each week, we definitely need to reward ourselves cognitively for the correct and successful pursuit. What this means is that anticipate and think about failure as a mechanism of generating motivation and indeed fear and anxiety, so that you lean into the correct behaviors and you lean away from the incorrect behaviors to reach your goal. But then weekly or so, whatever you can maintain consistently, you absolutely want to reward yourself cognitively by telling yourself, I'm on the right track. I got another week where I accomplish, whatever it is that I'm trying to accomplish. A concrete example that I'm following now, is this 150 to 200 minutes of zone two cardio per week, because that's shown to be very effective in improving mental and physical health metrics. So once a week, I'll check in with myself. If I reach that 150 to 200 minutes threshold, then I'll reward myself simply by checking off a box and saying, okay, I'm on track. I'm on track. I'm on track. This dopamine system is critical to re-up, to remind ourselves that we are on track, if indeed we are on track because dopamine itself provides a state of motivation and readiness to continue in the regular pursuit of our goals. Dopamine, the molecule, is actually used to manufacture epinephrine and norepinephrine. Which are other molecules in our brain and body, which put us into that readiness and action state. There are actually the molecules that help generate that increase in systolic blood pressure, that puts us into a state of readiness. So you can think about dopamine as a self amplifying system, provided that you are leveraging the dopamine system on a consistent schedule. Now, by also following a consistent schedule of self reward, you set yourself up for any positive unanticipated rewards, that may happen. So for instance, if you're checking in with yourself weekly, telling yourself that you're doing well, if indeed you are. And then out of nowhere, for instance, you're out on a run or you're doing something, I'm using fitness as an example. But you're doing something, you find yourself performing particularly well, that's a unexpected dopamine reward that will further amplify the system. Now I know many people out there, having heard me talk about dopamine before, worry, well, can I release too much dopamine and then the whole system will crash and then I'll run out of motivation? In general, that doesn't happen unless people are using pharmacology, supplements or prescription drugs or illicit drugs to increase dopamine. This is why I'm a big fan of things like, cold showers and cold water exposure, which has been shown to lead to long-lasting 2.5 X increases in dopamine, or in some cases, supplementation with things like L-Tyrosine, which are precursors to dopamine. Or in some cases, caffeine, which can increase the number of dopamine receptors that we have, so that whatever dopamine we have floating around can be more effective in activating these motivational states. But things that really increase dopamine and then cause it to crash, can be problematic. One way to conceive of dopamine, is as a sort of dopamine wave pool. You've probably seen these wave pools, where some pressure is pushed into the pool and then you get these waves going. If those waves are consistent enough, and they're are of high enough amplitude, the waves can continue to go up and down and up and down. But if it's a giant wave, if you get a huge blast of dopamine, well then a bunch of the water sloshes out of the wave pool and then you basically have to take some time off, reset that dopamine level. That's what happens in addiction and when people start pushing in a lot of drugs or other things into the system that increase dopamine too much. So today we've almost exclusively been talking about behavioral tools. It is possible to incorporate supplements and things of that sort, that can increase dopamine as a way to getting into ongoing motivational states. But I caution people about relying on those too much. Really what you want, is you want a situation where your own positive feedback, your own understanding, that you are reaching the milestones that you've set out for yourself. That you're achieving those, and that is what's causing these waves or these increases in dopamine that will further amplify your motivational states. Another very interesting aspect of dopamine that I've not talked about at all on this podcast before, is actually how the dopamine system interacts with the visual system. We've talked a lot about how harnessing your visual attention, to a particular point is great and can help serve your ability to both set and achieve goals. Really wonderful work that was done by Wolfram Schultz, who's one of the great pioneers in this area of dopamine and dopamine reward prediction error, showed that for people that have normal levels of dopamine, their visual search, meaning how they scanned visual environments, tends to be pretty constrained. They might move their eyes around a particular visual environment, searching somewhat. For people that lack dopamine, they actually have very little movement of their eyes. They don't actually tend to look very far into the horizon. They're don't have that very focused vergence point that we're talking about that kind of a... I guess for lack of a better phrase, that kind of eye of the tiger, focus on a goal. Rather, their eye movements are depleted and they're not actually evaluating horizons off in their future, they're not focused so much on the extrapersonal space. And this actually can be restored and some of these took place in Parkinson's patients and other people who have dopamine depleted, that when dopamine is restored pharmacologically, their visual focus is re-enhanced again. Now, there are a lot of details to this study that don't map perfectly onto everything that I've talked about. But the point is this, when we are focused on a particular point in visual space or a particular goal or horizon. All those systems, our blood pressure, epinephrine and indeed dopamine, get recruited to put us into a state of readiness and willingness to go pursue things in that extrapersonal space. When our visual attention is very diffuse, all of that relaxes, and we tend to be more comfortable staying in the place that we are, in our peripersonal space and the effect works in the other direction too. When dopamine is increased, our visual attention for particular things out in space, increase. So the way it works is reciprocal. When we use our visual system and in a particular way, bring it to a point of focus, it recruits chemical and neural systems in our brain and body that put us into a state of readiness and pursuit. And, when we increase certain chemicals in our brain and body, like epinephrine, like dopamine, then we also allow our visual system to be in a state of looking out at particular locations in our visual world. So the system works in both directions and some people leverage this by using things like caffeine or taking things like L-Tyrosine to increase dopamine. And again, it works both ways, there's no right or wrong way to do it. I'm a particular fan of using behavioral tools, always prior to using supplementation or any kinds of other tools because behavioral tools have a very unique feature that supplementation and other chemical tools don't. Which is that behavioral tools used over time, engage neuroplasticity. As we start to practice, using our visual system to harness our attention to particular locations and in that way, move to our particular goals, we get better and better at using those systems. In fact, the systems for focus and motivation, themselves have plasticity, so we get better at being motivated and focused when we place our visual attention at a given location. Using chemical assistance of a safe kind, of course, check with your doctor. But things like L-Tyrosine or caffeine or those combined, yes, it will increase dopamine and will increase our ability, to engage in visual focus somewhat. But those compounds alone, don't modify the circuitry in the way that we want. So I always say, behavioral tools first, then nutritional tools, then supplementation tools and then if it's right for you and safe, maybe you advance into some of the other more sophisticated tools. I'd like to just briefly recap what I've covered up until now. And again, emphasize that much of what I've covered has been based on the beautiful work of Emily Balcetis and colleagues. I do hope to get her as a guest on the podcast, by the way. First of all, set goals that are challenging, but possible, those moderate goals, not super easy, not super difficult. But moderately challenging goals, seem to be the most effective in moving people towards their goals over the short and longterm. Second, plan concretely, you need a concrete set of actions that you're going to follow in order to reach your goals. Third, foreshadow failure. This is a somewhat surprising one to me. I would have anticipated, that imagining success is the way to go. It turns out that imagining success and visualizing success, can be useful at the outset of a goal and maybe every once in a while in pursuit of that goal. But that it's not terrific for putting you in constant pursuit of that goal, rather, foreshadowing failure, visualizing failure and all the terrible things that it's going to bring, seems to be more effective. And that maps very well to what's known about the neural circuitry and the involvement of the amygdala. Focus on particular visual points as a way to harness your attention and to remove distractors. Removing distractors and getting your body and brain into a mode of activation. Getting that healthy increase in systolic blood pressure, that puts you into forward motion towards your goals, is absolutely key. So that's a brief summary of what I've covered up until now. There were other things too, of course, the dopamine system and the power of subjective top-down control in regulating that dopamine system. But I want to be sure to include a tool, that's been especially powerful for me, that's grounded in the neuroscience research and in the psychology research. And as I describe this tool next, I think you'll see the ways in which it measures nicely with the work that Emily Balcetis and colleagues have done. This is something that, I've personally been doing for many years, based on my understanding of the visual system and the understanding that indeed we can move our cognition and our perception from a place of interoception and focusing on our peripersonal space. That space within us and immediately around us and on the things that are immediately accessible to us. That we can shift from that mode to this mode of exteroception of focusing on things outside the confines of our skin and that are beyond our reach, that are literally goal directed behaviors and goal directed thoughts. And this is something that in the past, I have talked about a little bit and I've talked about something called, space-time bridging. And we haven't talked too much about the time domain of the visual system today. But space-time bridging, is simply a way of using one's visual system to focus on the peripersonal space and interoception. And then gradually in a deliberate way, stepping one's focus into the extra personal space and then back to the peripersonal space in a way that gives you a lot of flexibility and control over that ability in your daily life. So, I'm going to first describe the tool, and then I will explain more about the underlying science and the underlying mechanism. Here's how you would do this. You could do this indoors or outdoors, although, ideally, you would do it in a location where you could view a horizon. It could be through a window or ideally outdoors, without a window. It could be done anytime of day. At night, it might be a little more challenging, but it goes the following way. What you first do, is you would close your eyes, this could be done sitting or standing. But you would close your eyes and you would focus as much of your attention, including your visual attention on your inner landscape, on your interoception. So that would be your breathing, your heart rate, maybe even the surface of your skin, but really focusing internally. Now, how can you focus your visual attention internally, if your eyes are closed? Well, you do that by imagining your inner landscape. So you don't have to imagine your heart beating and so forth. But what you're trying to do is eliminate perception of the outside world. You're eliminating exteroception and you're focusing all of your cognitive attention and your perceptual attention on what you're experiencing within the confines of your skin or at the level of the surface of your skin and inside your body. And you would do that for a duration of approximately three slow breaths. So close your eyes. You do breath one, breath two and breath three, concentrating all your attention on your internal landscape. Then you would open your eyes and you would focus your visual attention on some area on the surface of your body. So for me, the way that I typically do this, will be to focus on, say the palm of my hand. So I'll focus my visual attention on the palm of my hand. And I then do three breaths again, focusing on my internal state, but now I'm splitting out a little bit of my attention from interoception to exteroception. I'm focusing on something outside me, the ratio or the split of attention is about 90, 10, about 90% of my attention is focused internally, but I'm also focusing some of my attention externally. Most people can do this pretty easily. Then, there's a third, what I call, station. I now move my visual attention to outside my body, to some location in the room, or if I'm outside in the external environment, something in the range of five to 15 feet away. And I'm trying to move 90% of my attention to that external object. So now I'm really biasing my perception and my attention towards exteroception. As I breathe, I'm paying attention to those three breaths, so that's why there's still 10%, that's focused on my internal landscape because I want to pay attention to those three breasts. But I'm focusing as much of my attention, outside of myself, maintaining just a little bit on my internal state, so I can measure the cadence of those three breaths. Then I move my visual attention to yet another station, which is further away, typically, a horizon or something as far off in the distance, as I can possibly see. Again for the duration of three breaths. And at that point, I'm trying my very best to move 99, if not 100% of my attention to that external location. And then, what I typically will do, is I will try and expand both my vision and my cognition to a much broader sphere. This is that, magnocellular vision that we talked about before, where I'm not focusing on a particular location on the horizon. I'm trying to dilate the aperture of my field of view, so I can see as much of the visual landscape as I'm in as possible. If you're in an internal, excuse me, if you're in indoors, then that might be the ceiling, the walls and the floor of the environment you're in. If you're outdoors, it would be to expand your visual focus as broadly as you possibly can. Again, for the duration of three breaths, then I would return immediately to my internal landscape. I would close my eyes and I would do three more breasts focusing entirely on my interoception, on my internal landscape or what we called before, my peripersonal space. And I would then repeat that, peripersonal space, 100%, focus on my hand, 90%, 10% on my peripersonal space or my internal landscape. Stepping out to another location where it's mostly exteroception, maybe a little bit of recognition of my internal state, then to the horizon, then to this broader visual sphere, then back into my body. And I would work through each of those stations, maybe two or three times. The entire thing takes about 90 seconds to three minutes, depending on how many breaths you do. I said three, but you could do one or 10. It doesn't really matter. Or, it's also going to depend on, for instance, how slowly your breathing. 'Cause your breathing might be faster than mine or vice versa. What is all of this doing? Why do I call this space-time bridging? And why is this useful for goal setting? The reason I call it space-time bridging, is that the visual system, is not just about analyzing space. It's actually how we batch time. It's how we carve up time. And the simple way to state this is that, when we focus our visual attention on a very narrow point, that's close to our body and our immediate experience. We tend to slice up time, very finely. We're focused on our breathing. We're focused on our heartbeats. In fact, our breathing and our internal landscape and our heartbeats become the sort of seconds hand, if you will on our experience. We are carving up time, according to our immediate physiological experience. Whereas when we focus our visual attention outside our body, not only do we engage that exteroceptive, extra personal space system, and we start to engage the dopamine system, the goal-directed system, but we also start batching time differently. When we focus our visual system into a broader sphere of space or into a space beyond the confines of our skin, we start carving up time, our frame rate changes. Now this is useful in the context of goal setting, goal assessment and goal pursuit. Because with the exception of a very few isolated examples, almost all goals, involve setting some goal, that's off in the future, and then carving up the time between now and the achievement of that goal into milestones, that range in duration. And the rewards, even if we try and just make them every week, are going to come at some unexpected intervals and that's actually can be helpful for reinforcing behavior, intermittent reward. That's intermittent and random is the most effective reward schedule we know, but the problem is always, how do we keep our cognition in line with the long-term goal while also being focused on these more immediate goals? And so this particular practice, that I call space-time bridging, but we could give it a different name. I'm sure there are better names. Maybe you can suggest some in the comment section on YouTube, that are more accurate or map to it better. But this behavior or this practice rather, is teaching us to use our visual system and thereby our cognitive system and thereby our reward systems, to orient to different locations in space and therefore different locations in time. And that is the essence of goal directed behavior. That is the essence of setting a goal. It's about thinking about what you want. Then it's about setting milestones that are intermediate to that goal. Then it's about assessing whether or not you're reaching those milestones. And then, it's of course about updating your goals, if you need to update your goals. All of that is an enormously confusing batch of challenges, if you think about it all at once, but if you break it down into these elements, that the visual system can help you find and move towards those milestones. I think there's ample evidence to support that and that your control over your visual system, is indeed yours, that you can deliberately set it to different locations. And then you make a practice of stepping through these different stations on a regular basis. Again, I do this each morning. I do this once a day. Rarely have I done it twice a day. Rarely have I missed a day. But by doing that, you can be very effective in teaching the systems of your brain that are related to goal setting and reward, to map to different timeframes. So, I found this to be a very effective protocol, the Balcetis work has mainly focused on visual tools that are of a single horizon. Here I'm talking about multiple what I called stations or horizons. But what's very clear, is that an ability to move from different visual stations and to do that in a deliberate way in a focused and conscious way. Clearly maps to an ability, to conceive of different goals over different periods of time. And I do believe can be greatly beneficial in allowing one to set particular goals and then move through the milestones to those goals and to constantly update one's pursuit and reward in reaching those milestones and eventually, the overall goal. Per usual, I covered a lot of material today. We talked about some of the neuroscience and psychology and popular understanding of goal seeking behavior. How to assess goals, et cetera. Talked about the beautiful work of Emily Balcetis at New York University and her work on the use of the visual system, to better achieve goals. And indeed things like visualization and why forecasting failure can be more effective than forecasting success as counter intuitive as that might seem. That's what the data point to. And we talked about the importance of setting concrete plans and really what that means. And what intervals at which to assess progress. And what intervals at which to assess reward and how the dopamine system is involved. And in addition, I described this practice that one can incorporate as a daily or semi-daily practice of so-called, space-time bridging of using the visual system and your ability to deliberately step your visual system from stations that are within your body. So-called peripersonal or interoceptive space out into the world further and further. And then back again in sequence as a way to harness and cultivate and build up these systems that link vision, space, time, reward systems and so forth. Ultimately, as you set out to accomplish your goals, there are going to be a number of basic steps that everyone will have to follow. You have to clearly identify, what the long arching ultimate goal is. You have to identify what the milestones will be. You might not know all of them at the outset, but you ought to have some idea about the intervals at which you are going to set those milestones and set your reward schedule for assessing progress in route to those milestones in your ultimate goal. My hope is that you'll be able to incorporate these tools, if not all of them, perhaps just one of them or two of them in pursuit of whatever particular goals, you happen to be focused on at this point and in the future. If you're enjoying and are learning from this podcast, please subscribe to the podcast on YouTube, Apple and Spotify. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, on YouTube, you can leave us comments and feedback. You can also leave us suggestions about guests that you'd like us to include or topics that you'd like us to cover in the comment section on YouTube. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review, there's also an opportunity to leave us a written review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, that's perhaps the best way to support this podcast. And in addition, we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the "Huberman Lab Podcast" at any level that you like. In today's episode and in previous episodes of the "Huberman Lab Podcast", we talked about supplements, while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people drive tremendous benefit from them. For things like sleep and focus and so forth. It's really important that if you're going to take supplements, that they be of the absolute highest quality. For that reason, we partner Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorne supplements, have the highest levels of stringency with respect to the ingredients they include and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients they include in their products. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And you can see the supplements that I take and get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate further into the Thorne site through thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and/ or, Twitter, please do so, there I teach neuroscience and neuroscience related tools, that sometimes overlap with the content of the podcast, but oftentimes is unique from the content of the podcast. Also, if you haven't already done so, please subscribe to the "Huberman Lab" at Neural Network Newsletter. The Neural Network Newsletter, is a monthly zero-cost newsletter where I very succinctly spell out or list out protocols for things like sleep, learning, neuroplasticity and other topics as well. You can go to hubermanlab.com, click on the menu, go to newsletter. It's a simple signup. We will not give out your email information to anybody. All our privacy policy is there, again at zero cost and the tools that are there, very cleanly spell out a number of the protocols, that you can hear about on the podcast. And in closing, I want to thank you once again for joining me in this discussion about the biology-science and in particular, the neuroscience of goal setting, goal assessment and achieving goals. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 293 ---
Video ID: GLgKkG44MGo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GLgKkG44MGo
Title: Dr. Jack Feldman: Breathing for Mental & Physical Health & Performance
Published: 2022-01-10 13:00:14 UTC
Description:
This episode my guest is Dr. Jack Feldman, Distinguished Professor of Neurobiology at University of California, Los Angeles and a pioneering world expert in the science of respiration (breathing). We discuss how and why humans breathe the way we do, the function of the diaphragm and how it serves to increase oxygenation of the brain and body. We discuss how breathing influences mental state, fear, memory, reaction time, and more. And we discuss specific breathing protocols such as box-breathing, cyclic hyperventilation (similar to Wim Hof breathing), nasal versus mouth breathing, unilateral breathing, and how these each effect the brain and body. We discuss physiological sighs, peptides expressed by specific neurons controlling breathing, and magnesium compounds that can improve cognitive ability and how they work. This conversation serves as a sort of "Master Class" on the science of breathing and breathing related tools for health and performance.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Breathing

Thank you to our sponsors:
Thesis - https://takethesis.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Our Breath Collective:
https://www.ourbreathcollective.com/huberman

Dr. Jack Feldman Links:
UCLA website - https://bioscience.ucla.edu/people/jack-feldman
Wikipedia - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_L._Feldman
Twitter - https://twitter.com/prebotzinger
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/jacklfeldman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Jack Feldman
00:03:05 Sponsors: Thesis, Athletic Greens, Headspace, Our Breath Collective
00:10:35 Why We Breathe 
00:14:35 Neural Control of Breathing: “Pre-Botzinger Complex”
00:16:20 Nose vs Mouth Breathing
00:18:18 Skeletal vs. Smooth Muscles: Diaphragm, Intracostals & Airway Muscles
00:20:11 Two Breathing Oscillators: Pre-Botzinger Complex & Parafacial Nucleus
00:26:20 How We Breathe Is Special (Compared to Non-Mammals)
00:33:40 Stomach & Chest Movements During Breathing
00:36:23 Physiological Sighs, Alveoli Re-Filling, Bombesin
00:49:39 If We Don’t Sigh, Our Lung (& General) Health Suffers
01:00:42 Breathing, Brain States & Emotions 
01:05:34 Meditating Mice, Eliminating Fear 
01:11:00 Brain States, Amygdala, Locked-In Syndrome, Laughing
01:16:25 Facial Expressions
01:19:00 Locus Coeruleus & Alertness
01:29:40 Breath Holds, Apnea, Episodic Hypoxia, Hypercapnia
01:35:22 Stroke, Muscle Strength, TBI
01:38:08 Cyclic Hyperventilation
01:39:50 Hyperbaric Chambers
01:40:41 Nasal Breathing, Memory, Right vs. Left Nostril
01:44:50 Breathing Coordinates Everything: Reaction Time, Fear, etc.
01:57:13 Dr. Feldman’s Breathwork Protocols, Post-Lunch 
02:02:05 Deliberately Variable Breathwork: The Feldman Protocol
02:06:29 Magnesium Threonate & Cognition & Memory 
02:18:27 Gratitude for Dr. Feldman’s Highly Impactful Work
02:20:53 Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Patreon, Instagram, Twitter, Thorne


Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 294 ---
Video ID: Wcs2PFz5q6g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wcs2PFz5q6g
Title: The Science of Making & Breaking Habits
Published: 2022-01-03 13:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I review the science of habit formation and habit elimination and how the process of neuroplasticity (brain rewiring) underlies these processes. 

I describe two new systems for habit formation. The first system is grounded in the neuroscience of brain states and our ability to perform (and to avoid) certain tasks at different phases of the 24-hour day. The second system focuses on 21-day habit formation and consolidation.

I also discuss "task bracketing" as an approach to enhancing habit formation and eliminating unwanted habits and the neural circuits that underlie task bracketing in the basal ganglia (a brain region for generating and stopping behaviors). I also review the science of dopamine rewards and how to apply that knowledge to shaping habits. 

The science and tools in this episode ought to be helpful for anyone looking to build better habits and eliminate unwanted habits for school, work, fitness, relationships, creative endeavors, and more—indeed for any person or situation where behavioral changes are needed.

#HubermanLab #Habits #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors:
Athletic Greens - http://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - http://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - http://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Excellent review on science of habits - https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033417
Meta-analysis on habits - https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1539449219876877

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Habits; New Programs
00:02:30 Athletic Greens, InsideTracker, Helix Sleep
00:06:52 Habits versus Reflexes, Learning, Neuroplasticity
00:08:51 Goal-Based Habits vs. Identity-Based Habits
00:11:40 How Long It (Really) Takes to Form a Habit; Limbic-Friction
00:16:07 Linchpin Habits 
00:18:55 Mapping Your Habits; Habit Strength, Context-Dependence
00:22:55 Automaticity
00:24:03 Tool 1: Applying Procedural Memory Visualizations
00:27:48 Hebbian Learning, NMDA receptors
00:31:00 Tool 2: Task Bracketing; Dorsolateral Striatum
00:37:08 States of Mind, Not Scheduling Time Predicts Habit Strength
00:38:16 Tool 3: Phase-Based Habit Plan: Phase 1
00:46:29 Tool 3: Phase-Based Habit Plan: Phase 2
00:55:24 Tool 3: Phase-Based Habit Plan: Phase 3
01:01:34 Habit Flexibility
01:04:57 Should We Reward Ourselves? How? When? When NOT to.
01:10:30 Tool 4: “Dopamine Spotlighting” & Task Bracketing
01:18:22 Tool 5: The 21-Day Habit Installation & Testing System
01:28:26 Breaking Habits: Long-Term (Synaptic) Depression
01:35:49 Notifications Don’t Work
01:37:50 Tool 6: Break Bad Habits with Post-Bad-Habit “Positive Cargo”
01:44:26 Addictions as Habits: https://hubermanlab.com/dr-anna-lembke-understanding-and-treating-addiction/
01:45:28 Conclusion & Synthesis 
01:48:27 Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Patreon, Supplements, Instagram, Twitter

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. [mellow music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we're talking all about habits. In particular, we're going to discuss the biology of habit formation and the biology of how we break habits. I think we can all appreciate the value of having habits. Habits organize our behavior into more or less reflexive actions so we don't have to think too much about performing the various behaviors that, for instance, allow us to brush our teeth or which side of bed we roll out of in the morning. And then of course, habits can be more elaborate too. We can be in the habit of exercising at a particular time of day. We can be in the habit of eating certain foods. We can be in the habit of saying or saying certain things. But of course, there are many habits that don't serve us well, or that perhaps even undermine our immediate and long term health goals and psychological goals. And even some habits that can really undermine our overall life goals. So today we're going to talk about making, meaning forming, and breaking, meaning stopping, various habits. There's a lot of information out there about habits. You'll find this in the popular sphere. There are books, there are articles, there are workshops, and so forth. However, lesser known is that there's a whole neuroscience of habit formation and habit breaking. And there's a whole field of psychology devoted to understanding habit formation and habit breaking. And within those scientific literatures, I think there are some real gems that, at least to my knowledge, we haven't paid too much attention to in the popular sphere. So today, we're going to talk about the biology of habit formation and habit breaking. I'm going to boil these down to some very explicit steps that anyone can use. My reasoning for doing that is, first of all, it's the end of 2021. Many people are thinking about new year's resolutions. They're thinking about leaving some things behind from 2021 and previous. And acquiring some new behaviors, taking on some new challenges, and trying to bring new things to their lives. But regardless of when you're listening to this, the programs that I'll outline are grounded in the neuroscience and biology of habit formation. And they map very well to what the psychologists have described, in terms of habit formation and breaking. So today you're going to learn a lot of science, you're also going to come away with some practical tools and I'm certain that regardless of your present state or goals, there'll be something of value to you. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic greens is in all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens is that because of the ingredients it contains, I know that I'm covering all of my foundation needs for vitamins, minerals, and probiotics. There is a wealth of knowledge now pointing to the fact that the so-called gut-brain axis is important for our brain health, for our metabolic health, for our hormone health, for our immune system, so the probiotics, vitamins, and minerals really support that system. And many of the other things it contains generally support our health, in terms of neural system, meaning the brain, the spinal cord, et cetera. Basically, Athletic Greens has all the things I need, nothing I don't, and by taking it once or twice a day, I always feel better and I know that I'm covering all my bases. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, or on the plane, et cetera. Plus, a year's supply of vitamin D3, K2. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim this special offer of the five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 and K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood-work done for the simple reason that most of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insight into your particular needs for your genetic type. Now, a major issue with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there is you get the numbers back, you get a lot of information back, but you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker makes that very easy. They have a personalized platform where you get your numbers and it points to specific things that you can do, in terms of behavioral protocols, meaning things you perhaps should do more of or less of, nutritional protocols, things that you perhaps should ingest more of or less of, and various things that you might consider for more elaborate, directed approaches to adjusting the numbers in your blood and DNA profiles. Another feature of InsideTracker, is that it has what's called "The Inner Age Test". This test allows you to see what your biological age is and compare that to your chronological age. Of course, your biological age is the one that you can control and that's the one that's really important to your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that I truly believe are the best out there. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for about a year now and it's the best sleep I've ever had. One thing that makes Helix mattresses really unique is that they are tailored to your unique sleep needs. You can go to their website, you take a quiz, it only takes about two minutes, and it will match your body type and sleep preferences to a particular mattress. So, it will ask you questions such as, "Do you sleep on your side, you back, or your stomach?" "Do you tend to run hot or cold during the night?" Maybe you don't know. You answer those questions and it matches you to the mattress that's right for you. For me, that turned out to be the Dusk Mattress, D U S K. I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm, not too soft. Anyway, I matched to the Dusk. I've been sleeping on a Dusk Mattress, as I mentioned before. It's been the best experience for me. My sleep is so improved. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two-minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you. And you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. Again, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their quiz, match to the mattress that's right for you, and if you decide to purchase it, you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. They have a ten-year warrantee and if you want to try it out, you can do that for 100 nights risk-free. They'll even pick the mattress up for you if you don't love it, but I'm pretty confident that you will. Again, helixsleep.com/huberman is where you'll find the Helix mattress for you. Let's talk about habits. And anytime we're talking about habits, that means our nervous system learns something. Now, many people think that habits are just like reflexes, but pure reflexes are things like the eye blink reflex. You know, something comes towards your eye and you don't want it to get in your eye, you'll blink. Or if you happen to step on a sharp object, or get too close to something that's too hot, you'll reflexively move away. Those aren't habits. Those are what we call hard-wired reflexes. Habits are things that our nervous system learned, but not always consciously. Sometimes we develop habits that we're not even aware of until they become a problem or maybe they serve us well. Who knows? But the fact of the matter is that habits are a big part of who we are. What we do habitually makes up much of what we do entirely. In fact, it's estimated that up to 70% of our waking behavior is made up of habitual behavior. So, you can imagine that there's a lot of biology, meaning cells and hormones and neural pathways, et cetera, that are going to support development of those habits. So if habits are largely, learned, consciously or unconsciously, we have to ask ourselves, what is learning? Well, learning is neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is simply the process by which our nervous system changes in response to experience. We have to ask, what changes? Well, what changes are the connections between neurons. Neurons are just nerve cells. They communicate with one another by electricity and by sending chemical signals to one another that inspire the next neuron and the next neuron to either electrically active or not. But at the end of the day, neuroplasticity is about forming new neural circuits, new pathways by which certain habits are likely to occur, and other ones are less likely to occur. So, we've got habits. We have that habits are learned, we have that learning involves neuroplasticity, and that neuroplasticity involves changes in the connections between neurons, nerve cells. Okay, so that describes habits through the lens of neuroscience and biology, but as many of you are well aware, there are popular books about habits and there's a whole psychological literature about habits, and those two areas point to some very interesting aspects of habits that I think are worth mentioning. First of all is this notion of immediate goal-based habits versus identity-based habits. Immediate goal-based habits are going to be habits that are designed to bring you a specific outcome as you do them, so each and every time you do them. So for instance, it might be that you want to develop a habit of getting, you know, 60 minutes of zone II cardio each day, or perhaps 3-4 times per week, as we head into the new year. I've talked before on the podcast about the fact that the scientific literature and the health literature really points to the incredibly positive effects of getting 150 minutes to 180 minutes per week minimum of what's called zone II cardio. Zone II cardio is basically any cardiovascular exercise that gets you moving, and your heart pumping, and breathing, but not so hard that you can't hold a conversation, and so that kind of puts you at the threshold of just being just able to have a conversation that's a little bit strained, but if you were to exercise a little bit harder, you know, run a little bit faster, et cetera, you wouldn't be able to talk while you did it. There's a lot of literature that points to that as a healthy practice. So maybe you're somebody that wants to get more of zone II cardio, for instance. That would be an immediate goal-based habit if your goal is to get that cardio, maybe 4 times a week. Every time you do it you check off a little box and you say, "Okay, I did it." You met the goal. That is different than so-called identity-based habits where there's a larger, over-arching theme to the habit, where you're trying to become, quote unquote, "a fit person". Or you're somebody who wants to be an athlete or something of that sort. It's where you start to attach some sort of larger picture about yourself or what it means for you to do that habit where there's both the immediate goal, right? Complete the exercise, complete the session, or whatever it is, check off that box. But that you're linking it to some sort of larger goal. Now, why am I making this distinction? I mean, first of all, I'm not the one to first make this distinction. Others have made the distinction between identity versus immediate goal-based habit formation. But the reason I'm making the distinction is that pretty soon in our discussion today we are going to talk about dopamine, a molecule that's associated with motivation and reward, that we make in our brain, and how different schedules of dopamine release predict where we will stick to a habit or not. And in particular, whether or not we will be able to form that habit quickly or not. Now, this is absolutely critical to understand for the following reason. Another thing that you'll hear out there in the literature is that it takes 21 days to form a habit. Some people say 18, some people say 21, some people say 30 days, some people say 60 days. So which one is it? Does it depend on the habit that one is trying to form? Or does it depend on the person that's trying to form the habit? Well, it turns out that there's excellent peer-reviewed data on this. There's a study published in 2010, first author Lally, L A L L Y. This study found that, for the same habit to be formed, it can take anywhere from 18 days to as many as 254 days for different individuals to form that habit. The reason I bring this up, is that I always get asked, "Is it true that it takes 21 days to form a habit?" "Is it true that your nervous system changes in six days" "when you're doing something repeatedly?" And the answer is, as I mentioned before, it's highly variable. What I didn't tell you actually, is what specific habit they were looking at in that Lally study. And it's interesting that the specific behavior was a health-related behavior. That's pretty relevant to our discussion here, on the podcast. Which was taking walks after dinner. There's actually a really nice literature showing that walks after a meal can speed glucose clearance from the blood stream, can be beneficial for not just weight loss, but cardiovascular health, et cetera. So a walk after dinner seems pretty straight-forward, right? Well, in order to form that habit, it took some people 18 days and other people 254 days. How did they know when they formed the habit? Well, they were doing it about 85% of the time and they also reported not having to spend that much mental effort in order to get into to the mode of taking a walk after dinner. So, for those of you listening, some of you might be thinking, "I can't believe that it would take certain people 254 days" "to get into that habit." As I said, people are highly variable and if you can't form one habit easily, it doesn't mean that you can't form other habits easily. The mystery of why certain people can form certain habits more easily than others? Probably has something to do with how people manage what's called limbic friction. Now, limbic friction is not a term that you're going to find in the formal neurobiological literature or even some of the psychological literature. It's, frankly, a term that I coined to encompass a number of different pieces of the psychology and neuroscience literature. Limbic friction is a short-hand way that I use to describe the strain that's required in order to overcome one of two states within your body. One state is one of anxiousness, where you're really anxious and therefore you can't calm down, you can't relax, and therefore you can't engage in some particular activity or thought pattern that you would like. The other state is one in which you're feeling too tired or lazy or not motivated. Both of those states, feeling too alert and too calm, if you will, relate to the function of the so-called autonomic nervous system, a set of neurons and hormones and chemicals in your brain and body that act as sort of a see-saw. You're either alert or calm. You're either asleep or stressed. Those two states are not compatible with one another. You've probably heard of "wired and tired" but that's really once you've been very stressed for a long time, to the point where you're exhausted. What does the autonomic nervous system have to do with any of this? Well, limbic friction is a phrase that can be used to describe how much effort, how much activation energy you need in order to engage in a particular behavior. So, using this Lally study as an example, some people would eat dinner, and then say, "Oh, that's right, I've been trying to develop the habit" "of taking a walk after dinner." "So, let's get up and go." Other people will feel like, "I just don't want to do it today." They're going to feel too much limbic friction and that limbic friction could arrive, again, from one of two sources. It could be because they are too tired to do it or it could be because they're too anxious and distracted in order to do it. So, this is a key distinction. A lot of habit formation has to do with being in the right state of mind and being able to control your state of body and mind. So as we march forward, what you're going to find is that this phrase or this term, limbic friction, is going to be a useful metric or a way for you to touch in with yourself and address whether or not you are likely to be able to form a certain habit easily or whether or not it's going to be very challenging. And I'm going to teach you a way to measure your degree of limbic friction. That is, how much activation energy it will take in order for you to execute a new habit. And I'm going to teach you how to measure your limbic friction and activation energy for how likely it is that you're going to be able to break a habit that you don't want to have. The other key concept for us to address that's really mainly found in the books and articles out there about habits, is this notions of what I call linchpin habits. Linchpin habits are certain habits that make a lot of other habits easier to execute. Now, the sorts of linchpin habits that I'm referring to are always going to be things that you enjoy doing. I'll just give you an example from my life. I happen to like exercise. Not all forms of exercise, but I happen to like resistance training and I happen to like running. So I'm personally in the habit of getting cardiovascular exercise 3 or 4 times per week. Maybe 30-60 minutes per session. And I'm in the habit of doing resistance training 3 or 4 times per week, typically also for about 45 to 60 minutes per session. Now, I enjoy those, and for reasons that I'll get into a little bit later, I enjoy those activities typically early in the day because of the neurochemistry and the various types of hormones, et cetera, that are associates with performing those activities. But I really place those activities under the umbrella of what I call linchpin habits. Why? Because those particular habits are easy to execute because I enjoy them. But they also make a lot of other habits easier to execute. Things like being alert for work, things like making sure that I get good sleep the night before, things like hydration, things like making sure that I eat the foods that are better for me than some of the other foods that maybe I would more reflexively reach to if I weren't doing that training. So certain habits act as linchpins, meaning that they shift a lot of other things. They can control and bias the likelihood that, in this case you or me, will perform other habits that are harder to access, that we have less of an affinity for. So again, there's three concepts that we need to include here. We've got identity-based versus goal-based habits. We've got the concept that typically different habits take different periods of time to adopt, depending on the person and the habit. And that there are these, what I call linchpin habits. Certain habits that make other habits easier to execute. And those linchpin habits always, always, always are things that we enjoy doing. So our goal throughout this episode is for you to identify which habits are easy for you to perform, which ones are hard for you to perform, and which habits you want to break. If you want to grab a pen and paper, you can do that. Or if you want to dictate some of that into your phone, you can. But right now, actually, if you just want to think about these concepts, you can always go back later, I'll be sure to spell out a very specific way that you can chart out a map towards forming particular habits and breaking particular habits later on. What I'd like us to do at this point is to take that concepts of limbic friction and for you to ask yourself what habits you perform on a daily basis, and these could be things as basic as brushing your teeth before breakfast, or brushing your teeth after breakfast. It could be, for instance, that you get exercise or you get it at a particular time of day, or even that you take a particular route to work, right? We are very habitual and we tend to do things more or less over and over in the same way, unless we intervene in ourselves. That's just the way that we are wired. So now I'd like you to shift to thinking about a particular aspect of habits and that's habit strength. Now, you all have different habits. You probably brush your teeth at a particular time of day, you probably exercise at particular times of week, you probably go to the refrigerator in a very habitual way. We are incredibly habitual organisms. Unless we intervene in our habits, they tend to carry out the same way that they always have once they've formed. So you can do this exercise now, you don't have to write this down if you don't want to, but you certainly are welcome. We're going to evaluate what's called habit strength. That's not a concept that I created. Habit strength is something that you will find in the psychological literature. Habit strength is measured by two main criteria. The first, is how context-dependent a give habit is. So, context dependence is, if you go from one environment to the next, do you tend to do the same thing, in the same way, at the same time of day? So, for instance, brushing your teeth firs thing in the morning. Maybe some of you do that before breakfast, maybe some of you do that later, maybe some of you, like me, don't even eat breakfast. But when I travel, I tend to brush my teeth at more or less the same time of day relative to when I wake up as I do when I'm at home. So it's context independent. So it's a very strong habit, right? There are certain behaviors, like perhaps what you eat, or, you know, perhaps how you dress, that are context independent, that you might perform one way in one context, and another way in another context. The other aspect of habit strength is how much limbic friction is required to perform that habit on a regular basis. This is extremely important because if you are in the process of building habits and consolidating those habits, then it's probably going to take more limbic friction to execute those habits. What do I mean by that? Well, let's say you set out to get, let's say 45 minutes of zone II cardio exercise every day, 5 or maybe even 7 days a week. Well, if at first you're highly motivated, limbic friction might be pretty low. Limbic friction is how much top-down, meaning from your fore-brain to your limbic system, the part of you brain that generates autonomic responses, how much limbic friction, meaning conscious over-ride of your state is required in order to engage in that particular behavior. So, if you're feeling particularly tired and you don't want to get out of bed, and you don't want to go out and do your zone II cardio, then there's a high degree of limbic friction. It takes, some people think of it as motivation, but motivation is a bit of a vague concept, whereas limbic friction involves specific neural circuits and you can think of it in a more or less quantitative way. You can think of that your body is very tired, so it's going to take more limbic friction in order to get into action. Right? You're going to have to overcome more limbic friction, excuse me. Whereas if you're very, very alert, there's less limbic friction because you're moving toward something that's action oriented. However, the inverse is also true. Let's say that you are trying to get into the habit, or you're in the early stages of forming a habit to meditate regularly. That's a pretty quiescent or calming activity, so if you're somebody who comes home from work and you're very anxious and you have a lot of work to do and you have to deal with a bunch of things, there's a lot of limbic friction to overcome in order to get into that calm state. So these two aspects, context dependence, whether or not you're like to do the thing regardless of where you are. Right? On travel, at home, on vacation, with people around, not people around, et cetera. And how much limbic friction is required to execute that habit, will tell you whether or not that habit is deeply or just shallowly embedded within your nervous system. The goal of any habit that we want to form is to get into what's called automaticity. Automaticity is fancy language for the neural circuits can perform it automatically, and that's the ultimate place to be. All right, if you have all these goals and things that you want to be doing on a regular basis, you'd love for them to be habitual because it takes less mental and physical effort, less limbic friction, in order to execute those. And so much of what's out there, again in the popular psychology literature, in books that you'll find on the bookstore shelf and on Amazon, and in the airports, are about how to get from that mode of high degree of limbic friction to automaticity. And they offer a number of different ways, I think many of which are useful, trying to get you to organize different types of habits into different bins, like value-based, and goal-based, and trying to persuade you that structuring habits at the particular times of day or in a particular way are going to be beneficial, and indeed, I think they have helped a lot of people. So what I'd like to do is to take the scientific literature of how the nervous system learns and engages in plasticity, and apply that to habit formation, habit maintenance, and if so desired, how to break particular habits. I'd like to give you a particular tool that's gleaned from the research psychology literature. I should mention that I learned about this from an excellent review article that's available online. It's called Psychology of Habit. The authors are Wendy Wood and Dennis Ruenger, this is published in Annual Review of Psychology. The Annual Reviews series is a very high quality series. There are annual reviews of neuroscience, annual reviews of psychology, annual reviews of nutrition science, et cetera. For those of you that are interested in exploring review articles that are grounded in hundreds of quality, peer-reviewed studies, the Annual Review series is really terrific. Certainly among the best, if not the best. And they also tend to be quite long and quite comprehensive. So this review, Psychology of Habit by Wood and Ruenger, is excellent. And here I'm more or less paraphrasing from them, so I want to be clear that these are their words, not mine. They're talking about the various ways that habits form in the nervous system and they mention, with each repetition of a habit, small changes occur in the cognitive and neural mechanisms associated with procedural memory. So I just want to talk for a second about what procedural memory is. In the neuroscience of memory, we distinguish between what's called episodic memory and procedural memory. Episodic memory is a recall of a particular set of events that happened, whereas procedural memory is holding in mind the specific sequence of things that need to happen in order for a particular outcome to occur. So think of it like a recipe or a protocol, or for the sake of exercise, it's like sets and reps, or a particular course that you're going to run or cycle, or the number of laps you're going to swim and how you're going to perform it. It's very clear that for anyone trying to adopt new habits, getting into the mindset of procedural memory is very useful for overcoming that barrier that we call limbic friction. How do you do that? Well, a simple visualization exercise, or it doesn't even have to be done eyes closed. You know, often times we hear visualization exercise, you think about sitting in a lotus position, eyes closed, you know, trying really hard to visualize something. Doesn't need to be anything like that. It can simply be, if you are deciding to adopt a new habit, to just think about the very specific sequence of steps that's required to execute that habit. And I'll use a trivial example, but this could be applied to anything. Let's say I want to get into the habit of making myself, or someone else in my household, a cup of espresso every morning, I would actually think through each of those steps. Walk into the kitchen, turn on the espresso machine, draw the espresso. Walking through each of those steps, from start to finish, and it turns out just that simple mental exercise done once can shift people towards a much higher likelihood of performing that habit regularly, not just the first time, but as they continue out into the days and weeks that follow. So that's remarkable to me and the literature is really robust. Just one mental exercise of thinking through what are the sequence of steps required in order to perform this habit from start to finish can shift the likelihood of being able to perform that habit from unlikely or moderately likely, to very likely over time. And that's because it pulls from this process that involves our hippocampus and our neocortex and other areas of our brain and nervous system, that engage in procedural memory. It shifts the brain towards a mindset, if you will. It's more of a neural circuit set, would be more accurate. But a mindset/neural circuit set of doing things in a particular sequence, which allows that limbic friction to come down and increases the likelihood that we're going to perform that thing. Simple tool but very powerful too, according to the psychology literature. And actually, the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie that sort of procedural memory, stepping through phenomenon are known. In this article I mentioned, this beautiful review, they talk about so called Hebbian learning. Donald Hebb was a psychologist in Canada and birthed this field that has now lasted, gosh, more than 50 years and is still very strong in neuroscience and psychology of Hebbian learning. Hebbian learning is when particular neurons are co-active, meaning when they fire together, they tend to strengthen their connections with one another. And it has a number of different cellular and molecular features that we don't have to go into in detail, but for those of you that want to know, I know some of you are hungry for a little bit more neuroscience, this involves things like NMDA receptors and methyl-D-aspartate receptors. NMDA receptors are really important I think for everyone to understand. So I'll just tell you a little bit about them. These are receptors that are on the neuron's surface and normally they don't contribute much to the activity of those neurons. Those neurons are perfectly capable of doing their thing without activation of this NMDA receptor. But when a neuron gets a very strong input, a strong stimulus, that NMDA receptor triggers a number of mechanisms that recruit to the surface of the neuron more other receptors. In other words, it makes that neuron more responsive to input in the future such that it doesn't require so much input. In other words, it takes a neuron that is very unlikely to fire and makes it more likely to fire. So this procedural stepping through of the steps of the recipe or the series of actions steps that are involved in sitting down to study and writing for an hour, or generating exercise, whatever is the habit that you're trying to learn. When you're doing that exercise, it's not as if your nervous system thinks you're actually performing that behavior. Your nervous system isn't stupid. It's actually a lot smarter than that. It knows the difference between a thought and an action, but when you do that, it sets in motion the same neurons that are going to be required for the execution of that habit. And so when you actually show up to perform that habit, it's as if the dominoes fall more easily. It's a lower threshold, as we say, in order to get the habit to perform. So, Hebbian learning, NMDA receptors, all that nuts and bolts stuff. Really the guts of the mechanisms of how this works. But for those of you that just want to be more habitual about certain things, be able to perform certain things more reflexively, that you would like in your life, simply take the time, do it once, maybe twice, and just sit down, close your eyes if you like, and just step through the procedure of what it's going to take in order to perform that habit. The psychology literature, as I mentioned, and also the neuroscience literature, strongly supports the fact that it is going to make it far easier for you to adopt and maintain that habit. And if you are somebody who used to perform a habit, and you don't understand why you dropped it, and you're frustrated with yourself, and you're trying to figure out how you can get back into that habit, well by all means, lean right back into that habit, but if you're having trouble doing that, also just use the procedural memory exercise in order to shift your nervous system towards a higher likelihood that you will return to that habit just the same way I described for trying to initiate a new habit. So now I'd like to discuss a second, and what I think is perhaps the most powerful tool for being able to acquire and stick to new habits. This tool is rooted in what we call neural circuits and I do think it is important to understand a little bit about how those neural circuits work. For those of you that are saying, "Just tell me what to do." I have to say, as I always say, understanding a little bit or a lot of underlying mechanism will help solidify these concepts for you and will help ensure that the tools that I offer are going to make sense and that they're going to make sense in differing contexts and for different types of habits that you're tying to learn. So, rather than just tell you what to do, I'm going to tell you how this particular tool works, and then in doing that, you should be able to apply it to any habit, under any conditions. The tool that I'm referring to is something called task-bracketing and the neural circuits associated with task-bracketing are basically the neural circuits that are going to allow you to learn any new type of habit or break any habit that you'd like to break. We have in our brain a set of neural circuits that fall under the umbrella term of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia are involved in action execution, meaning doing certain things, and action suppression, not doing certain things. In the experimental realm, these are referred to as go, meaning do, or no go, don't do, certain things. And some of us fall more into the category of we find it very easy to do certain things, but harder to not do other things. Some people have a lot of no go type circuits that are very robust, and they have a lot of behavioral constraint, but they have a harder time getting into action. And some people have a perfect balance of both, but I've never met one of those people. So again, drawing from, more or less paraphrasing from this beautiful review that I described earlier in Annual Review of Psychology, excuse me, by Wood and Ruenger, task-bracketing involves a particular set of neural circuits within the basal ganglia, so I'm going to describe this here, again paraphrasing, a sensory-motor loop. Sensory means just input coming in about sight, sounds, taste, et cetera. And then the motor systems, the systems of the brain and body that generate action, taking that information and generating action. So it turns out that there's an area of our basal ganglia called the dorsolateral striatum, we can use the acronym DLS. Again, dorsolateral striatum. Dorso means up. Lateral means to the side. So dorsolateral. And striatum is a subdivision of the basal ganglia. And it's very important for the establishment of behaviors that are associated with a habit, but not necessarily the habit itself. And beautiful studies in both animals and humans that record the activity in the dorsolateral striatum find that the dorsolateral striatum is associated, meaning it becomes active at the beginning of a particular habit, and at the very end and after a particular habit. Hence the phrase task-bracketing. It brackets the habit. Now, other sets of neurons are going to be active during the actual execution of the habit, but what the literature on the dorsolateral striatum tells us is that we have particular circuits in our brain that are devoted to framing the events that happened just before and as we initiate a habit, and just after and as we terminate a habit. In other words, it acts as a sort of marker for the habit execution, but not the execution of the habit per se. This is very important because task-bracketing is what underlies whether or not a habit will be context dependent or not, whether or not it will be strong and likely to occur even if we didn't get good night's sleep the night before, even if we're feeling distracted, even if we're not feeling like doing something emotionally, or if we are, you know, completely overwhelmed by other events. If the neural circuits are task bracketing, are deeply embedded in us, meaning they are very robust around a particular habit, well then it's likely that we're going to go out for that zone II cardio no matter what, that we're going to brush our teeth no matter what. I'm fact, brushing our teeth is a pretty good example because, for most people, even if you got a terrible night's sleep, even If everything in your life is going wrong, chances are, unless you're very depressed, if you're going to leave to work, or even if you're not, that you're going to still carry out the behavior of brushing your teeth in the morning. I would hope so, actually. But you are probably less likely to perform particular habits that are not what you deem as necessary. But if you think about it, brushing your teeth, exercise, eating particular foods, maybe engaging socially in particular ways, you are the one that places any kind of value assessment on which ones are essential, and which ones are negotiable. So task-bracketing sets a neural imprint, a kind of a finger print in your brain, of this thing has to happen at this particular time of day so much so that it's reflexive. And as we'll talk about in a moment, there's a way that you can build up task-bracketing so that regardless of what it is you're trying to learn, there's a much higher probability that you're going to do that thing. And when I say learn, meaning let's say you're trying to acquire a habit that for you is really challenging. Maybe it's that you're going to write for an hour a day on a book project that you've been thinking about or you're going to work on mathematics, or you're going to do any sort of thing that for you there's a lot of limbic friction. While it is important to think about the sequence of events that would be required in order to engage in that behavior, that procedural memory visualization exercise we talked about before, that will help, there's a way also that you can orient your nervous system towards this task-bracketing process, so that your nervous system is shifted or oriented towards the execution of a given habit. So this is sort of like warming up your body to exercise. When the dorsolateral striatum is engaged, your body and you brain are primed to execute a habit and that you get to consciously insert which habit you want to perform. So in order to leverage the neural mechanisms of task-bracketing, in order to increase the likelihood that you're going to perform a particular habit, I have to break it to you that one thing that you've probably heard over and over about habit formation is not true. And what I'm referring to is this idea that if you're very specific about exactly when you're going to perform a particular habit, that you're more likely to perform that habit. And while that is true in the short term, it is not true in the long term. And the reason for that is that our nervous system tends to generate particular kinds of behavior based not on time, but on our state. Meaning what level of activation is taking place in our brain and body. How much focus we happen to have, how fatigued we are, how energized we are. So while schedules are important, it's not the particular time of day per se that's going to allow you to get into a habit, and form that habit, and consolidate that habit. Rather, it's the state that your brain and body are in that's important to anchor yourself to. So now I'm going to offer you a tool. It's actually an entire program by which you can insert particular habits and activities at particular phases of the day, not times of day, but phases of the day, because it turns out that particular phases of the day are associated with particular biological underpinnings, chemicals and neural circuits and so forth, and in doing so it will make it far more likely that you will be able to regularly engage in these habits and activities over a long period of time. And whether or not that will move you from somebody who ordinarily would take 200 days to form a habit to one of those 18 days to habit people in that earlier study I mentioned, I don't know. But I am certain that will have a significant shift on allowing you to engage in particular habits more easily and to consolidate those habits more quickly. So the program I am about to describe, I formulated for you based on the neuroscience literature, and the psychology literature of learning, and this concepts of task-bracketing. It involves the 24 hour days into what I call three phases. The first is phase one, which is 0 to 8 hours after waking up, approximately. Okay, you can put a plus or minus 30 minutes on this for yourself. The second phase is the 9 to 14, maybe 15 hours after you wake up. And the third phase is 16 to 24 hours after waking up. So we've taken the 24 hour cycle, we've carved it up into three phases, phase one, phase two, and phase three. Now, everything I'm describing, or at least the way I'm going to describe it, is based on what I would call a typical schedule, diurnal schedule. You've heard of nocturnal? Well, we are diurnal. Most of us are asleep at night and awake during the day. I do realize that a number of people have shift work or they have newborns or other reasons why they have to be up in the middle of the night and sleeping during the day. If that's the case, please listen to the episode we did on jet-lag and shift work because that has a lot of tools specifically for that population. But most people go to sleep somewhere around 10:00 PM, plus or minus two hours, and wake up some time around 7:00 AM, plus or minus two hours. So today, I'm going to use the to bed at 10:00 PM and a wake up time of 7:00 AM as the framework for this, but you could adopt it easily to your particular schedule. Phase one, which again, is 0 to 8 hours after waking, has a particular neurochemical signature. Regardless of what you do, the neuromodulators norepinephrine as well as epinephrine, so that's noradrenaline and adrenaline, as well as the neuromodulator dopamine tend to be elevated during that first 0 to 8 hours after waking. There are a number of reasons for this related to the fact that also cortisol is higher in our brain and bloodstream, it's a healthy level of cortisol upon waking, body temperature is increased, et cetera. And there's several things that perhaps we should all be doing, I've talked about many of these on the podcast before, that in addition to those chemicals, further support an alert and focused state. And I'll just list those off. I've done many podcasts on each of these if you'd like to access those podcasts you can find them in the menu of podcasts on YouTube, Apple, Spotify, et cetera. They involve, for instance, viewing sunlight or bright artificial light if you can't access sunlight, within the first 30 minutes of waking. Physical exercise of some kind in this phase of the day, 0 to 8 hours of the day, ideally pretty early in that phase, but, you know, if it has to be at the 7 to 8 hour transition point that's fine too. Cold exposure in the form of cold showers or ice baths or outside with minimal clothing, appropriate yet minimal clothing. Caffeine ingestion. Fasting, for instance, not ingesting calories, also will lend itself to increased norepinephrine and dopamine, et cetera. If you are going to consume foods, foods that are rich in things like tyrosine, which is a precursor for dopamine. You can look up foods that are high in tyrosine. And for those of you that are interested in supplementation and like to use those routes, things like alpha GPC or phenylethylamine, think, or L-tyrosine, if that's in keeping with what you're able to do. Of course, consult your doctor if you're going to rely on supplementation. What's this all about? Well, the already elevated norepinephrine and dopamine, the sunlight, exercise, cold exposure, caffeine, tyrosine, et cetera, all of those place the brain and body into a state in which you are better able, or I would say, more easily able, to engage in activities that have a high degree limbic friction and where you need to override that limbic friction. Right? We've heard that the morning is kind of sacred, conquer the hardest things first thing in the morning, and that's been discussed in the pop psychology literature and in the habit formation literature merely from the perspective of get it out of the way so you can feel good about having done it. But what I'm referring to is quite different. What I'm referring to is a particular phase of day that after rising, after waking up, that is, for 0 to 8 hours, right, in that first phase, your whole system is action and focus oriented. And we know that when you're action and focus oriented and because of the neurochemicals that are naturally released in your brain and body that you will be more likely to overcome any limbic friction that stands in the way of performing particular habits. So, as you list out or think about the various habits that you'd like to adopt in your life, take the habits for which you know there's the highest degree of limbic friction, they are the hardest for you to engage in, they require the most activation energy, and put those in this 0 to 8 hours after waking. This will greatly facilitate your performance of those new habits. I'm certain of that. And in addition to that, by doing them in this particular phase of the day, not necessarily the same time, I mean, if you want to be very habitual, and you want to do, you know, the exercise, or the sunlight viewing always at the same time, or you want to do, you want to drink your caffeine always at the exact same time, that's fine, but by placing them in this broader window of 0 to 8 hours after waking, what you're doing is you're creating task-bracketing. You're making it such that your nervous system will predict when you are going to lean in against limbic friction in order to perform particular types of habits. And this is very different than saying, "I'm always going to run" or, "I'm always going to study from 10 to 12 AM every morning." That's great, and if you can do that, terrific. But the literature indicates that people who do that, who are very rigid about when they do things tend, because of context dependence, to not necessarily stick to those habits over time. Some people do, but many, many people don't. So think about the hardest habits to form and the habits that you most want to form that are hardest for you to adopt and to maintain and I highly suggest placing those somewhere within this phase one of 0 to 8 hours after waking. Now of course, some of the things I listed out, sunlight viewing, exercise, cold exposure, caffeine, fasting, those might be the actual habits themselves, but here I realize, or rather I want to acknowledge that many people, including myself, are doing some or all of these things already and many people, including myself, are trying to adopt new habits that don't fall into the category of just trying to set your overall state. Again, norepinephrine, dopamine, and all these neural systems will be greatly elevated in this 0 to 8 hours after waking. However, the other things I mentioned, sunlight exposure, exercise, cold exposure, caffeine, fasting, if that's for you, or if you're eating during that phase, eating things that contain some or elevated levels of tyrosine, maybe supplementing alpha GPC or L-tyrosine, et cetera. All of those things further facilitate the neurochemistry and therefore the state of mind that's going to be ideal for leaning into limbic friction and overriding that limbic friction so that you can regularly perform that habit. What we're really talking about here is leveraging neural systems in order to help you make it more likely that you're going to be able to engage and maintain a particular habit. So what I'm referring to as phase one of each day is useful for acquiring certain habits, but there are other phases of the day, and those turn out to be useful for acquiring other types of habits. Phase two, as I mentioned, is about, again these aren't specifics, but about 9 to 14 or 15 hours after waking. During this phase of the day, because of the circadian shifts in our biology, the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine that's circulating in our brain and bloodstream tends to start to come down and levels of cortisol tend to start to come down. That's the ideal circumstance. In fact, you don't really want elevated cortisol late in the day. That's actually a signature of depression and anxiety and a number of other unfortunate things. So, 9 to 14 hours after waking dopamine and norepinephrine and cortisol are starting to taper down, just naturally. And a different neuromodulator, serotonin, is starting to rise. Serotonin is definitely going to be highest in this second half of the day and tends to lend itself to a more relaxed state of being. Now of course, I do realize that some people are less of morning people and do find that they really come alive and awake in the afternoon, but most people don't fall into that category. Most people feel more alert early in the day, even anxious early in the day, and then, as the afternoon progresses, they tend to be a bit more sleepy, a bit more relaxed, a bit more calm. There's certain things that we all can and should do during this phase two of each day that lend themselves to a state of mind and a state of body that is going to be beneficial for the generation and consolidation of certain types of habits. What are those things? First of all, as the day goes on, you should try if you can to start tapering the amount of light that you're viewing. Now, this doesn't mean putting yourself into dim light at 3 o'clock 4 o'clock in the afternoon. That's certainly not the case. Simply that you want to start tapering off the amount of really bright light that you're getting, unless it's sunlight. Talked about this before on the podcast, but if you haven't heard, viewing the sun as it's at what we call low solar angle so it's headed toward the horizon, you don't necessarily have to watch the sunset, although that can be nice. But getting some sun light in your eyes in the second half of the day can also be beneficial for a number of brain systems and psychological systems so you can get some some light in your eyes, you can certainly have artificial lights on, but you want to start dimming those lights and bringing them actually physically lower in the room because the neurons in your eye that view the upper visual field they actually trigger this alertness mechanism in the brain and body. And in the second half of the day, even if you're humming around and doing work at 3 or 4 or 5 or even 7 PM, you are probably headed toward sleep a few hours later, so things like limiting the total amount of light if you can, things like NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, another thing that I've talked about on this podcast. If you haven't heard about this before, non-sleep deep rest is an umbrella term for things like meditation, for Yoga Nidra, a very powerful science supported tool for teaching you how to relax, things like self-hypnosis which might sound a little kooky to some of you, but actually is a clinically based tool for which there's a lot of scientific literature. If you're interested in that there's a great free resource called Reverie, R E V E R I E .com. There's a app for both Apple and Android. This is an app that was developed by colleagues of mine and researchers at Stanford School of Medicine. You can do these short 15 self hypnosis script, as they're called. They can teach you how to relax yourself, there's even one for focus, for sleep, for chronic pain, Again, all very strongly supported by quality peer-reviewed literature. So things like Reverie, meditation, things like heat and sauna, hot baths, hot showers. Those are terrific things to do in the second half of the day, they tend to support this serotonergic, or high serotonin like state and lend themselves to more calm and relaxation. For those that are interested in supplementation, there's always ashwagandha, which reduces cortisol, again peaks in cortisol late in the afternoon and evening are associated with depression, anxiety, and so forth. Ashwagandha has a pretty potent cortisol inhibiting tool. I personally don't use it very often and I caution people about using it for longer than two-week periods of time without taking some breaks. You can look up more about ashwagandha on examine.com. There's a lot of traffic literature with links to studies there. But basically this phase two of the day is one in which you're alert, you are present you are working, you are engaging socially, you're cooking dinner probably, paying attention to a number of things, but you should really be trying to taper off your stress level. So how do you leverage phase two of the day for habit formation? Well, given what we know about the neurochemistry of learning and memory, given what we know about task formation and its reliance on certain forms of neuroplasticity, the second half of the day is a terrific time to take on habits and things that you're already doing that require very little override of limbic friction. So these might be things that categorize in common terms as kind of mellower activities. It might be journaling, it might be that you already are performing music or I should say, practicing music regularly, but there's a particular type of music that is hard for you or that you're working on a particular piece of music, or you're trying to learn a language. Something that's a little bit challenging, but doesn't require a ton of energy in order to override that limbic friction. The second half of the day is a much better time to do that. Less resistance, as we might say. But of course, resistance has a neural substrate and the reason for doing those things in the second part of the day, the so-called phase two, as I've called it, part of the day is because your ability to override resistance is really diminished in this second phase of the day. Some of you might say, "Whoa wait," "I like to exercise in the second half of the day." "That's actually when I have the most energy." "That's when I feel warmer" "I'm not a morning exerciser." That's absolutely fine, but what I'm referring to is the acquisition of new behaviors and placing those consistently at the second half of the day in order to engage these task-bracketing mechanisms that I talked about before. One of the hallmark features of those basal ganglia circuits for go and no-go is that they are associated with certain neurochemicals, dopamine and serotonin, acetylcholine, and other neurochemicals. And by placing particular habits at particular phases of the day, those neurochemical states start to be associated with the leaning in and the process of beginning, and as I mentioned, ending those particular habits. And in doing so they shift the whole nervous system toward being able to predict that certain things are going to happen at particular times a day, that you're going to be leaning very hard against limbic friction early in the day in phase one, and that you're going to be doing things that require less conscious override of limbic friction in phase two. And in doing so, set up task-bracketing system so that the individual habits that you're learning or that you're trying to learn have a much greater probability of being executed and consolidated, meaning that pretty soon that they will just naturally become reflexive. And as with phase one, many of the things that I mentioned that support this, what I'm calling a serotonergic state or more relaxed state in phase two, things like seeing sunlight in the afternoon, but not a lot of bright light from artificial sources, things like NSDR, things like heat and sauna, hot baths et cetera, ashwagandha, again all of those things themselves could be habits that you're trying to adopt, right? In that case, do those if you'd like to explore them. They are quite beneficial for a number of reasons, not just related to execution of particular habits in phase two of the day, but also for improving quality of sleep and consolidating any learning that you might have triggered earlier in the day. I've talked about that before, but just briefly, as a relevant aside, neuroplasticity involves triggering the neural plasticity, setting it in motion, but the actual rewiring of the brain and the reconfiguration of neurons that will allow that learning to be reflexive, that actually occurs during states of deep rest, like an NSDR and like deep sleep. And I should just mention, for those of you that can only exercise or prefer to exercise in phase two of the day, right, 9 to 14 hours or 15 hours after waking, that's absolutely fine. However, because of the importance of sleep and in particular deep sleep throughout the night for not just neuroplasticity, but recovery of muscle and other tissues that are taxed during physical exercise, if you do train in phase two, I highly recommend, highly recommend that you start doing some NSDR activity after you train, within an hour or two, because that will allow you to taper down and relax so that you can get into the next phase we're going to talk about, which is phase three. Phase three of the 24-hour schedule runs from about 16 to 24 hours after waking. During that period of time, there are few things that are going to support being in a state of mind, state of body that are going to allow neuroplasticity to occur, that are going to allow the rewiring that you've triggered during the waking part of the day to actually take place. Those things are very low to no light, meaning keeping your environment very dark or very, very dim. I don't think it's necessary to sleep in a room that's complete blackness. I think that's a little bit overkill, but for most people keeping the room dark and keeping the room temperature low is very beneficial for getting and staying in deep sleep. The body has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees in order to get into sleep and stay asleep, so low light, low temperature environment, you can always pile on blankets of course if you don't want to be cold at night, you want to be warm enough, but you want your environment to be cold. Typically people aren't eating in the middle of the night, although one thing that can be useful is to make sure that you're at least well-fed enough when you head into this third phase of every 24-hour day that you're not awake because you're hungry. A lot of people recommend putting a gap between your final bite of food and when you got to sleep at night. Some people say that gap should be 4 hours, other people say 2 hours, if you're me, I generally have something, I don't know, within 2 hours or 90 minutes of going to sleep, but it's not a big meal, but that's just me, and I fall asleep and stay asleep fine with that. You have to experiment for yourself. I've talked about supplements that can support sleep in previous episode of the podcast, things like magnesium threonate, or magnesium bisglycinate, things like theonine, apigenin. If you'd like to read more about those, we actually have a newsletter that I'll just quickly refer you to this is the Huberman Lab Neural Network Newsletter, you can sign up for it by going to hubermanlab.com, it's very easy to find, but even if you don't sign up, you can go to the toolkit for sleep that's listed there and that tool kit is not just supplements, that tool kit is a number of different things, both behavioral and supplement-based and nutrition-based, et cetera, that can allow you to get in to sleep and to stay asleep more readily. It's totally zero cost, you can find that again at hubermanlab.com. So things like low light, low temperature, the supplements I mentioned, adjusting your eating schedule appropriately, obviously not drinking caffeine in the middle of the night or too close to bed, that's going to be critical. In fact, ideally you wouldn't ingest any caffeine in phase two of the day, so that you could get into this deeper state of rest in which habit formation and neural plasticity can occur. What if you wake up? The way I've cast phase three is that you're supposed to be in this deep slumber, you're not supposed to wake up at all, you're supposed to be in low light and your brain is rewiring and those habits are getting consolidated, et cetera. Well, if you're like me, you probably get up once in the middle of the night. Maybe go use the restroom. Perfectly normal, perfectly normal, but a lot of people have trouble falling back asleep. Very important if you get up in the middle of the night to use a minimum of light in order to navigate your surroundings, just as much as you need in order to safely do so, because light inhibits hormone melatonin, can make it very hard to fall back to sleep if you inhibit melatonin. The effects of light inhibiting melatonin are actually very potent. It happens very, very quickly, so try and keep the lights low. And you have trouble falling back asleep, that's when you might also want to use something like a Reverie app, they have a sleep script there that can hopefully help you get back to sleep. Or something like NSDR, you can find NSDR scripts on YouTube. These are zero cost. You can look up one that I particularly like is NSDR Madefor. It's a company I'm associated with, but the NSDR is completely zero cost, and there are other things, like Yoga Nidra, which you can find scripts for elsewhere. Again, all of these habits or these behaviors, these do's and don'ts around phase three, themselves might be habits that you're trying to create for yourself. But again, phase three is really about making sure that whatever limbic friction you've been able to override in phase one and trigger some new habit, right? Forcing yourself to write or forcing yourself to study or forcing yourself to exercise during that high limbic friction state. And then whatever things you've been doing in phase two, which are habits that hopefully have moved a little bit further along the continuum of newly-formed versus all the way to reflexive, or things that take less limbic friction in in order to do. Phase three is when all of that gets really locked into the nervous system through those Hebbian mechanisms, like NMDA receptors, et cetera, that I talked about before. Again, neuroplasticity is the basis of habit formation and neuroplasticity and the rewiring of neural circuits happens in these states of deep sleep. So if you're not obeying this phase three, if you're not giving phase three the material it needs, and you're and you're not avoiding the certain things, like caffeine and bright light and stress during phase 3, you're simply not going to be able to build those habits that you've been working so hard to trigger in phase one and phase two of the day. Again, these are things that I've talked about previous episodes of the podcast and elsewhere, but really this is about habit formation. And the whole reason for placing particular types of behaviors at particular phases of the day is to set a framework for that task-bracketing. Again, task-bracketing and the circuits of the basal ganglia indicate that it's not just the neural circuits that are engaged by the task itself, but the neural circuits that are engaged before and after that task execution. That's what gets consolidated. So when you do things that particular phases of the day, under particular conditions of neurochemistry, what you're doing is you're giving the brain a very predictable set of sequences that during sleep it can start to put into your hard drive, if you will. It can really program it into your nervous system, so that within a short period of time, hopefully within 18 or maybe even 6 days or who knows? Maybe even fewer days, you'll find that executing those behaviors is very, very straightforward for you and that you won't have to feel so much limbic friction or override so much limbic friction. Some of you are probably asking, okay, if I perform a particular habit during phase one, and then I do other habits during phase two, and I eventually get to the point where I'm engaging in those habits in a pretty effortless way, do I keep them in the same phase of the day? And the good news is, the literature says it doesn't matter. And in fact, moving that particular habit around somewhat randomly can actually be beneficial to you because actually moving it from one time a day to the other is that context independence that we really are seeking. By being able to do the same thing that we want to do regardless of time of day or circumstances that's how we know that we've achieved a real habit formation, that's how we know that the habit has been moved into certain components of our neural circuity that just allow us to do it what seems like reflexively. Although earlier I pointed out that these aren't reflexes in the traditional sense. The reason for that is that this brain area, the hippocampus, that many of you know is associated with learning and memory, is not actually where memories are stored. The hippocampus is where memories are formed, it's where procedures, like we talked about before, procedural memory of how you're going to execute a particular sequence, where that's maintained. So like if we use the recipe model, that's where the recipe is maintained until you know how to cook that dish and then the procedural memory literally migrates off into a different set of neural circuits, which are the neural circuits of the neocortex where we have maps of sensory experience, maps of all kinds experiences, including motor maps of how to execute things. So we use one part of the brain to learn something, but then that information, in the form of the electrical activity of neurons, is passed off to a different brain area. Now, the neurons themselves don't move from the hippocampus to the cortex, that doesn't happen. What happens is the signals, the sequence of electrical firing, much like a script for a movie or the notes on a sheet of paper for a particular musical piece is transferred off to a different brain area. So, that whole process of really leaning into something that's hard, and then it becoming easier, and then eventually that things becoming more or less reflexive involves a migration of the information in the brain. And once it's migrated out to a different location in the brain, at that point it's achieved context-independence. It doesn't have to be bracketed by, you know, your caffeine and your lunch. It doesn't have to occur immediately after your afternoon NSDR, but before your four O'clock meeting on Zoom, or something of that sort. So all this is to say that once something has become reflexive, you should play with it a little bit about time of day. If you want to keep it in the same phase of day, great. But if you one day decide you're going to exercise in the afternoon, the next day you decide you're going to exercise in the morning, and that's the habit that you're concerned with, that's terrific. If you're able to do that, that means that it's truly achieved context-independence. It means that you have officially formed that habit. And as I mentioned earlier, much earlier at the beginning of the episode, the strength of a habit is dictated by how much limbic friction, that was one, and how much context dependence there is. So when it doesn't take much activation energy to get into the execution of that habit and you can do it in any context, well, then you have formed a habit. We really can't have a discussion about learning anything, habits or otherwise, unless we talk about reward prediction error. Reward prediction error is associated with the molecule dopamine, although I should say there are other neurochemicals in our brain and body that are also related to reward prediction error. But reward prediction error is a very good system, or I should say, a lens through which to think about, whether or not we should reward ourselves for performing a given habit. And this is a much larger discussion that actually relates to things like parenting and self-regulation. You know, should we reward kids just for effort? Should we reward ourselves just for effort? What should we reward? How much should we reward ourselves? When should we withdraw reward? Should we use punishment? These kinds of things. This is a vast literature. We don't have time to go into all the details, but the notion of reward prediction error is so powerful that it can predict most if not all forms of learning, including habit formation. And you can deploy or use particular features of reward prediction error if you would like to reinforce or accelerate the formation of certain habits. So, reward prediction error, quite simply, is if you expect a reward and the reward comes, a particular behavior that was associated with generating that reward is more likely to occur again. That's pretty straight forward. However, the amount of reward, in the form of this molecule dopamine, that you will experience is even greater if a reward arrives that's unexpected. Okay. So let me repeat that again. If I think that something's coming that's going to be great, let's say I lean into a habit, I manage to override my limbic friction, and I'm doing my 45 minutes of writing in the morning with no phone and no internet and I'm getting toward the end, and I'm anticipating how I'm actually doing this, this is great, I did it, I'm feeling really, really good. I finish, I definitely will receive a dopamine reward, I'll make my own dopamine reward, that's where it comes from. Remember, this is all internal. However, I will also receive a dopamine reward if unexpectedly something positive happens. And typically if something unexpected but positive happens, the amount of dopamine reward that we get is actually much greater than in any other conditions. However, it's hard to surprise yourself about a behavior that you're deliberately engaging in. So that becomes a bit of a tricky one. Reward prediction error also says that if we expect a reward and the reward doesn't come that the pattern of dopamine release will follow a particular contour and that contour is very important. Here's how it goes. Let's say that I'm writing and I'm about 30 or 45 minutes in, I'm thinking, "Ah, this is great." "I'm actually, I managed to do this" "I'm succeeding in executing the behaviors" "that I need to in order to perform this habit." "I'm overriding limbic friction." Just that series of thoughts will start to generate the dopamine release within my brain and body. However, if at the 15 minute mark the phone rings and I pick up the phone or I break my own protocol, I break my own self-discipline and I go on and check social media or I do something that takes me out of that, what's going to happen is that my level of dopamine is actually going to drop below the baseline, meaning below the level of dopamine I had before I even started the habit execution. Okay? So what this is, is this system that predicts whether or not rewards are going to come. When we think a reward is going to come, it starts to actually arrive earlier in the form of dopamine release. This is the feeling that we experience as positive anticipation. You tell a kid, "Hey, we're going to go to the amusement park." Or "We're going to go get ice cream." They haven't had the ice cream yet, they're not at the amusement park, but they're excited, the dopamine release comes earlier. Okay? They get to the amusement park or they get the ice cream, they will also have some dopamine release associated with that. But most of it, believe it or not, came in the form of the anticipation. And dopamine has some qualities that make the actual ice cream and the actual amusement park experience more pleasurable than it would be had that dopamine release not happened. Now of course, the other way to do is to surprise a kid. You tell them, "Listen, we're going to the class that you absolutely hate." Or "We're going to go see the person" "that you absolutely despise." And then you drive them to the amusement park that's the big release of dopamine. But reward prediction error also says that if you tell the kid, or yourself, "Okay, we're headed to the amusement park." "We're going to get some ice cream." They're really, really excited. And then you get there and it's closed, or they're not letting any more people in, well then the dopamine level drops way below what it was before you told them that you were headed there. Okay? I've given a number of different examples that hopefully make this clear. Reward prediction error governs virtually all aspects of effort and all aspects of learning. Why? Because when dopamine is released in the brain and body, the neural circuits of our brain and body change. There's a state change. Our over level, excuse me, our overall level of energy, but also the sorts of sensory events that we're paying attention to changes when there's a lot of dopamine in our system. Now you can leverage this for habit formation. Think back to task bracketing. Think back to limbic friction. If you are considering adopting a new habit or if you are trying to break a habit, something we haven't talked too much about, but we will in a moment, it's very useful to think not just about the procedural aspects of what you're going to do, but also think about the events that precede and follow that particular habit, and the execution, or at least the effort to execute that habit. What you're doing is you're casting a kind of a spotlight around a bin of time, or a set of events, for which dopamine can be associated. What does this look like in the practical sense? Well again, I'll just try and use very simple concrete examples, but this could carry over to anything. Let's say I were somebody who has a hard time getting in that 30 to 60 minutes of zone II cardiovascular exercise mid-morning. This is actually an issue for me. I much prefer to do resistance exercise than cardiovascular exercise, although once I do it, I always feel much better that I've done it. What I should do is positively anticipate the onset and the offset of that session. Right? So thinking about leaning into the effort, going out and doing that zone II cardio session, and I should think about how I'm going to feel after. So, not just thinking about how great I'm going to feel after, but also thinking about how hard it's going to be at the beginning, and then trying to reward myself subjectively for the entire experience. In other words, start rewarding task-bracketing in addition to rewarding the execution of the habit itself. Now some of you might be saying, "Well, wait this is all self-talk." "This is just positive self-talk." But it's not positive self-talk, it's not saying, you know, "I feel so great about doing something" "that I actually hate." You can't lie to yourself, or you're welcome to lie to yourself, but the neuroscience literature, the literature of growth mindset, all the literature basically of mindset speaks to the fact that when you lie to yourself, you know you're lying, and you actually set up the opposite of a reward system. So, you have to be brutally honest with yourself that, for instance, "I don't like initiating this cardiovascular exercise" "but I do like the fact that I've done it" "after I've done it." So what you are doing is you are applying reward prediction error to the entire sequence of things that's involved in getting into the habit execution, getting through the habit execution, and getting out of the habit of execution. How do you do this? Well, I take us back to our procedural memory visualization exercises we talked about earlier. When I talked about it in that context, I talked about walking through mentally the series of steps that's required to perform a particular habit. So in the case of the zone II cardio thing it would be, "Okay up and put on my shoes," "then I'm going to head out the door," "then I'm going to drive up the road." There is a particular canyon near here that, if I'm going to run, I happen to like running, or I don't hate running enough that I tend to do it. Going through that, heading back, et cetera, et cetera. That's great, but even better would be to broaden the time bin and start to positively anticipate the period headed into the habit, so even before you put on your shoes. The fact that you are successfully placing the habit in, in this case, phase one of the day and that afterwards I'm going to feel a particular set of positive benefits, elevated mood, et cetera. I like being hungry and quickly after I exercise I'm hungry, so I like being hungry because I like eating, so there's a whole set of things that link up with one another. So I'm not just thinking about habit execution as this isolated little set of events, or this little time bin, but rather, I'm drawing a larger envelope around it and starting to positively associate dopamine reward with that larger envelope. And for those of you that are thinking, "Well, this is just a psychological trick." You know, you're kind of like, "This is sort of like lying to yourself." It's not because you're not actually contradicting the fact that some of this is unpleasant. What you're doing is you're taking this entire series of events, what I'm calling this kind of time envelope, and you're associating it with a particular reward that comes later, which for me would be the feeling that, you know, that I've completed this. Right? Because for me that's usually a good feeling. So reward prediction error is beautiful, not just because it's a sort of math of anticipation and reward, or a math of anticipation and disappointment, it's beautiful because you can stretch out or make more narrow the time bins in which reward prediction error works. Reward prediction error is the way in which people navigate four year degrees. Right? I mean, you go, sure, final exam to final exam, et cetera. But ultimately, there's a big payoff at the end and it's all basically for that big payoff. And of course, I understand that it's the journey, not the destination, but let's face it, for a lot of us goals and habits are about achieving some sort of destination. In the case of zone II cardio, for me it's about trying to stay alive for as long as I can, as long as I can with vitality, that is. And it's also the fact that if I'm doing that, I get to eat the foods that I like. I tend to be able to eat more, which I happen to really enjoy eating, so much so that I'd like it just as an activity. So basically what you're trying to do is not restrict your thinking to just the habit that you're trying to form, but rather, to grab ahold of the timing before and after that particular habit and start to positively associate reward mechanisms in your brain with that entire time bin. This is a very useful and very powerful tool in order to form habits. And I should say that it's not something that comes naturally to most people. In fact, even as I describe it, you might find it's still a little bit abstract, but what I encourage you to do, if you are finding it to be a little bit vague, would be to pick the habit that you want to form, write down or think about very concretely what is the sequence of steps involved in the execution of that habit, and then write down or think about what is the sequence of events that need to precede that habit, maybe the immediate 10 or 15 minutes before, as well as the immediate sequence of events and/or feelings that will occur after that habit, and then call the whole thing a habit execution. The whole thing a effort to engage in that particular habit. And in doing that, and in positively associating with the idea that you're going to complete that entire sequence, you will engage reward prediction error in the proper way that the dopamine surge can lend itself towards motivation. Because ultimately, dopamine is not about feeling good, it's about feeling motivated. This is something that I've talked about numerous times before, but dopamine, contrary to popular belief, is not a reward molecule, so much as it is a molecule of motivation and drive. And the natural consequence of doing the exercise I just described, of writing things out that precede, are involved in the immediate execution of the habit, and follow the habit, will allow you to experience an increase in energy and thereby an increase in likelihood that you're going to engage in that entire sequence of events. And the reason for that is that dopamine gives us energy, and the reason for that is that the molecule epinephrine, adrenaline, is actually manufactured from dopamine. Biochemically, it comes from dopamine. So, dopamine is powerful and you can access more dopamine around even habits that you haven't yet formed by taking this broader time envelope and task-bracketing that specific task execution or habit execution. Way back at the beginning of the episode, In promised you that I would deliver two programs that are geared towards habit formation. And I promised that I would give you ways in which you could gauge whether or not certain habits had moved from high effort, what I call high limbic friction, to reflexive. And we talked about a number of way to gauge that. In researching this episode, I found a tremendous number of different systems for habit formation. It's really amazing how much is out there. There, one says 60 days to this, or 21 days to that, or 18 days to this. I mean, it's just rampant in the popular psychology literature and in the self-help literature. I want to spell out a particular system that I think could be very useful to most if not all people that's rooted in the biology of habit formation, rooted in the psychology of habit formation, and that is entirely compatible with that phase one, phase two, phase three type program that I talked about earlier, but encompasses a bit of a longer time scale and really arrives at a kind of a system, if you will, for how to build in habits and then to test whether or not those habits have really stuck and whether or not they're likely to stick going forward. And so this, at least for the sake of this example, a 21 day system. I picked 21 days because that seems to be the average or most typical system for engaging neuroplasticity as it relates to the formation of new habits. This 21 day system, actually, is one that someone I know very well uses and has used for a very long time. They actually, their kids use it as well. And it has a certain elegance to it and I think as I describe it that elegance will begin to reveal itself. So basically what this involves is you set out to perform 6 new habits per day across the course of 21 days. Why 6 and why 21? Well, we'll talk about that in a moment. But the idea is, you write down 6 things that you would like to do every day for 21 days. What phase of the day those things fall into? Well, that will depend on what they are and how they relate to those earlier phase one, phase two, phase three, but for now, 21 days, 6 things per day. However, the expectation is that you'll only complete 4 to 5 of those each day. Okay? So built into this is a kind of permission to fail, but it's not failure, because it turns out that this approach to forming habits is based not so much on the specific habits that you're trying to form, but the habit of performing habits. Right? It's the habit of doing a certain number of things per day. So, you set out to perform 6. Now, another reason for not necessarily performing all 6 is that some activities probably shouldn't be performed each day. For instance, in my case, if I were to weight train or even run every day, I'm of the sort, or my biology is of the sort that I don't recover so well. So I wouldn't want to do resistance training every day, but I might want to do it 4 days a week, for instance. So by having 6 things in that list, you could shuffle out that particular activity on particular days of the week, and simply do 4 or 5 other activities. So 21 days, you list out 4 to 5 things. So it might be zone II cardio, resistance training, sunlight viewing, writing could be journaling, it could be learning a language, mathematics. Again this is going to vary depending on your particular goal and the habits that you're trying to create. But no more than six and the expectation is that you're not going to perform more than 4 to 5. If you miss a day, meaning you don't perform 4 to 5 things, there is no punishment. And in fact it's important that you don't actually try and do what, in the literature, is called a habit slip compensation, which is just fancy psychological language for if you screw up and you don't get all 4 or 5 in one day, you don't do 8 the next day in order to compensate. This actually brings me back to an example I had from graduate school. I remember when I started graduate school feeling very excited, but a little bit overwhelmed by the amount of things that I had to do because I had to both do research, I was doing coursework, at the time graduate students stipends, and still now unfortunately, were depressingly low so it was financially stressful. There were a number of things happening and I remember a neurologist, this was at UC Berkeley, he was a really fantastic scientist and person, his name was Bob Knight, some of you may know him. I remember he, I went to him and I asked, you know, "What is the process by which someone" "actually navigates graduate school successfully?" And he said, "Listen, you don't want to do anything" "or engage in a routine in any way" "that you can't keep up consistently" "for at least five and ideally 6 days per week." I thought, "Oh, that's pretty good." And he said, "Every 4 or 5 years" "you might have to update that," "but you need to decide what you can do consistently," "what you can do every day or at least six days a week," "or 5 days a week." And that was very very useful to me and it fits well with this notion of habit slips, that if you happen to screw up and not be able to engage in whatever habits you're trying to learn for whatever reason, that the next day, you just get right back on on the on the horse, so to speak. However, there's a really interesting feature from the neuroscience literature and from the psychology that says that chunking this 21 days into 2 day bins can be very, very useful. While it is true that the unit of the day that our cells use is a circadian one, a 24-hour clock, there does seem to be something powerful about engaging in particular habits, in a particular sequence, for two days in a row, and then resetting, so thinking, "Okay I can do this for a day" "and if I can do it for a day," "I can probably do it for 2 days." And then resetting. So every 2 days you're resetting. So you're kind of chunking 21 days into a series of 2 day bins, in which you are trying to perform 4 to 5 new habits and then completing that 21 days. Now, everything I've described about this 21-day program with 6 things that you're trying to do with new habits and only performing 4 to 5 and not compensating, et cetera. There's nothing neuroscientifically unique about it, except for the fact that it's not just 21 days, broken up into two day chunks. After 21 days, you stop engaging in this 21-day deliberate 4 to 5 things per day, tight schedule, and you simply go into autopilot. You ask yourself how many of those particular habits that I was deliberately trying to learn in the previous 21 days are automatically incorporated into my schedule? How many of them am I naturally doing? In other words, every 21 days you don't update and start adding new habits. You simply try and maintain the ones that you built in that first 21 days. And this I think is extremely important because in all the habit literature that I could find, sure, there was a lot of psychological data and neuroscience data, behavioral science data around here's how you form a habit, here's how you break a habit. There was even some kind of test for whether or not a habit had really achieved context independence, whether or not it was a strongly formed habit. But there wasn't a lot of information, at least by my search, of what to do once you've formed a habit, and how to evaluate whether or not that habit is likely to persist long into the future. So here's the idea, you set out these 6 things that you would like to learn, or that you would like to acquire in your life, these habits, you only expect that you're going to perform 4 or 5 each day, you do that for 21 days. Again, if you miss a day, you just hop right back on the next day. However, you should think about the functional units within this 21 day period as 2 days. You can try and nail 4 to 5 of these things for 2 days. If you happen to get all 6, great, but that's not necessarily required. So you can do it for 2 days then reset 2 days, then reset 2 days, and then in the next 21 days, you're not trying to acquire any new habits, you're not going to throw in 6 more habits that you want to learn, you're simply going to assess how well, how deeply, you rewired your nervous system to be able to perform those 6 habits of the previous 21 days. And this is extremely useful, I believe, because it will allow you to asses whether or not you can indeed make room, if you even have room, I should say, for more habits. Many people are trying to cram so many new behaviors into their nervous system, that they don't stand a chance of learning all those behaviors. What you may find, is that you kept up 2 of those things very consistently throughout the 21 days. And perhaps there was one of them that you did sporadically, and that there were 3 others that, frankly, you didn't manage to execute. You may also be one of these people, one of these mutants, that sets out to do 6 new things per day for 21 days and performs every single one of them. Terrific. More power to you. In that case, for the following 21 days, let's see whether or not you can continue to perform those very same 6 things every day for 21 days, and then, and only then, would you want to add more habits in. So you could repeat this 21 day process, you know, 21 days of new habit, 21 days of testing those new habits as to whether or not they're reflexive or not. You could do that forever, if you wanted. But the idea is that this isn't something that you're doing all year long. It's that you're perhaps starting the new year or regardless of when you're listening to this, you set out to make that 21 day really the stimulus period in which the habits get wired in and then the following month, and maybe even the following months, or periods of 21 days, are really the kind of thermometer or the test bed of how well you've embedded those particular habits. And if indeed you want to continue to add new habits or you find that certain habits that you weren't able to embed in your nervous system and make reflexive, you want to then bring those in, fantastic. But it's only once you've achieved all those 6 habits as reflexive, that you would move forward. And I think this sort of system, while it could have been replaced with many other different systems. Again, there's nothing holy about this system. But this particular system has a number of features, the lack of compensation for missed days, the fact that it's a fairly high intensity program for 21 days, but then you test yourself, a kind of competition test with yourself, if you will. Those features and the fact that habit slips, missing of particular habits and not doing all 6 is kind of built into the system, I think makes it a very reasonable one. It's very adaptable to the real world. And I think it's one that, provided you obey the phase one, phase two, phase three type system that we talked about earlier, you collapse these two programs with one another, which hopefully will be easy, based on the descriptions I've given. Well, if you do that, and I think there's a very high probability that the habits that you try and form will achieve this context dependence and that it will take progressively less limbic friction to try and perform them. Thus far, we've almost exclusively been discussing how to form habits. But what about breaking habits? Certainly many people out there would like to break habits that they feel don't serve them well. One of the challenges in breaking habits is that many habits occur very, very quickly and so there isn't an opportunity to intervene until the habit has already been initiated and in some cases completed. Well, there are a couple of tools that neuroscience and psychology tell us can be very beneficial. Some of those things are somewhat intuitive and relate to what I call foundation practices. Meaning things that set the overall tone in your body and brain, such that you would be less likely to engage in a particular habit or that would raise your level of awareness, both of your situation and to how you feel inside. So things like stress reduction. Things like getting good sleep. Things like quality nutrition. Things like having positive routines arranged throughout your day. All of those, of course, will support you in trying to break particular habits. And while that can be very useful, it's admittedly very generic advice. It doesn't point to any one specific protocol. In order to identify a specific protocol that one could apply in order to break habits, we have to look at the mirror image of the sort of neuroplasticity that we talked about at the beginning of the episode. At the beginning of the episode, we talked about a form of neuroplasticity called long term potentiation, involving the NMDA receptor. Just to refresh your memory a little bit, it says that if a set of neurons is very electrically active it's likely that those neurons will communicate with themselves more easily because of changes in things like NMDA receptor activity, the recruitment of additional receptors, et cetera. It's essentially a cellular and molecular explanation for how something goes from unlearned, to learned, to reflexive. Now, in order to break synapses, or to break apart neural connections that are serving a habit that you don't want to engage in, we need to engage the process called long term depression. And long term depression has nothing to do with a state of mental depression or a reduction in mood. So I really want to be clear that when I say depression in this context it has nothing to do with psychological depression, it has nothing to do with mood. It's simply called long term depression because just as long term potentiation says if neuron A triggers the firing of neuron B, and it does so very robustly over and over and over again, then neuron A will not have to fire as intensely, or as frequently, in order to activate neuron B in the future because they become potentiated. Right? The threshold for co-activation has been reduced. There's a much higher probability that they will be activated together at low levels of intensity. That's essentially what long term potentiation is. Long term depression says that if neuron A is active and neuron B is not active within a particular time window, then the connection between neuron A and B will weaken over time, even if they started off very strongly connected. Okay? So, I'm going to repeat that because this is a pretty detailed neurobiological mechanism whereby if neuron A, and neuron B is active, but at a different time or outside a particular, what we call, temporal window, meaning outside a particular time window, then through long term depression, the connection between neuron A and neuron B will weaken. And just as a point of interest, the NMDA receptor is also involved in long term depression, although there are other molecular components involved as well. So how do you take two neurons that underlie a habit out of synchrony? How do you get them to fire asynchronously? This is pretty interesting with respect to the cellular and molecular biology, but at the behavioral level, it's especially interesting. They way that one would do this is, let's say for instance, you have a habit of picking up your phone mid work session. Okay? That's a reflexive habit I think that most people have experienced. And we often hear the idea that, oh, the phone is so filled with access to dopamine and incredible things that we're just drawn to it. But if you noticed what's happened with phone use over time, most people, including myself sometimes I admit, find ourselves just looking at our phone, or find ourselves in a particular app without actually having engaged in the conscious set of steps of, "Oh I'm really curious" "what's going on in this particular app." "I'm really curious" "what's going on in this particular website." And you just kind of "find yourself", in air quotes, for those of you listening, I'm making air quotes. You just sort of find yourself doing it because the behavior of picking up your phone is sort of reflexive, or has become fully reflexive. You see this a lot at meals where multiple people are there and no one's looking at their phone and then all of a sudden someone takes out their phone and you'll notice that other people just naturally take out their phone. It's this kind observation induced reflex. And I would wager that most people aren't consciously aware of the immediate steps involved. So the literature says there are a number of ways to break these sorts of habitual behaviors, or reflexive behaviors. Most of those approaches involve establishing some sort of reward for not performing the activity or some sort of punishment for forming the activity. I've heard of some basic things that some people will do, like they'll even put like a rubber band on their wrist, and every time they complain, or every time they do some behavior, like pick up their phone, they'll give themselves a snap on the wrist. And yeah, the rationale there is that you're trying to create a somatic, a very physical representation of something that makes it very real and harder to overlook. Other people will just do a tick mark on a piece of paper. This sort of, "What gets measured is what gets managed" kind of mindset, where if every time you do something, you take away the judgment, this is very new age-y, I realize, but this is what you find out there, if you search the literature. Even on PubMed, peer-reviewed articles, that every time you engage in a behavior, you just measure the fact that you did that behavior, you just mark it down. At the end of the day, people are supposed to look at that and say, "Oh my goodness!" "I can't believe that I spent, you know, 3 hours." Or, "I did it 46 times." And in fact, a lot of apps, social media apps, will start to give you warnings now, if you opt in, that you've been on the app for an hour, would you like to leave? Most people just click right past it and go back in. I think very few people say, "Oh my goodness!" "It's been an hour and therefor you're right," "I absolutely shouldn't engage in this any more." It's just far to easy to just blow past those reminders. Well, the literature on habit formation and habit reduction, breaking habits, has been analyzed. There's a beautiful meta-analysis, which involves looking at a number of different studies all together, comparing the statistical strength of each of those studies, looking in different conditions what sorts of habits were trying to be made or broken. The first author on this review is Fritz, F R I T Z. I'll certainly put a link to this. It's Heather Fritz and it's "Intervention to modify habits: a scoping review." And it is indeed a very broad scale review. It's from the Journal of Occupation Participation and Health. It's published in 2020. It's a really nice article. A couple of things I learned from this article and then I'll get into the specific tool for breaking habits. Perhaps the most interesting thing that I took from this review was the finding that notifications to either engage in habits or to not engage in habits actually were not very effective over time. They were effective in the immediate period when people started using these notifications, as were little sticky notes, like, "Don't go into the refrigerator" "between the hours of whatever and whatever." Or just visual reminders, physical reminders or electronic reminders were effective in the immediate term, but in the long term, did not predict whether or not people would effectively stick to habits they were trying to stick to, or break habits that they were trying to break. So sadly, that doesn't seem to work very well. And perhaps they just need to come up with more robust reminders. I don't know, mild electric shock or something like that because what we do know, only sort of kidding about mild electric shock, but what we do know from both human and animal studies is that things like electric shock, things like monetary penalties, right? Having to pay out every time you engage in a particular behavior. Those are pretty effective ways to break habits. The problems is when people are not being monitored for habit use, for instance, you can imagine a situation where you say, "I'm not going to pick up my phone" "for the 4 hours in the early part of the day" "so I can get, you know, real dedicated focused work done." Unless someone's monitoring them, then people don't tend to monitor themselves completely enough that they punish themselves completely enough, that they break the behavior. In other words, the punishment isn't bad enough, in order to break the habit, which just speaks to how powerful these habits are once they become reflexive. They're just very, very hard to override. So it turns out that the key to generating long term depression in these pathways is actually to take the period immediately following the bad habit execution, meaning, let's say you tell yourself you're not going to pick up your phone, you're not going to bite your nails, you're not going to reflexively walk to the refrigerator at a particular time or day, but you find yourself doing it anyway, and what actually has to happen is bringing conscious awareness to the period immediately afterwards, which I think most people recognize, they realize "Ugh I just did it again. I just did it again." And in that moment, capture the sequence of events, not that led to the bad habit execution, but actually to take advantage of the fact that the neurons that were responsible for generating that bad habit were active a moment ago, and to actually engage in a replacement behavior immediately afterward. Now, this is really interesting and I think powerful because I would have thought that you have to engage in a replacement behavior that truly replaces the bad habit behavior, right? That you would have to be able to identify your state of mind or the sequence of events leading into the bad habit, but rather, the stage or the period immediately after the bad habit execution, is a unique opportunity to insert a different type of, what we would call adaptive behavior, but that could be any behavior that's not in line with the bad behavior, so let's give it an example. Let's say you find yourself, you're trying to do focused work, you pick up your phone, you're disappointed in yourself for picking up your phone, you could of course just put it down, and re-engage in the work behavior, but if you were good at that, then you probably wouldn't have done it in the first place. And so, what turns out to be very effective, is to go engage in some other positive habit. Now, this has two major effects. The first one is you start to link in time the execution of a bad behavior to this other good behavior. And in doing so, you start to recruit other neural circuits, other neurons, that can start to somewhat dismantle sequence of firing associated with the bad behavior. In other words, you start to create a kind of a double habit that starts with a bad habit, and then ends with a good habit. And that seems to create enough of a temporal mismatch so that then recognizing when you're heading toward to bad habit becomes more apparent to you. So again, I want to make this very, very concrete. Let's say that the behavior is reflexively picking up one's phone. You do that, you think, "Ugh, goodness, I did it again." Here's what I'm going to do, you would set that down and then you would engage in some other positive behavior, that you've deemed positive. And here, it's very subjective, so it's hard for me to give an example that will necessarily make sense to everybody, but perhaps you're working on hydration, so maybe you go have a glass of water. Maybe you're trying to do breath work or something. Maybe you're trying to enhance your language speaking skills so you go and you spend 5 minutes doing a particular type of language learning. You literally exit whatever you were doing and perform that other new positive habit in the immediate period right after that, even for a short period of time. It's a little bit counterintuitive, but what this does it creates kind of a cognitive and a temporal mismatch between the initial bad behavior, which before is what we would call sort of a closed loop, and the engineers out there will know what I'm talking about. But in a closed loop, so one behavior, one set of neural firings, leads to another, leads to another, and then just kind of sets the same thing in motion. It can be kind of a self perpetuating system. By changing the number of features that are in that loop, it disrupts the closed nature of that loop, it creates what we call an open loop, and in an open loop, you are better able to intervene. So, as I mentioned before, this might seem counterintuitive, you might think, "Why would I want to reward the execution of a bad habit" "with a good habit." "I don't want to reward myself for the bad habit." But really what you're trying to do is you're trying to change the nature of the neural circuits that are firing so that you can rewrite the script for that bad habit. A different way to put it would be, imagine that the bad habit is like a chord on the piano that you play, or a chord notes, or a sequence of notes that you would play, and it comes very easily. You can play it every single time. But, let's say, as you're trying to learn a new piece of music, you're just constantly inserting that at the inappropriate time. That was, you know, I think it was a decent enough analogy for a bad habit because it involves some motor execution. You just find yourself doing it. Rather than trying to prevent yourself from doing it, the next time you do it, add in a new chord or sequence that you're trying to learn. What this does then is it changes the whole nature of the sequence of neurons that are firing from bad habit through to the end of this newly applied good habit. So, this is the way in which you start to dismantle or, when I say dismantle, really weaken the likelihood that if neuron A fires, neuron B will fire. Because, as you're starting off in the mode of very reflexively performing a bad habit, those neurons are firing together without you consciously being aware of it. It's almost impossible for you to intervene in yourself without a number of other features, like severe punishment, severe consequence type outcomes. Rather, tacking on some additional sequences, like if neuron A, neuron B fires, and then you're saying, "Okay well, if neuron B fires," "I'm going to start inserting neuron C, D, E, F to fire." Right? That's the, C, D, E, F being the positive behavior that you're going to insert. And in doing so, you create a chain of neuronal activation that then is very easy to dismantle. And so, when people have applied this kind of approach, it removes the need to have constant conscious awareness of one's own behavior prior to that behavior, which is very, very difficult to achieve. Rather, what they find is that they are able to engage in re-mapping of neural circuits associated with bad habits in ways that are very, very straightforward. Right? Because you can always identify when you've done the thing you don't want to do and then tack on to that something additional that's positive. Now, the nature of that positive thing is important. You don't want it to be something that's very hard to execute. You want it to be something that's positive and fairly easy to execute, so that you're not struggling all the time to insert this on top of this bad behavior, whatever that bad behavior might happen to be. But again, this is rooted in the biology of long term depression, it maps very well to the behavioral change literature that I was able to glean that really shows that rather than just get reminders, rather than try and instill punishment, rather than setting up reward for breaking bad habits, that perhaps the simplest way to approach this is to tack on additional behaviors to the bad habits, make sure those behaviors are good behaviors, or behaviors that are adaptive for you, and in doing so, you will soon find that the initiation of the bad habit takes on a whole new form or that you're not even inspired to do it at all. And of course, I want to acknowledge that breaking bad habits is really hard. We had an episode all about addiction with Dr. Anna Lembke from Stanford Medical School. She's a colleague of mine who runs the Dual-Diagnosis Addiction Clinic at Stanford. And in that episode, we talked a lot about how addicts for drugs, alcohol, people have addictions to certain types of behaviors, or avoidance behaviors even, that in the case of addiction, there has to be a tremendous kind of full-scale campaign for them to be able to intervene in their behavior. So, for those of you that are thinking about bad habit breaking in the context of addictive type behaviors, definitely check out that episode. Addiction does employ some of these principles around habit making and habit breaking, as it were, but of course, because the consequences of certain habits in addiction can be so severe, there's other sets of protocols and there's a kind of a psychological backdrop to it that's very important. It also relates to the biology of dopamine, and you can find all of that in the episode with Dr. Anna Lembke. So today we've covered a lot about the biology and the psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. We talked about why certain habits are so hard to wire in, why certain habits are so hard to break down and eliminate, and how we can determine which habits are going to be easier for us to access and which habits are going to be harder for us to access and break. We talked a lot about this notion of limbic friction and we talked about context dependence. And we talked about a number of different things as it relates to neural circuits and the formation of new connections in the brain, and strengthening and weakening of connections in the brain. We also discussed two programs. Programs designed specifically for you on the basis of the neurobiology literature and the literature on the psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. Just to briefly recap, one program involves dividing the 24 hour day into three phases, phase one, phase two, phase three, and to try and tackle specific habits at particular phases of the 24 hour cycle. The second program involved a 21 day process of engaging approximately 6 new habits per day, although the expectation, as I mentioned earlier, is that you're not going to perform all 6 of those. And an assessment in the following 21 days as to whether or not you have indeed formed those new habits or not. And there were a number of other features that I mentioned that were related to those two general programs. Phase one, phase two, phase three, and the 21 day program, and how those could be meshed together. So, I'm guessing some of you will probably have questions about those programs and how to apply them, but hopefully they were clear enough for you to get started. This is a good opportunity for me to mention that the Huberman Lab Podcast has something called the Neural Network Newsletter that is sent out approximately once a month. For the next newsletter, I will release a on-paper version of these two systems and how they mesh together for habit formation and habit breaking, and if you'd like to access that, you can go to hubermanlab.com, you go to the menu, you can sign up for the newsletter. First of all, it's zero cost. Second of all, we have our privacy policy there, but I can tell you right now, we don't share your email with any vendors or with any other sources. Those emails stay internal to us. And if you'd like to see what the sort of flavor of those newsletters is, the previous newsletters, for instance, one on tools for sleep, that I mentioned earlier, or tools for neuroplasticity, in the classroom and outside the classroom as well, for teachers and for students of various kinds, those are also posted there so you can access any of the previous newsletters. My hope is that today you've learned both the biological mechanisms and the practical tools by which you can start to establish habits that, for you, you deem adaptive, healthy, and that are going to support you in your goals. And that you can start to dismantle some of the habits that you find to be unhealthy or maladaptive for you and for your goals. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific way to support us. In addition, on YouTube you can leave us feedback in the comment section. You can also leave us suggestions for future guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And please also subscribe to the podcast on Apple and/or Spotify. On Apple, you can leave us up to a 5 star review. And now Spotify has a feature by which you can also leave us review feedback. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this podcast episode. That's perhaps the best way to support out podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's podcast and in many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I mentioned supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from supplements. Supplements for sleep, supplements for focus, supplements for various other things related to mental and physical health and performance. One key issue any time there's a discussion about supplements, you have to be sure that the supplements you are taking are of the very highest quality. And for that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, because Thorne has the very highest stringency, with respect to the quality of the ingredients they include, and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients that they include in their supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, and get 20% off any of those supplements, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman and, in addition to being able 20% off any of those supplements, if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that web portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following us on Instagram and Twitter, please feel free to do so. There, I teach neuroscience and neuroscience related tools in short format. Some of that material overlaps with what you hear on the podcast, some of it is unique and different from what's on the podcast. And once again, I want to thank you for going on this journey of exploring the neuroscience and the psychology of habit formation and habit breaking. I hope it supports you in your goals. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [mellow music]

========================================

--- Video 295 ---
Video ID: n9IxomBusuw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n9IxomBusuw
Title: Dr. David Sinclair: The Biology of Slowing & Reversing Aging
Published: 2021-12-27 13:00:32 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I am joined by Dr. David Sinclair, tenured Professor of Genetics at Harvard Medical School and an expert researcher in the field of longevity. Dr. Sinclair is also the author of the book Lifespan: Why We Age & Why We Don't Have To, and the host of the Lifespan Podcast, which launches January 5, 2022. 

In this interview, we discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms of aging and what we all can do to slow or reverse the aging process. We discuss fasting and supplementation with resveratrol, NAD, metformin, and NMN. We also discuss the use of caffeine, exercise, cold exposure, and why excessive iron load is bad for us. We discuss food choices for offsetting aging and promoting autophagy (clearance of dead cells). And we discuss the key blood markers everyone should monitor to determine your biological versus chronological age. We also discuss the future of longevity research and technology. This episode includes lots of basic science and specific, actionable protocols, right down to the details of what to do and when. By the end, you will have in-depth knowledge of the biology of aging and how to offset it.

#HubermanLab #DavidSinclair #Longevity

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Magic Spoon - https://www.magicspoon.com/huberman

Dr. David Sinclair Links:
Lifespan Podcast: https://lifespanpodcast.com
Twitter: https://twitter.com/davidasinclair 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/davidsinclairphd/ 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/davidsinclairpodcast 
Lifespan (book): https://amzn.to/47MLimC
Aging Test Waitlist: https://www.tallyhealth.com
Harvard Lab Website: https://sinclair.hms.harvard.edu

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Dr. David Sinclair, Harvard Medical School
00:03:30 ROKA, InsideTracker, Magic Spoon
00:07:45 “Aging as a Disease” vs. Longevity & Anti-Aging
00:10:23 What Causes Aging? The Epigenome
00:15:53 Cosmetic Aging 
00:17:15 Development Never Stops, Horvath Clock
00:20:12 Puberty Rate as a Determinant of Aging Rate
00:23:00 Fasting, Hunger & Food Choices
00:32:44 Fasting Schedules, Long Fasts, (Macro)Autophagy
00:34:50 Caffeine, Electrolytes 
00:35:56 Blood Glucose & the Sirtuins; mTOR
00:37:55 Amino Acids: Leucine, “Pulsing”
00:44:35 Metformin, Berberine
00:50:29 Resveratrol, Wine
00:53:20 What Breaks a Fast?
00:56:45 Resveratrol, NAD, NMN, NR; Dosage, Timing
01:09:10 Are Artificial Sweeteners Bad for Us?
01:12:04 Iron Load & Aging
01:15:05 Blood Work Analysis
01:19:37 C-Reactive Protein, Cholesterol: Serum & Dietary
01:26:02 Amino Acids, Plants, Antioxidants
01:33:45 Behaviors That Extend Lifespan, Testosterone, Estrogen
01:40:35 Neuroplasticity & Neural Repair
01:46:19 Ice Baths, Cold Showers, “Metabolic Winter”
01:48:07 Obesity & How It Accelerates Aging, GnRH 
01:52:10 Methylation, Methylene Blue, Cigarettes 
01:56:17 X-Rays  
01:59:00 Public Science Education, Personal Health
02:05:40 The Sinclair Test You Can Take: www.doctorsinclair.com
02:08:13 Zero-Cost Support & Resources, Sponsors, Patreon, Supplements, Instagram 

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

