--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:43:45
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 296th in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 296 ---
Video ID: RgAcOqVRfYA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgAcOqVRfYA
Title: Science of Social Bonding in Family, Friendship & Romantic Love
Published: 2021-12-20 13:00:25 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss the science of social bonding- the process by which we form attachments. I explain the neural and hormonal basis for "social homeostasis" (our drive for a given amount of socializing) which reveals why we get lonely, why we seek out connection with others and how power dynamics (hierarchies) shape those connections. I also discuss the neurochemical basis of introversion and extroversion, of trust and how shared experiences that promote similar physiological states in two or more individuals, leads to more rapid bonding. I also discuss how food and oxytocin play key roles in social bonding. This episode covers quality peer-reviewed science and practical tools for anyone seeking to find, build or end relationships.

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Relationships

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Social Bonding: Child-Parent, Romantic, Friendship, Breakups
00:02:55 ROKA, Athletic Greens, Headspace
00:07:08 Social Bonding as a Biological Process
00:10:03 Social Isolation
00:13:32 Social Homeostasis & Neural Circuits for Social Drive 
00:18:55 Brain Areas & (Neuro)Chemistry of Social Drive 
00:22:48 What is Social Homeostasis & Dopamine
00:27:00 When We Lack Social Interactions: Short- Versus Long-Term
00:28:10 Introverts & Extroverts
00:31:00 “Good” Versus “Bad” Social Interactions & Hierarchies
00:33:54 Loneliness & Dorsal Raphe Nucleus & Social Hunger 
00:37:33 Tools
00:38:05 Socializing & Food Appetite: Crossover Craving
00:42:45 Falling in Love
00:45:05 Tools for Social Bonds: Merging Physiologies; Story
00:53:54 Childhood Attachment Patterns in Adulthood
01:03:45 Attachment Styles: Autonomic Versus Intellectual Attachment
01:06:10 Emotional Empathy & Cognitive Empathy, Arguing
01:09:45 Allan N. Schore & “Right Brain Psychotherapy”
01:10:40 Oxytocin & Trust, In Males Versus Females, Hormonal Glue
01:16:10 Repairing Broken Bonds to Self & Others
01:18:56 Social (Media) Butterflies: Biological Basis
01:24:08 Key Points for Bonding & Understanding Social Bonds
01:27:07 Breaking Up
01:28:36 Synthesis 
01:31:17 Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne, Instagram, Twitter

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode is about the biology, psychology and practices of social bonding. From the day we are born until the day we die, the quality of our social bonds dictates much of our quality of life. It should therefore be no surprise that our brain, and indeed much of our entire nervous system is wired for social bonds. Now social bonds occur between infant and parent, there even particular wiring diagrams within the brain and spinal cord and body that are oriented towards the specific bonds that occur between infant and mother, as well as infant and father. And we have specific brain circuitries for friendship, specific brain circuitries that are activated in romantic relationships. And as it goes, specific brain circuitries that are activated when we break up with a romantic partner or when they break up with us, or when somebody passes away, moves away, or otherwise leaves our lives in one form or another. Today, we are going to talk about those brain and nervous system circuitries, we're also going to talk about the neurochemicals and hormones that underlie their function. And we are going to touch on a number of important and actionable tools that you can apply in everyday life. And because we are headed into the holiday, the New Year and Christmas holiday, that you can deploy in your various interactions with family members and friends. And should you not be spending time with family members and friends, today, we are also going to talk about how to achieve social bonds out of the context of family and romantic partnership and friendship. So today's episode is going to include a lot of science, a lot of actionable tools, and I'm confident that you will come away from today's episode with tremendous knowledge about how you function. For instance, if you're an introvert or an extrovert, why is that? Turns out there may be a neurochemical basis for that. Maybe you're somebody that really enjoys social media, maybe you're somebody that doesn't. Today I'm going to talk about a gene or a set of genes that predicts whether or not you will follow more people or seek out more online, social interactions or fewer. Believe it or not, there's biology around that now, and it's excellent peer reviewed work. We will also talk about how bonds are broken, and why breakups can be so painful, not just romantic breakups, but breakups with friendships and coworkers, and how to move through those more seamlessly. So regardless of your age, and regardless of whether or not you are in a romantic partnership of one form or another, or not, I do believe this episode will be useful to you as you explore the social bonds that already exist in your life, and as you seek out new and changing social bonds. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system, and the visual system has many important features that allow us, for instance, to see things with crystal clarity, even if it's brightly lit or dimly lit, or there are changing brightness in our environment. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed with the biology of the visual system in mind. So when you wear them, you don't have to take them off and put them back on like you would with other types of sunglasses and eyeglasses, and you're always going to see things with crystal clarity. In addition, they're very lightweight, so usually forget that you're wearing them. I certainly forget when I'm wearing mine. I wear readers at night and when I drive, and I wear sunglasses often throughout the day. The other thing that's really great about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses is that you can wear them doing anything. You can wear them while running, while cycling, if you get sweaty, they won't fall off your face. But unlike a lot of other performance eyeglasses out there, they have a terrific aesthetic that you could also wear to work, to school, out to dinner, they basically can be worn anywhere, anytime. If you'd like to try Roka, eyeglasses and sunglasses, you can go to Roka that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's Roka, R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, and I've taken it ever since. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason that I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day, is because it covers all of my vitamin mineral probiotic foundational needs. There's now a wealth of evidence pointing to the fact that vitamins minerals and probiotics support healthy gut microbiome, healthy immune system, healthy nervous system, healthy endocrine system, that's the hormone system. And with Athletic Greens, it really covers all those bases. In fact, when people ask me what one supplement they should take, I recommend Athletic Greens. If you like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They're giving five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up the Athletic Greens while on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera, plus a year supply of vitamin D3/K2. There is now a lot of evidence supporting that Vitamin D3 is great for our metabolism endocrine system, mood sleep, a huge number of biological functions. And K2 has also been shown to be important for cardiovascular health and various aspects of blood lipids. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can claim a special offer, you'll get your Athletic Greens, five free travel packs of Athletic Greens, plus a year supply of vitamin D3/K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app supported by 25 published studies and has over 600,000 five-star reviews. I've been meditating for a very long time, more than three decades, but I confess I haven't been a consistent meditator until recently. I think many people will have that experience, we've all heard about the terrific science and benefits of a regular meditation practice. Things like reduced anxiety, improved sleep, sharper cognition, and focus. However, sticking to a meditation practice can be tricky, and many people start and then they stop. Or at least that's what happened to me until a few years ago, when I started using the Headspace app to do my meditation. Headspace has short meditations of just a couple minutes long, longer meditations. Ideally for me, I like to do a 20-minute meditation at least three times a week, but sometimes because of my schedule and other things going on, I only sneak in a five-minute meditation once or twice a week. With Headspace, you have a huge number of meditations to select from. So if you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a completely free one-month trial with all of Headspace's meditation. That's the full library of meditations that Headspace has to offer. That's the best deal offer by Headspace right now. So again, if you're interested, go to headspace.com/special offer today. Let's talk about the biology of social bonding. And I want to point out that I used the word bonding intentionally. It's a verb. And in biology, we want to think about verbs because everything in biology is a process, it's not an event. And when we think about things in biology as a process, that means it's going to have multiple steps. And today we are going to explore the steps, start to finish of social bonding. Meaning how social bonds are established, how they are maintained, how they are broken and how they are reestablished. Now an important feature of biology generally, but in particular, as it relates to social bonding, is that the neural circuits meaning the brain areas and neurons and the hormones, things like oxytocin, which we'll talk about today, and the other chemicals in the brain and body that are responsible for the process we call social bonding are not unique to particular social bonds, they are generic. What I mean by that is that the same brain circuits that are responsible for establishing a bond between parent and child are actually repurposed in romantic relationships. And this might not come as a surprise to many of you, many of you are probably familiar with this idea of securely attached people versus anxious attached people versus avoidant attached people. We're going to touch on that a little bit, but all of that has roots in whether or not children and parents formed healthy social bonds, or whether or not they had challenged social bonds. Now it's clear from the scientific and psychological literature that just because you might have had a not so great or even terrible social bond with a parent or with some other caretaker or loved one as a child, that doesn't fate you to have poor social bonds as an adult, there's a lot of plasticity in the system, meaning it can change, it can rewire in response to experience. And as we will soon discover, there specific components within the neural circuits of your brain that are responsible for social bonding that allow you to place subjective labels on why you are doing certain things and to rewire the neural circuits for social bonding. So we're going to touch on all of that today. But the important feature really to point out is that we don't have 12 different circuits in the brain and body for different types of social bonds, we have one, and there's some universal features that underlie all forms of social bonds. So we're going to start by exploring what those neural circuits are, and then we're going to see how they plug into different types of social bonds. And then we're going to explore things like introversion, extroversion, where we're going to touch on a little bit about things like trauma bonds, healthy bonds, and various other aspects of how humans can bond to one another. And as you'll soon discover, there is a unique chemical signature of all bonding of all kinds. And you're going to learn how to modulate that chemical signature. Before we talk about social bonding, I want to talk about it's mirror image, which is lack of social bonding or social isolation. Now for better, for worse, there is a tremendous literature on the biology of social isolation, and all of the terrible things that happen when animals or humans are socially isolated at particular phases of life. Now, for those of you that are introverts, you are not necessarily damaging yourself by deciding to spend less time with other people. Many people like time alone, I personally am an introvert, I get a thrill out of spending time with one or two close friends, but I enjoy a lot of time by myself. I like to socialize, so I wouldn't call myself an extreme introvert, but I know there's some extreme introverts out there. But when we talk about social isolation, what we're referring to is when animals or humans are restricted from having the social contacts that they would prefer to have. And to just briefly touch on the major takeaways from this literature, which spans back a hundred years or more, being socially isolated is stressful. And one of the hallmark features of social isolation is chronically elevated stress hormones, like adrenaline also called epinephrin, like cortisol, a stress hormone that at healthy levels is good for combating inflammation, helps us have energy early in the day, focused throughout the day. But if cortisol is elevated for too long, which is the consequence of social isolation, the immune system suffers and other chemicals start to be released in the brain and body that are designed to motivate the organism, animal or human to seek out social bonds. An example of one such chemical is a peptide called tachykinin. Tachykinin is present in flies, in mice and in humans, and under conditions of social isolation, it's levels go up, and because of the brain areas that contain receptors for tachykinin, people start feeling very aggressive and irritable after social isolation. Now that should be a little bit counterintuitive to you, you would think, oh, you know, if you isolate an animal or a human, and then you give them the opportunity for social interaction, they should behave very well, they should be thrilled, they're finally getting the nourishment, the social nourishment that they've been lacking for so long. It turns out that's not the case. Chronic social isolation changes the nature of the brain and body such that it makes social connection harder, and it makes the person who's been isolated, irritable, even aggressive with other people. Now, I don't want to go too deeply into the biology of social isolation, because it doesn't actually afford us that much insight into what healthy social bonding looks like. So today we're going to focus more on the functional biology, a dual meaning of the word functional, as opposed to the pathology of social isolation. However, I do want to point out that social isolation starts to deteriorate certain aspects of brain and body pretty quickly, but how quickly depends again on how introverted or extroverted somebody is. So if you're somebody who is socially isolated for the holidays, or has been socially isolated for a period of time, and is craving social contact, that is a healthy craving. And as we'll learn next, the healthy craving for social contact has a very specific brain circuit, has a very specific neurochemical signature associated with it, and has some remarkable features that you can leverage in social contacts of all kinds. I think some of the more important and exciting work on social bonding comes from the laboratory of Kay Tye. Kay is a professor at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, she's an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. And in recent years, I would say in about the last five or six years, her laboratory has made a fundamental discovery as to why we seek out and put so much effort into social bonds. And the key discovery that she made is that much like hunger, much like temperature, much like thirst, we have brain circuits that are devoted to what's called a social homeostasis. Many of you have probably heard about homeostasis before, homeostasis is the characteristic of various biological circuits and even individual cells to try and maintain a certain level. It's most easily thought of in the context of hunger, if you don't eat for a while, your drive to pursue food and think about food and make food and spend money on food, and indeed to enjoy food goes up. Whereas when you're well fed, you don't tend to seek out food with as much vigor or as much intensity, you wouldn't invest as much time, effort, money, et cetera. So homeostasis is the aspect of cells, tissues, and organisms to seek some sort of balance to regulate themselves. In a crude way, you can think about the thermostat on your home as a homeostatic circuit. When the temperature goes up a little bit, it cools things down to maintain a certain temperature. When the room gets cold, it hits a certain level and a sensor detects that, it clicks on and then the heat goes on to maintain a certain set temperature. So that's a simple way of thinking about homeostasis. Every homeostatic circuit has three components, or at least three, one is a detector, meaning the organism or the thermostat on your wall has to have some way of detecting what's going on in the environment, all right, in the context of social bonding, whether or not you are interacting with others and whether or not those interactions are going well. So that has to be detected, that's the first thing. Then there has to be a control center, that's the second thing. And the control center is the one that makes the adjustments to, in the case of social bonding, to your behavior and to your psychology. So you'll soon learn that there are ways in which the more time that you spend alone, the more motivated you are to seek out the pictures of faces, the interactions with actual people, physical contact, and so forth. Now that might seem obvious to you, but thanks to the work of Kay Tye and others, it's remarkable to learn that there are specific brain centers that are adjusting our psychology and biology so that we seek out bonds more aggressively, or maybe we don't because we are perfectly sated or satiated with respect to how much contact we've had with other people. Now, the third component of this homeostatic circuit is the effector. The effector is actually what drives the behavioral response, it's what leads you to pick up your social media and start scrolling, it's what leads you to text a friend, it's what leads you to call a friend or make plans and what leads you to follow through on those plans. So again, those three components are a detector, a control center, and an effector. And as you'll soon learn, the neural circuit that controls the social homeostasis actually has a fourth component, and that fourth component is one that places subjective understanding as to why you are doing what you are doing, and establishes your place in a hierarchy. Now, I know the word hierarchy can be a little bit of a barbed wire one because people immediately start thinking about boss and subordinate, or in couples, a leader and a follower. But when we talk about social hierarchies in the context of human interactions, social hierarchies are very plastic, meaning in one setting, one person can be the leader, in another setting, the other person can be the leader. You probably have groups of friends or family members where you're constantly passing the baton as to who's going to drive, who's going to navigate, who's going to pick the restaurant, who's going to clear the dishes and who's going to do certain activities and not others. So hierarchies are very dynamic. And as a consequence, social has to be very plastic and very fluid so that you move from one environment to the next, even with the same people, you have to be able to make those adjustments. And in the case of the social homeostasis circuit, those adjustments are made by a particular brain structure, I've talked about on this podcast before, it's called the prefrontal cortex, it is the seat of our higher consciousness, if you will. It's what allows us to play subjective labels on things so we are not strictly input output, we're not robotic. Meaning if you go to dinner with a friend and they are exceptional at choosing restaurants, well, in the context of the social homeostasis circuit, your prefrontal cortex would allow them to pick the restaurant because basically they are dominant over you in their capacity to pick good restaurants, at least in this example. Whereas as you leave that restaurant and perhaps you are navigating to a where to get a drink after dinner, or where to walk through the city, perhaps you have the better sense of direction. And so then the social bonding has to be maintained as you switch the hierarchy, okay? So that's the role of that fourth element, the prefrontal cortex. Now I just briefly want to touch on some of the brain areas that thanks to the work of Kay Tye and others, we now know underlie the detection, control and response. Okay, I call them the detector, control center and effector because inside of that description, isn't just a bunch of names of neural structures, there are also hints as to what the underlying neurochemicals are, and by understanding what the neurochemicals are, you can start to think about tools that you can use to form social bonds and maintain social bonds in better, healthier ways. So let's talk about the detector first. Now, keep in mind that you have your senses, you have your vision, you have your hearing, you have touch, you have smell, you have taste. Sensation as I've talked about many times before in the podcast, but I'll just remind you, sensation is the conversion of physical stimuli in the environment into electrical and chemical signals in your nervous system. The language of the nervous system is electrical and chemical signals. So photons of light are converted to electrical and chemical signals, pressure on the skin or light touch on the skin is converted into electrical and chemical signals and so on and so forth. So all of that of course is flowing into the nervous system, but the detector that underlies social homeostasis involves mainly two structures, one is called the ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the other is the BLA, basal lateral amygdala. And when you hear the word amygdala, you're probably thinking fear. But today, as you'll see, the amygdala actually has many different sub compartments and components. And there's a reason why the basal lateral amygdala, which is associated with certain aspects of aversive behaviors, meaning moving away from certain types of things or interactions, there's a reason why the BLA is such an integral part of the detector system, and that's because just as it's important to form healthy social bonds, it's vitally important to try and avoid unhealthy social bonds. And so the basolateral amygdala is mainly associated with these aversive type responses of just moving away from certain things. The control center in the social homeostasis circuit involves a brain area called the lateral hypothalamus and the periventricular hypothalamus. The lateral hypothalamus and the periventricular hypothalamus contain neurons that are able to access the hormone system in order to influence the release of things like oxytocin, which is a hormone neuropeptide, it's got a part hormone, part neurotransmitter, it's kind of a hybrid, we're going to talk a lot about oxytocin today. So we've got the ACC and the BLA, these are their areas are mainly involved in moving away from things, although also toward them, that's the detector. Then we got the control center, which is in the hypothalamus, and then there's a very special and important area associated with social bonding that I want everyone to learn, which is the dorsal raphe nucleus or DRN, dorsal raphe nucleus. The dorsal raphe nucleus is a small collection of neurons in the midbrain, so it's deep in the brain. And most of the time when you hear about raphe, R-A-P-H-E, by the way, raphe nucleus, you're talking about serotonin. Serotonin is a neuromodulator that is often associated with feelings of satiety after eating, warmth, basically satisfaction with things that you already have. However, within this dorsal raphe nucleus, there is a small subset of neurons that release dopamine. Dopamine is a neuromodulator most often associated with movement, craving, motivation and desire. And the neural circuits that are rich with dopamine are things like the substantia nigra, the mesolimbic dopamine system, the VTA, the nucleus accumbens, et cetera. Those names don't have to mean anything to you. However, this unique population of dopamine neurons in the raphe is truly unique in that it's responsible for mediating what I've been calling social homeostasis. It is the effector or the response that mediate social homeostasis. Now I haven't told you exactly what social homeostasis is. Social homeostasis, just like hunger, is the process by which when you lack social interaction, you start to crave it. What's very interesting about the fact that there are dopamine neurons in this raphe structure that is the effector for social homeostasis, what this means is that when you are not interacting with people at a frequency or intensity, that is right for you, dopamine is released into the brain. In most popular conversations about dopamine, and even in scientific circles, when you hear dopamine release, you think about reward or feeling good, because indeed many behaviors and drugs of abuse increase dopamine. That's one of the reasons they have so much addictive potential. However, dopamine is not associated with feeling good, it is actually the neurochemical that's responsible for movement toward things that feel good. So to zoom out and conceptualize what we have here, we have a brain area that is a detector that either will move us toward or away from certain types of experiences or sensations. We have a control center that is going to release certain hormones and neuropeptides into our brain and blood, depending on the sorts of interactions that we happen to be having. And we have this response system, which is the dorsal raphe nucleus that contains dopamine neurons. And when we are not interacting with people at the frequency or intensity that we crave, dopamine is released, and that dopamine causes us to seek out social interactions of particular kinds. So let's talk about what social homeostasis is and how it plays out. And again, let's use hunger as an example. So let's say you're a person who eats every three or four hours regularly. So on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, you're just accustomed to eating every three or four hours. If just suddenly I steal your meal out of the fridge at work, something I would not do, but just for sake of mental experimentation, that would probably cause you to go and seek out food through some other route. You might buy food, you probably be upset first, but then you go buy food or replace the food that you were going to eat, you'd be hungry for that food. And indeed there are hormonal type mechanisms and other mechanisms that when we eat regularly and we predict that food is coming in, we actually start secreting insulin, which is for mobilizing blood sugar, there are hormones in the bloodstream that make us hungry on a regular clock-like schedule, and you would seek out more food. Similarly, if you're somebody who is accustomed to a lot of social interaction, and suddenly I take away that social interaction, you would feel kind of let down, you would crave a replacement social interaction. You might be upset that you had a lunch date with a friend, you're used to having lunch with them every Wednesday, and they cancel and you would crave the interaction. Okay, this is called a pro-social craving. And indeed, this is what you see in animals and humans. If you, what's called acutely isolate them, which is just a fancy scientific word of saying deprive them of social interactions in a short-term basis, they start engaging in pro-social behaviors, they start texting other people, they start seeking out social interactions of different kinds. And that makes perfect sense, right? But thought of from the different side, you could also imagine how well, if you're getting a social interaction with somebody on a daily or weekly basis, and suddenly you remove that interaction, well, then people might not care, they might just think, well, I'll get the interaction tomorrow or the next day or the next day, because they're sated, much in the same way that the person who eats very regularly might say, "Well, I ate four hours ago, and I'll eat eight hours later, no big deal." But that's not what happens. There's a prediction that we are going to have certain types of interactions, and when those interactions don't happen, we replace that lack of interaction with a drive and a motivation to seek out social interaction. And that drive and motivation is caused by, or I should say, is driven by dopamine release from that dorsal raphe. And so the takeaway is that when we lack social interaction that we expect, we become pro-social. However, if we are chronically socially isolated, meaning we don't have interactions with people for a long time, we become actually more introverted. This is separate from all of the tachykinin stuff that I talked about earlier, or falling into states of chronic stress, but it's well-established now that in humans and in animals, if you don't give them enough social interaction, they actually become antisocial. And so this is actually a little bit like what one might see with long-term fasting. Okay, I gave the example of eating every four hours, now let's give the parallel example of somebody who's been fasting perhaps for two or three days, if they are expecting to eat, and then the meal doesn't arrive, they are not necessarily going to immediately try and seek out food. And that's a little bit counterintuitive, you would have thought, well, they haven't eaten in a very long time, they're going to be very motivated to seek out food, but no, they are accustomed to fasting. Similarly, the social homeostasis circuit works in a way such that when we don't have social interactions for a very long time, we start to lose our craving for social interactions. Let's look at the social homeostasis circuit through the lens of what's commonly called introversion and extroversion. Now, typically when we hear about introverts, we think about the quiet person at the party, or the person that doesn't want to go out at all. And we think about an extrovert as somebody who's really social, the so-called social butterfly, who enjoys social interactions, is really chatty, is kind of life of the party type person. That's the cliche or the kind of pop psychology cliche, but actually in the psychology literature, that's not really the way it holds up. Many people who appear introverted are actually extroverted. The quiet person at a party could be an extrovert, except that they just don't talk very much. The characteristic of an extrovert is somebody that gets energy or feels good from social interactions, they sort of get a lift, and we can predict that that lift occurs because of some release of dopamine within their brain and body. And indeed there's evidence for that, neuroimaging study support that, other forms of neuro-biological analysis support that as well. We can also imagine that the person who's talking a lot is somebody who's very extroverted, but oftentimes people who talk a lot for their work or they're somebody who's very social when you interact with them, that person gets back to their car and is absolutely depleted and exhausted by that interaction or all sorts of social interactions. So we really can't predict whether or not somebody is an introvert or an extrovert simply based on their behavior, it's really more of an internal subjective label. However, if we look at introversion and extroversion through this lens of the social homeostatic set point, and we think about dopamine as this molecule that drives motivation to seek out social interactions, what we can reasonably assume is that introverts are people that when they engage in certain forms of social interaction, either the amount of dopamine that's released is greater than it is an extrovert, that's right, I said greater than it is at an extrovert, and so they actually feel quite motivated, but also satisfied by very brief, or we could say sort of sparse social interactions. They don't need a lot of social engagement to feel sated. Again, the parallel example would be hunger. This would be somebody who doesn't need to eat much in order to feel satisfied. Whereas the extrovert, we can reasonably assume releases less dopamine in response to an individual social interaction. And so they need much more social interaction in order to feel filled up by that interaction. And indeed this is supported by the neuro-biological imaging studies. So rather than thinking about introverts and extroverts as chatty versus quiet, it's useful to think about people, maybe yourself, maybe other people you know, as how much social interaction they need in order to bring this social homeostasis into balance. Now there's the fourth component of this social homeostasis circuit that I mentioned before, and that's the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is involved in thinking and planning and action, and has extensive connections with areas of the brain like the hypothalamus, which is responsible for a lot of motivated drives. It also has connections with the various reward centers of the brain, and it can act as kind of an accelerator, meaning it can encourage more electrical activity of other brain centers, or as a break on those brain centers. A really good example, it's kind of a trivial one in the context of today's discussion, but it's a concrete one so I'll use it, it would be, I know many people out there use cold showers as a way to stimulate metabolism and build up resilience and this sort of thing. If you get into a very cold shower and you feel as if you want to get out, but you force yourself to stay in, you're forcing yourself to stay in because your prefrontal cortex is placing some subjective label on that experience. Either you're doing it for a certain benefit or you've got a timer, and you're using the timer as the regulator of how long you're going to stay in, basically your overriding reflexes. And that's the main function of the prefrontal cortex. But as I mentioned earlier, the prefrontal cortex components that wire into the social homeostasis circuit are responsible for evaluating where you are in a given hierarchy. And that affords you a ton of flexibility in terms of the types of social interactions that you can engage in, and whether or not you're going to spend time with certain people or not, whether or not you're going to engage and then disengage. What do I mean by this? Well, let's say you're an extroverted person, you're somebody that likes a lot of social interaction and you get a lot of dopamine release on whole from a lot of social interactions. So maybe one interaction with a teller at the supermarket, isn't really going to give you much dopamine, but going to a party will give you more dopamine, and so you seek out these larger social interactions. However, you might go to a party where somebody says something or you see somebody there that you'd much prefer not to see, and therefore you decide to leave. The deciding to leave is regulated by that prefrontal cortex component. So it's important to understand that just because there's a homeostatic circuit that involves areas like the amygdala and the hypothalamus and these deep brain regions, like the dorsal raphe, as a human being, you have flexibility over your social interactions and that flexibility arise from those prefrontal circuits. So there's a ton of subjective nature to it, there's a lot of context to it. So while there are some predictable elements of these circuits, they are not simply what we would call, plug and chug, you have flexibility, you are able to say, "You know, I love parties, but I really don't want to go to that party because so-and-so is there." Or, "I very much don't like going across town in traffic, but I'm going to do it today because a certain collection of people, or perhaps a certain individual will be at that particular party." And so the prefrontal cortex again, is what allows you that subjective ruling or ruling over what would otherwise just be reflexes. So now I'd like to drill a little bit deeper into this incredible neural structure that is the dorsal raphe nucleus and this small collection of neurons, the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe because while it's a small collection, they are very powerful. Loneliness has been defined by the great psychologist, John Cacioppo, as the distress that results from discrepancies between ideal and perceive social relationships. Let me repeat that. Loneliness is not just being isolated, loneliness, as he defines it, is the distress that results from discrepancies between ideal and perceive social relationships. It's when we expect things to be one way, and they're actually another way and which way we expect them to be and which way they turn out, again, is highly subjective. What you expect from friendships, and what other people expect from friendships could be entirely different, but the circuit that underlies friendship bonding is exactly the same. And it is this dorsal raphe nucleus and the dopamine neurons in that nucleus that underlie the bond that is social friendship and all types of social bonds. There's a key finding in the literature, the title of this paper is Dorsal Raphe Dopamine Neurons Represent the Experience of Social Isolation. This is a paper from Kat Tye's lab, the first author is Matthews, Gillian Matthews to be specific. What they did is they were able to selectively activate the dopamine neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus. And when they did that, they induced a loneliness-like state. Now, how did they know it was a loneliness-like state? They knew because it motivated the seeking out of social connections. This is the kind of social hunger that I was referring to before. Whereas when the dopamine neurons of the dorsal raphe are inhibited, meaning their activity is quieted that suppressed a loneliness state. So that's a little counterintuitive, right? It's a group of neurons that when activated makes you feel lonely, and when this brain area is not activated, it suppresses loneliness. But if you think about it, that's exactly the kind of circuit that you would want in order to drive social behavior. When you're feeling lonely, dopamine is released and it causes you to go out and seek social interactions. When this brain area has enough social interactions, that's sort of a figure of speech, brain areas don't have enough social interactions, but when enough social interactions have happened, that the neurons in this brain areas shut down their production of dopamine. Well, the loneliness state turns off. So what we think of as loneliness as this big kind of dark cloud, or, you know, fog in our psychological landscape, boils down to a very small set of neurons, releasing a specific neurochemical for motivation. And to me, this really changes the way that we think about loneliness and that we think about social interactions. There's so much subjective landscape to loneliness and to social interactions, but at the end of the day, what it really is is that we are all social animals to some extent or another, and we all crave social interactions to some extent or another, although the extent will vary depending on where you are in the introversion extroversion continuum. And it is indeed a continuum. Now, the other aspect of the study that was really important gets back to that issue of hierarchy and social rank. What they found is that depending on where you see yourself in the social rank, the dopamine neurons in the raphe will lead to one consequence or another, meaning moving toward social interactions or moving away from them. So the whole system is set up so that you have a ton of flexibility and control over social interactions. So just a couple of key points and actionable takeaways based on the information I've offered up until now, if you think of yourself as an introvert, it's very likely that you get a lot of dopamine from a few or minimal social interactions. Whereas if you're an extrovert, contrary to what you might think, social interactions are not going to flood your system with dopamine, they actually are going to lead to less dopamine release than it would for an introvert, and therefore you're going to need a lot more social interactions in order to feel filled up by those interactions. Now I've been drawing a lot of parallels between this social seeking or avoiding social isolation and hunger, but is that really the case? And could it be that they're actually interactions between the different drives? Meaning could social isolation or the desire to seek out social interactions actually relate to the hunger system and vice versa? And indeed the answer is yes. We don't have 50 different homeostatic systems and 50 different neurochemicals to underlie our drive, to eat our drive for romantic interactions, our drive for friendship interactions, we have essentially one, maybe two, and they all funnel into the same dopamine system. And there's a beautiful paper that illustrates some of the crossover between these different homeostatic drives. The title of the paper is Acute Social Isolation Evokes Midbrain Craving Responses Similar to Hunger. This from Rebecca Saxe's lab at MIT, Massachusetts Institute of technology, Dr. Kay Tye is also an author on this paper, the paper was published in Nature Neuroscience. It's a really terrific paper. Just to briefly summarize what they did, they took people that were categorized as socially connected healthy human adults. So these are people that are used to pretty frequent social interactions, and they socially isolated them for about 10 hours. And they had no opportunity to access social media, email, fiction reading even, and certainly didn't have the opportunity to interact with people face to face. So what this did is it increased social craving, both subjectively the people said that they were now craving social interactions, and then they did brain imaging in response to images of people, people interacting, food, flowers, other types of stimuli, some of the stimuli or these images that we call them stimuli but their images really, had a lot of social engagement going on in them, others did not, some had a lot of faces showing, others did not. And as you might suspect, there was activation of many of the brain areas that we've talked about earlier, dorsal raphe nucleus and other brain areas associated with dopaminergic neurons. When the socially isolated people viewed social cues, people interacting, faces, and so on and less so for things like flowers, however, they also had increased responses to images of food, which is interesting and actually is consistent with the literature that when people are socially isolated, they often will start eating more, or they will change the nature of the foods that they eat. Now we think of that as comfort foods or soothing oneself through eating rather than social interaction as a kind of pathology, but while it might not be healthy, depending on the context and the person, it's really important to understand that the reason that happens is because we have a common circuit and that the system meaning the person is actually craving dopamine release. They don't consciously know this, this is all subconsciously carried out, but they're craving dopamine release. And if they can't get it from social interactions, as they normally would, they'll start seeking it from food. Now they did an important reverse experiment as well, where they had subjects go on 10 hours of food fasting. Now these were not people that were familiar with fasting, they weren't doing intermittent fasting, they were eating more typical meal schedules, and so that created increased hunger, et cetera, but it also increased their appetite if you will, for social interactions. And so the important point here is that there's a common biology, there's a common circuitry that underlies homeostatic craving of things that maintain us as individuals and as a species. And it really places social interactions as right up there in the list of things that we could consider so vital for our survival and for our health. Things like food, water, social interactions really sit within a top tier amongst each other, and they use the same common circuitry, dorsal raphe dopamine neurons, in addition to other structures, in order to create this drive, to seek out certain types of stimuli. Now, this is a very reductionist view of social bonding, I realized that, but it's important to realize that while we place all the subjective context, oh, I miss this person, or I really would like to avoid that person, at the end of the day, it really all funnels into a system whereby a single neurochemical is either being released and motivating us to seek out more of a particular type of interaction or is not released, and therefore we are perfectly comfortable staying exactly where we are. As I say this, some of you are probably thinking, "Oh, that's probably what happens when you fall in love." And indeed that's the case. When people enter romantic relationships, that to them are very satisfying, there's this period that, you know, that the theory is that it lasts anywhere from six days to six months, although some people report that this feeling can last many, many years, even decades of just feeling completely filled up and sated by the experience of being with that person. So much so that cravings for food are reduced, cravings for sleep are reduced. Now there's all sorts of activities and things that go along with new romantic partnerships that take up time, that might get in the way of things like sleep or things like food. But the point is that dopamine is the final common pathway by which we seek out things and we end up feeling as if we are satisfied by certain types of interactions. Now, similarly, if you've ever been isolated for a long period of time, your focus might have shifted to what you're going to eat, what you're going to cook for dinner in a much more heightened way, the importance of those sensory stimuli and those types of interactions, and indeed the taste of food itself expands. So normally when we are in social relationships that are ones that are familiar to us, we have a balance of these different drives. But when one particular drive takes over and we are very focused on it, because they all funnel into the same circuitry, there really isn't the seeking out of certain types of behaviors like food seeking when we're newly in love. Now that doesn't mean that food won't taste good to us so that we don't seek it. And indeed, there are experiments that have been done where if people have just fallen in love, the taste of a strawberry can just be incredible. The other effect of dopamine is that it changes the way that we interpret sensory stimuli, our detectors actually change when we are in heightened states of dopaminergic activity or drive. Basically what this means is that things seem better than they would when we have less dopamine in our system. The point here is that there's a lot of crossover, there's a lot of meshing together of different homeostatic drives that they don't exist in separate channels. And it's only under conditions in which one particular homeostatic drive is kind of being played out to the extreme, such as the example of falling in love, that we tend to avoid or sort of overlook the other homeostatic drives, and that's because simply we're getting enough dopamine, we don't need anymore. Up until now, I've been focused on the organizational logic of social bonding, which is really just nerd speak for how is it that we form bonds, avoid bonds? Why do people seek out more or fewer bonds than others, et cetera? Now I'd like to shift gears a bit, and focus on what are some things that we can do to encourage the formation of healthy bonds? There's a beautiful study that was published in Cell Reports, Cell Press Journal, excellent journal. The title of this paper is Conscious Processing of Narrative Stimuli Synchronizes Heart Rate Between Individuals. I mentioned this on a previous podcast, but I'd like to mention it again and go into a little bit more depth because it points to specific actionable items that we can all use in order to enhance the quality and depth of social bonds of all kinds. Now this study involved a very simple type of experiment, they had people listen to a story, everybody in the study listened to the same story, but they listened to that story at different times and indeed in different locations. So different people, same story. And they measured things like heart rate, they measured breathing, et cetera. Now, what was the motivation for doing this? Well, there's a long standing literature showing that our physiology, things like our heart rate, our breathing, our skin conductance, meaning the amount of sweating, can be synchronized between individuals, and that synchronization can occur according to a variety of different things. There've been studies that have people look at one another and they look and actually see that their pupil size of their eyes starts to synchronize. People's breathing can synchronize, people's body temperatures can even start to synchronize, or at least shifts in body temperature can synchronize. One person gets cooler, the other person gets cooler. A lot of this is subconscious, some of it can be detected by conscious cues like flushing of the skin, or actually seeing someone's pupils change. But actually the pupil reflex is a really good example, whereby except for rare cases and certain highly trained individuals, most people can't control their pupil reflexes in a very deliberate way, it's truly a reflex, it's an autonomic reflex. So there's a lot of literature showing that within small groups or two people, these physiological signals can be synchronized. What this study found was that when people listen to the same story, but at different times, their heart rates start to synchronize. This is incredible because people are listening to the story at different times, but the gaps between their heartbeats become very stereotype and map almost precisely onto one another. That's incredible. Now we also know from an extensive literature that the quality and perceived depth of a social bond correlates very strongly with how much physiological synchronization there is between individuals. In other words, when your bodies feel the same, you tend to feel more bonded to somebody else. And so this whole thing is a rather circular argument, when you feel closer to somebody else, your physiology synchronize, and the reverse is true as well, when your physiologies are synchronized, you feel closer to other people. This is what I call the concert phenomenon, if you ever go to see your favorite band, or you go to a concert that you particularly love, you often look over at somebody and you'll see them enjoying the same thing, and they're often in a similar state as you are, maybe their sort of like favorite song comes on, and you actually feel connected to that person. You feel like you're in... Obviously there's a shared experience, but there's also a shared physiological response to that experience. And so this can happen and mass with large groups of people, or it can happen just between two individuals. And as the study points out, it can actually happen between individuals, without them actually interacting with one another. When the story they are listening to is the anchor or the driver of their physiology. This really points to the fact that the body and the brain are reciprocally connected. Yes, indeed, what we think, what we hear, what we feel drives our physiology, our heartbeat, our respiration, et cetera, but our heartbeat and respiration also are influencing our state of mind. And in this case, it's encouraging certain types of social bonds when our heart rates are synchronized. And you can leverage this, how can you leverage this? Well, let's take a upcoming example of the holidays. There's a sort of a joke, I think it was Ram Dass, sort of Buddhist philosopher type that said, "If you think you're enlightened, go visit your parents." And I think what he was referring to is that some people, not all people, have challenging relationships with their parents. We're going to talk about child-parent attachment and interactions in a few minutes, but you know, some people have a wonderful relationship to both their parents and more power to them, I think that's wonderful, we should all be so lucky. Many people have challenged relationships with their parents, or they have a great relationship with their parents, but their parents know, or they know how to drive that dart right into that particular soft piece of psychological flesh by saying just the slightest thing, or even by raising their eyebrow or rolling their eyes or the tone in which they do something. This is also true between siblings. I think many of you can think of examples where this is true. Many people when they interact with others, expect that the mere interaction with the other person is going to create the sense of bonding. And often that is the case, for instance, if are involved in intimate disclosure, if people enjoy each other's company so much that just the mere sight of somebody evokes great feelings and it's mutual, that often can happen. But in many types of social interactions, it's not the direct interaction with that person that makes us feel close to them, but rather it's shared experience. And shared experience is shared physiology. That's the point I'm trying to make by way of this study about conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronize this heart rate of different individuals. So for instance, if you have a somewhat challenged or somewhat, let's call it a slight friction in getting close with somebody, or it can be a challenging interaction, oftentimes, it's very useful to focus outward on some other common narrative, a movie, oftentimes people will watch a game together. Actually there's a lot of critique that people or families will focus outward too much on external events, but these external events can be observing the grandchild and how wonderful they are, or observing the meal and how wonderful it is. Or as we commonly see in various traditions, there's a story that's repeated each year, certainly in the upcoming holidays, there's Christmas stories, there are themes and traditions, and those themes and traditions anchor a number of different aspects of our psychology. They're really wonderful, they thread through the ages really, and allow us to link our own experiences up with previous generations and experiences. But in addition to that, they synchronize our physiologies. And so sometimes it can be useful rather than expecting others to shift our physiology in the way that we wish, or us shifting their physiologies in the way that we wish, and then expecting some bond to mushroom out of that in some beautiful way, to focus on some external stimulus, to focus on something that will synchronize the physiologies of both people, that can act as a bridge in order to establish social bonds. And this is not a hack or a workaround for making terrible relationships good, this is actually at the seat of what we come away from a social interaction with as feeling "Wow, that was a really wonderful time." Often a really wonderful time can be by virtue of the specific things that were said, or the specific things that one engaged in, but more often than not the final common pathway, we should say, of great experiences was a great physiological experience and a shared physiological experience. I have a short anecdote that relates to this, I have an older sibling and she used to say that when she was in college, the best dates that she ever went on were dates where she was asked to go out and listen to music. She pointed out, however, that oftentimes the guys that would ask her out would take her to jazz clubs, she always had the theory that they would ask her to jazz clubs because at jazz clubs typically you would sit down and then she had to conclude that they couldn't dance. My sister likes to dance. And so anytime someone actually had the nerve to take her dancing, those turned out to be particularly, let's just say, satisfying dates and relationships, at least they lasted longer, that's all I know about them, that's all I want to know about them, she's my sister after all. But the theory behind whoever was asking her out on these dates was it was the right one, which is that if you want to bond with somebody, you create a common physiological response through a common and shared experience. And that is often a good entryway into establishing whether or not it's always a question, whether or not there can be common physiological experience between two individuals. Up until now, we've been talking about social bonding through the lens of neurocircuits that are already established. However, early in the episode, I mentioned that these very neural circuits that are responsible for social bonding in adult forms of attachment, be it romantic or friendship or otherwise are actually established during development. One of the more important, and I think exciting areas of early attachment as it relates to adult attachment, comes to us from the work of Allan Schore. Alan shore, spelled A-L-L-A-N, Schore, S-C-H-O-R-E is a psychoanalyst who also has deep understanding of neurobiology of attachment, both in childhood and in adulthood. And he's focused a lot on differences between right brain and left brain forms of attachment. Now in an early episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I touched into the fact that most of what's discussed in the general public in sort of pop psychology and even in some neurobiology courses about right brain versus left brain, and one side of the brain being more emotional, and the other side being more rational is completely wrong. Okay, most of what I see out there is actually backwards to the way things actually work. And while there is some, what we call lateralization of function, meaning certain brain functions are handled by neurons on one side of the brain or the other, the idea that one side of your brain is emotional, and the other side of your brain is rational is just simply not true. However, the work of Allan Schore points to some very concrete neural circuits that do have a lateralization bias, meaning they are more right brain than left brain, or more left brain than right brain, that underlies certain forms of attachment between child and parents, in particular child and mother, and that these right brain-isms, if you will, and left brain-isms for attachment, get played out again and again in our forms of attachment as adults. So I'd like to talk about that work briefly now, because I think it really points to a number of important features of how we establish bonds and the different routes to establishing bonds. So within the field of psychoanalysis, there's been a longstanding discussion, of course, about the so-called unconscious or subconscious, the things that we are not aware of. And I think there's growing evidence pointing to the fact that at least one major component of the subconscious or the unconscious is the so-called autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is the portion of our nervous system that controls our reflexive breathing, our heart rate, our skin conductance, meaning our sweating, pupil size, it's the aspect of our nervous system that makes us more alert or more calm. It's the so-called sympathetic, meaning for alertness, or parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system, parasympathetic for more calming responses. Now what Dr. Schore's work and the work of others is now showing, is that early infant-parent, in particular infant-mother attachment involves a coordination or synchronization of these right brain circuits and these left brain circuits, as they relate, excuse me, to the autonomic nervous system. How does this play out? Well, it plays out where early on as an infant, when you're born, you're truly helpless, you can't feed yourself, you can't warm yourself, you can't change yourself, and you certainly can't emulate walk anywhere to get the things that you need. All of those functions, all of those needs rather are met by your primary caretaker. Typically that's the mother. Fathers of course play a role also, but because of breastfeeding or even bottle feeding, typically mothers play a more prominent role. I realized there are exceptions, but that's the general rule. There are now brain imaging studies examining the brains of infants and the brains of mothers as they interact and showing that the physical contact between the two, the breathing of the mother and child, the heart rate of the mother and child, and indeed the pupil size of the mother and child are actually actively getting coordinated. In other words, the mother is regulating the infant's autonomic nervous system primarily, and the infant is also regulating the mother's autonomic nervous system, a small coup from a baby or a cry, which is a stress cry from a baby will definitely regulate the autonomic nervous system of the mother. This whole right brain system is directly tapped into the so-called oxytocin system, and we'll talk more about oxytocin in a moment. Oxytocin again, being this peptide hormone that is involved in social bonds of all kinds, but that at least in early childhood is very closely associated with milk let down and milk production. There's actually a lot of stimulation of oxytocin release in the mother by nursing itself, so physical contact with the nipple, and by the contact of skin between baby and mother and their specificity there, it's not just any baby that can evoke the most amount of oxytocin release from the mother. Now, however, there are examples where just holding a child will evoke oxytocin release in the non-parent or somebody other than the parent, I think most people experience that. That's the new puppy or new baby phenomenon 'cause indeed puppies can invoke oxytocin release as well. The point is not that oxytocin is only released in response to the primary relationship, or the mother and their child, but rather that the amount of oxytocin scales with how closely related one is to that particular child and vice versa. So there's oxytocin release occurring in both the child and the mother. So this right brain system is an emotional but autonomic system, it is below our conscious detection. Now, as we get older, there's another system that starts to come into play in parent-child interactions, and this also comes into play in sibling interactions and so forth, and that's the left brain system as described by Allan Schore. Now, again, this isn't about emotion versus rationality, this is about autonomic versus more conscious forms of bonding. So on the left brain circuit side, there is evidence for based on neuroimaging studies, but also animal studies to support the idea that on the left brain side of things, there is a processing more of narratives that are very concrete, logical narratives, okay. And again, I have to zoom out and just really tamped down the idea that it's not that one side of the brain is emotional and the other side is rational, but rather that these two things are happening in parallel. And that there's a bit of a dominance for the left brain circuitry to be involved in the kinds of bonding that are associated with prediction and reward. So good example would be reading to a child every night, sitting there and reading, you know, I can recall reading to my niece and seeing her parents read to her. And she had no clue whatsoever with what they were saying because she, well, at least, I don't know, but she certainly couldn't speak, but she liked looking at the pictures, and it was a very predictable sort of interaction. It was okay, out come the books, it was usually here's the bath, then there's the pajamas, then there's the lights go down, then out comes the book, and then there's the interaction between parent and child, which of course usually also involves physical contact. So it's not like the right brain system and the left brain system are operating separately, they're operating in parallel. But that sort of prediction and reward kids like to be read to, is generally mediated by this left brain system. And this carries on as children get older and as parents take on and evolve their parenting roles. It's very apparent that healthy social bonding between children and caretaker relies on the fact that both this right brain system and the left brain system are engaged, that there's a synchronization of autonomic function, meaning a joining together in actual somatic feeling, and that there's a synchronization of experience that's more about some outward or external stimulus, like reading a book or watching a show together or enjoying some common experience of a meal together. And of course, as children get older, they're able to access more and more cognitively sophisticated things. You can watch a movie with them and they'll make predictions about which characters are going to show up for instance, or you can take to a concert and they can appreciate the concert or play in that concert, and they appreciate that they're being appreciated. Okay, so there are a million different, there's infinite number of examples here, but the idea is that there are two parallel circuits that are important for establishing bonds, and that this is set up very early on in childhood. And that it's neither emotional nor rational, but both. Now both of these circuits tap into the circuitry that we talked about earlier, where dopamine is released and molecules like serotonin, which again is a neuromodulator more associated with feelings of warmth, comfort, and satisfaction with our immediate surroundings and possessions rather than seeking of things and motivation and drive to go look for things, as is the case with dopamine. So there's still interactions with those systems, but the work of Allan Schore has stimulated a lot of interest in what are the circuits that underlie this autonomic bonding, this matching of heart rate and breathing, and what are the neural circuits that underlie this bonding or this synchronization of experience on the kind of left brain side. And the reason I find this model so attractive is that it's very clear that healthy child-parent bonds are established, but not by one or the other of these right brainer left brain systems, but by both. And there isn't enough time to go into it right now, but some of you are probably familiar with this idea of anxious attached versus avoidant attached versus there's a kind of dissociative attached model of infant parent bonding, just briefly. What's becoming clear from the neuro-biological imaging studies is that as people start to advance into adolescence and adulthood and well into their elderly years, the same circuits that were active and established in childhood are repurposed for other forms of attachment. And that to have truly complete bonds with other individuals, but in particular with romantic partners, it's important that there be both synchronization of physiology and synchronization of these more, I guess we could call them more rational or predictive type circuits. So we can leverage this information, we can start to think about what sorts of bonds to us feel very enriching and very complete. We know that we can have, for instance, an emotional connection with somebody, but we can also have a cognitive connection with somebody. I have many colleagues with whom I have deep intellectual connection and convergence with. I won't say that I have deep emotional connection with most of them, a few of them, yes, but most of them no. Others in my life, for instance, I have a deep emotional connection to, but not a lot of deep cognitive connection to. A good example would be the connection that I had with my bulldog, who unfortunately passed away. But Costello, we had a very close, emotional connection, right? It was based on touch, it was based on our walks, it was based on fun, it was very autonomic. We rarely discussed if ever what we were doing, we had a felt relationship as opposed to a cognitive relationship. And while I'm sort of half kidding about that, as an example, it's a really good example, it was a very real bond. And in fact, just as a brief anecdote, I can remember when Costello was a puppy and I was entirely responsible for his well-being, like any parent of any infant, I lost my appetite for those few weeks when I was house training him and I seem to lose all ability to process any cognitive information. Now I was also sleep deprived, but I was entirely focused on the autonomic bond that we were forming. And now, thankfully, that eventually was established pretty quickly. Basically I went on to just basically feed him, walk him and do everything for him, and we had a wonderful relationship. Now it's very clear that what we're talking about here is a form of empathy. Empathy is the ability to feel, or at least think we feel what others feel. Because again, as my colleague and the great bioengineer and psychiatrist at Stanford, Karl Deisseroth has said, and he was a guest on this podcast. We really don't know how other people feel, we just get the sense that perhaps we are feeling the same thing or we're feeling something different and we infer, or we project what they might be thinking. Empathy is this sense that we are sensing what other people are sensing, okay. And there's no real way to verify that except if you're measuring physiologies, you could get some insight into that. In the clinical psychology and in the neuro-biological literature now, it's understood that there is both emotional empathy, like actually feeling what somebody is feeling and what is now called cognitive empathy. Cognitive empathy is this idea that we both see and experience something the same way at a mental level, emotional empathy is this idea that yes, I can feel what you feel at a visceral sematic or autonomic level. And it's absolutely clear that strong social bonds between children and caretaker involve both emotional empathy, this autonomic function and cognitive empathy, that there's a mutual understanding of how the other person feels and how the other person thinks in order to be able to make predictions about what they're going to do. It's also very clear based on the emerging literature, that romantic relationships, and to some extent, friendships, although friendships have been explored a bit less in the literature, that emotional empathy and cognitive empathy are both required in order to establish what we call a trusting social bond. And there's some beautiful experiments done using neuroimaging of two individuals playing a trust game, essentially a game where you're trying to predict the other person's behavior, whether or not they will behave in a trustworthy way. And these experiments tend to use real money, so there's actually something at stake, and you can more or less predict whether or not somebody feels a lot of trust for somebody else and whether or not they believe they will act in a trustworthy manner based on whether or not they have high levels of both cognitive empathy and emotional empathy. So for those of you that are seeking to establish deeper bonds or bonds of any kind, it's important that you think about synchronization of bodily states, we talked about that earlier, and synchronization of cognitive states. Now that doesn't mean you have to agree on everything. In fact, oftentimes people who feel very close to one another cognitively and emotionally argue about all sorts of things and disagree about a lot of things. In fact, we probably know, I certainly know people and couples that seem to bond through arguing, which is an interesting phenotype in itself. But the point isn't that there'd be total convergence of opinion or stance, but rather that we understand how the other feels and we believe that they understand how we feel, that we understand how the other person thinks and that they think that we understand how they think. So it's a reciprocal loop between two people that involves this cognition and involves emotion, and it's grounded as Dr. Schore has pointed out in our earliest forms of attachment. And that makes perfect sense because the same sorts of circuits that are responsible for social homeostasis, the kind of right brain and left brain circuits that are responsible for infant-mother attachment, and then later for more intellectual or predictive type attachments between child and caregiver, are the exact same circuits that we superimpose into all other types of relationships throughout the rest of our life. And I should just mention that for those of you that might be thinking that you had a less than satisfactory infant-caretaker interaction or form of attachment, you are not alone. And in fact, much of the work that Dr Schore focuses on is about how those early circumstances can be understood and rewired toward the development of healthy adult attachment. And if you want to check out his work, he's actually got a few YouTube videos out there, again, it's Allan Schore, spelled S-C-H-O-R-E, I'd love to get him as a guest on the podcast. He also has a book it's called "Right Brain Psychotherapy." And it's an excellent book, it's actually pretty accessible even if you don't have a background in biology or psychology, I found it to be very interesting, there are a lot of excellent references. And again, if you're listening Dr. Schore or, you know, Allan Schore, we'd love to get you on the podcast. One of the key themes to understand about biological processes is that they often work on short timescales and longer timescales. And up until now, we've mainly been talking about the stuff that happens on short timescales. So the kind of synchronization of heart rate or activation of a given set of neurons that dumps some dopamine and causes us to seek out more social interaction or less for instance. But every biological circuit and function needs to have longstanding effects as well. And typically when you're thinking about longstanding effects in the brain and body, you start looking towards the hormone system. It's not always the case, but more often than not neuro-transmitters and neuromodulators are pretty quick, whereas hormones have longer lasting effects. In fact, a lot of hormones can actually travel to the nucleus of a cell and actually change which genes are expressed. So if ever there was a hormone or hormone-like molecule that's associated with social bonding, it's oxytocin, and oxytocin has gotten a ton of interest in the popular press. I don't know why that is, but perhaps it's because of all the incredible things that oxytocin is associated with. And it is indeed a lot of things. So for instance, oxytocin is released in the brain and binds to receptors in different locations in the body, and the moment you hear different locations in the body receptors, you should think, well, it's going to have lots of different effects. And indeed it does. Oxytocin is involved in orgasm, it's involved in social recognition. That's right, when you see people that you consider your people, your team, your group, your friends, oxytocin is released. Even if you don't come into physical contact with them. Oxytocin is also associated with pair bonding, the feeling that they are your person, and that you are their person, is the common language people use. It's also associated with honesty. Believe it or not, there are experiments that show that if people receive oxytocin through an inhalation spray, that they will be more honest and forthcoming about certain things. And the oxytocin system and variants in the oxytocin system have also been associated with autism and various autism spectrum disorders. So there's a huge range of behaviors that's involved in because you have receptors for oxytocin in lots of different brain structures and areas of the body that do different things. However, there's some very consistent effects of oxytocin that are worth just listing off, and then I'm going to talk about two separate pathways by which oxytocin can manifest its effects, and how you can actually regulate oxytocin in ways that are interesting and perhaps useful as well. First of all, oxytocin is involved in the milk, let down reflex, lactation. This makes perfect sense, there needs to be a cue by which the suckling on the nipple of the infant causes the release or let down of milk, and milk let down and lactation is controlled by prolactin, another hormone, but also oxytocin. Oxytocin is also involved in uterine contraction during childbirth, it's involved in cervical dilation to allow the baby to pass out of the birth canal. So it's involved in induction of breastfeeding and of labor, which is remarkable and especially remarkable given that in males or at least in some male animals and in some male humans, and I do want to say some, and I'll get back to this, it can be involved in the erection response, it can be involved in the orgasm response in both males and females. Although there there's a very interesting difference. There's a little bit of controversy about this, but it does appear that in females, sexual and orgasm cause the release of oxytocin, whereas in males, sexual stimulation does not cause the release of oxytocin, but rather a different molecule vasopressin is triggered by sexual stimulation, but orgasm does trigger the release of oxytocin in males, but with a delay of about 30 minutes. Why that is in the specific function of that is not clear, but it does seem the oxytocin is involved in the sexual response in both males and females. The main types of interactions that release oxytocin at high levels are first of all, that the interaction between individuals that see each other as very closely associated, right? So a infant and mother are very closely associated whether or not it's an adopted infant or not. Oftentimes they are in close contact, oftentimes they are from the very body of the other. And so the amount or the amplitude of oxytocin released tends to scale with how closely associated individuals are just the sight of one's baby or smell of one's baby can evoke oxytocin release and vice versa from the mother. Physical contact, even more so in romantic partners. Physical contact, even the sight of a picture of a partner can evoke oxytocin release and sexual desire also trust. So there's this whole collection of psychological and physiological things that are packaged into the oxytocin system. It's not just a one way system. Now, a lot of people out there have written to me asking about inhaling oxytocin, asking whether or not that can actually increase the depth or rate of pair bonding. And there does seem to be some evidence for that. Now, I think in most places, oxytocin is prescription, although it might be over-the-counter and others, I don't know, you have to check where you are as far as I know you can't just go out and buy oxytocin nasal spray, although you may be able to, forgive me, I'm naive to that point. But it's interesting to note that some drugs that are being used in clinical trials for things like trauma, and are also used in clinical therapeutic settings for increasing bonding, in particular MDMA, also called ecstasy, increase dopamine and serotonin, we know this, dopamine and serotonin have a vast number of effects throughout the brain and body that I've talked about some of them today and another podcast. But one of the lesser appreciated effects of MDMA is that it causes huge increases, massive increases in the amount of oxytocin that's released into the brain and body. And MDMA-assisted psychotherapy while still illegal, as far as I know, certainly in the United States, but in most places throughout the world, is being explored in clinical trials, not just for trauma, not just for depression, not just for eating disorders, but also for reestablishing what seemed to be fractured or challenged bonds between romantic partners. And while most of the attention has been focused on the dopaminergic and serotonergic aspects of the MDMA response, it's clear to me, based on my read of the literature, that the enormously elevated oxytocin that occurs during the consumption of MDMA is part of the reason why people experience during the MDMA session and post MDMA session, a much greater degree and depth of kinship or feeling of connection with that person. And it's important to point out that that feeling of connection is of the autonomic type that I was referring to earlier, al Allan Schore's work. That it's not of the, oh, we think about things the exact same way, we agree on everything now, it's more of that their physiologies are synchronized. So much so that even in individuals within a couple where one does a therapeutic session and the other does not, they still both feel quite more bonded to the other. Now, oftentimes in the clinical therapeutic setting, both members of a couple or romantic partnership, whatever form it may take or consuming MDMA and then thereby experiencing elevated oxytocin and this enhanced sense of bonding, and again, it's this autonomic bonding, but it's so powerful. Meaning the oxytocin response is so powerful that it doesn't even require that both individuals experienced this user inflection and oxytocin, and that's because one person's physiology is influencing the other, and oxytocin is this kind of bridging signal that occurs in both nervous systems, synchronizes things like heartbeat, obviously it's associated with touch. And so if people are touching or people are engaging in the sorts of behaviors that I mentioned earlier, that can increase oxytocin further, that's going to further increase the depth of the bond. But the point here is that there's actually a hormonal glue between individuals, okay, infant and mother, friends, teammates, romantic partners, and so on. And that hormonal glue is oxytocin. Now people vary in the extent to which they feel or have the capacity to feel bonded to anyone. And it is now generally understood that some of that variation might depend on variations in oxytocin receptors or what are called gene polymorphisms for oxytocin. Genes can have a number of different sequences in them, they're nucleotide sequences, we won't go into genetics right now, As and Gs and Cs and Ts in various combinations are what make up the genes. Genes are transcribed into RNA, RNA is translated into proteins that affect cells, okay? The oxytocin gene encodes for oxytocin and variants in that gene change the amount and function of oxytocin. There's a really interesting study published just this last year in a relatively new journal, the journal has a kind of a unusual name it's Heliyon, I think it's Heliyon and not hellion, but Heliyon, H-E-L-I-Y-O-N. This is a Cell Press journal, as far as I can tell, it's a very solid journal, certainly the Cell Press label is very stringent. And this paper is entitled, The Relation Between Oxytocin Receptor Gene Polymorphisms, which just means changes in genes or variations in genes, Adult Attachment and Instagram Sociability, and Exploratory Analysis. This is a really wild study, but I liked the study, It's very thorough. First author, last name, Carollo, C-A-R-O-L-L-O. And what they found was that by analyzing the genetics of different individuals who are on social media, and looking at how many people those individuals follow and how many people follow them, and what they come up with is a so-called social desirability index, they were able to correlate in a very straightforward way that people that carry certain variants in the oxytocin and oxytocin receptor genes actually seek out more online, social Instagram interactions. So some people I know, I won't name their names, only follow, you know, anywhere from zero to six accounts, other people follow thousands of accounts and they take the ratio of how many accounts people follow versus how many followers they have, arguably not a perfect measure, but a nice one in the sense that you can do this in a completely unbiased way with many, many thousands of subjects. And then they were able to get genomic analysis from a number of these subjects. And it turns out that people who have, let's say higher levels of oxytocin function or potential levels of oxytocin function, actively seek out more social interactions on social media. So this, I think represents an important first in the area of how social media and data from social media are starting to merge with biological data in terms of predicting how avidly people will seek out social interactions of an online type. And nowadays, we hear a lot about how online, we are connected but we're not really... What is it? We're communicating but we're not connected or the connections aren't real. I think we're going to need to revisit that. While I'm certainly a believer in the idea that face-to-face communication and common interactions with people standing in the same space or playing sports together, enjoying music together, enjoying meals together is vitally important, there's an entire generation, or several generations of people that are coming up who much of their social interaction has been online. And if you think about it, all of the things that we've spelled out earlier about common mental narrative, this left-brain system al Allan Schore, or autonomic bonding or synchronization of heartbeats according to common stories, all that is happening in online social interactions. When a thousand of us look at the exact same Instagram post, yes, we will have a thousand independent responses to that, but chances are many of us have a similar or same response based on the data that we talked about earlier in synchronization of heartbeats. And so we are socially bonded with other people through social media, and it's very apparent that the oxytocin system is playing some role in that. And this, if we zoom out makes perfect sense, because again, dopamine, serotonin, prolactin, oxytocin, none of these systems were placed in us or are organized within us in order to encourage specific and only specific types of social interactions. The one that we can say is absolutely critical is the child-parent interaction, right? Because children simply can't take care of themselves, they need a caretaker. I should have said caretaker, not parent. But infants, if they're not taken care of will die. But beyond that, we have evolved or come to realize many different types of social interactions, and online interactions nowadays are very, very common. I'm certainly involved in them, I'm guessing you're involved in them as well, we're involved in one right now, for example. The oxytocin system is absolutely threaded through and largely responsible for those types of social bonds as well. And incidentally, "Oxytocin" is the name of the fifth song on Billie Eilish's second album, "Happier Than Ever." So we've covered a lot about the biology and indeed the neural circuitry and neurochemistry and neuroendocrinology of social bonding. I want to make sure that I highlight the key features that go into any and all of your social bonds. First of all, all social bonds have the potential to include both what we call emotional empathy and cognitive empathy. And so if you are interested in establishing and deepening social bonds of any kind, it's important that you put some effort towards this thing that we call emotional empathy, which is really about sharing autonomic experience. Now, depending on the relationship that will take on different contexts, what's appropriate in one type of bond is not going to be appropriate in another type of bond. Physical contact for instance, is appropriate for certain types of bonds and not for others. Nonetheless, emotional empathy and the synchronization of autonomic function, heart rate breathing, et cetera, can be best accomplished by paying attention to external events in particular narrative story music and perhaps sports or other types of experience as an external stimulus to drive synchrony of those internal states. The other aspect of forming deep bonds is cognitive empathy. Again, cognitive empathy is not about agreeing on things or viewing things the exact same way, it's about really gaining understanding of how somebody else thinks about something, really paying attention to that, and then paying attention to how you think about and feel about something. So that's what cognitive empathy is. So emotional and cognitive empathy together are what make up these really robust bonds of various kinds. Now we also talked about introversion and extroversion, and I'd like to try and dismantle the common misperceptions about introversion extroversion because when we look at the neural circuitry, as you recall, introverts are not people that don't like social interaction, it's just that they feel filled up or sated by less social interaction than would be an extrovert. And that's because at least according to the social homeostasis circuit model, they actually get more dopamine from less social interaction. Okay, it's like somebody who is sated by less amount of food. Okay, it doesn't mean they don't have the same appetite, it just means that they get more from less. Whereas extroverts get less dopamine release from an equivalent amount of social interaction. And of course these aren't precise measurements, but on the whole extroverts need more social interaction, more frequent, more long-lasting, et cetera, in order to achieve that dopamine threshold, because again, dopamine is driving that craving of social interaction. And once it's met, then people don't feel like they have to seek social interaction as much. So for those of you that feel as if you're an introvert or extrovert or that know introverts and extroverts, it's not about how verbal people are, it's not about how much they seek out social interactions per se, it's about how much social interaction is enough for the given person. Now, the whole reason for providing this framework, this biological circuitry, et cetera, is not to simply put a reductionist view on things that you already realized and knew, but rather to give you some leverage points to understand how is it that you form social bonds? How is it that you might be challenged in forming certain types of social bonds? And to think about entry points, to both establishing and reinforcing social bonds of different kinds. Hopefully it will also give you insight into why breakups, whether it be between friendships or romantic partners can be so painful. A breakup of any kind involves both a breaking of that emotional empathy and that cognitive empathy. And indeed it has a neuro-biological and hormonal underpinning, right? We go into some sense, a social isolation, even if we're surrounded by other types of people, if one of our major sources of oxytocin or one of our major sources of dopamine suddenly is not around, that is incredibly devastating to a nervous system. And to borrow from the great psychologist and neurobiologist Lisa Feldman Barrett, who says, you know, we are not just individuals, we are nervous systems influencing other nervous systems and their nervous systems are influencing us. I think that's the right way to think about it. So it should come as no surprise that breakups of various kinds are very challenging regardless of what underlied that breakup, whether or not somebody's moving or an actual decision of one person to leave the relationship or both, et cetera. On the more positive side, largely biological, but to some extent, psychological view of social bonding will also allow you to orient in this vast landscape that we call social bonds. To understand why it is perhaps that you seek out so many online interactions. Maybe you have the oxytocin polymorphism that causes you to want more, follow more accounts, or interact more with people and comment more, respond to comments, who knows? I'm also hoping that it will allow you to get a lens into how you can strengthen the social bonds that you want to strengthen, and to establish new social bonds that you want to establish. None of this has meant to manipulate or leverage social bonds that wouldn't otherwise form, to the contrary, it's about identifying what are the specific routes by which social bonds are created and allowing you, I hope, to work with people that you feel challenged in forming social bonds with, or maybe deciding to completely divorce from those social bonds entirely because there's absolutely no hope of ever forming emotional or cognitive empathy. I certainly acknowledge that that could be the case too. So there's both a light and a dark and a gray zone to this entire thing that we call social bonding. What is not graded, but is absolute, as they say, is that social bonds are vitally important to us as a species, whether or not they are at a distance over social media, whether or not they are in close proximity, actual physical contact. Today, what I've really tried to illustrate is that there are a common set of biological, neurochemical and hormonal underpinnings to what we call social bonding. And so while it is complex and it is subjective, it involves the hierarchies, it involves our previous upbringing, it involves our goals, et cetera, it is not infinitely complex, and in that sense, it is tractable. Hopefully I've offered you some leavers or some entry points under which you can both understand and move towards social bonds that would be more satisfying and more gratifying for you. That's certainly one of the goals. The other one is that hopefully if you are a clinician or simply the friend that people go to, or the family member that people go to when they are challenged through various challenges and social bonds, that you can start to perhaps pass along some of the information as a way of people understanding what they're going through as they are breaking up, but also as they are falling in love, as they are forming attachments, and as they are being challenged with attachments. That's my hope, and especially as you head into the holidays and end of year, but also as it continues into 2022, I would hope that you would take this knowledge and apply it in any of the ways that you feel are meaningful and adaptive for you. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel, that really helps us. In addition, please put comments in the comment section on YouTube, if you have them, and if you have suggestions for future podcast guests that you'd like us to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast, please put those in the comment section as well. We do eventually read all the comments. In addition, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast on Apple and/or Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review and a comment if you like. Please also check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, that's perhaps the best way to support this podcast. And we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. We didn't talk about supplements on today's episode of the Huberman Lab Podcast, but on many episodes we do. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like enhancing the depth and quality of sleep, for things like focus, immune system, et cetera. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. The reason we partnered with Thorne is because thorn has the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients that they include in their supplements and the precision of the amounts of the supplements that they include. This is not true for a lot of other supplement brands out there. Thorne is partnered with the Mayo Clinic, with all the major sports teams, so there's tremendous confidence in their stringency. Again, if you go to thorne.com/u/huberman, you can see all the supplements that I take, you can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that portal, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following the Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, please do so. on Instagram, I regularly teach short snippets about neuroscience and neuroscience-related tools, some of that information overlaps with what's covered on the podcast, often it does not. So check us out at Huberman Lab on Instagram and on Twitter. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 297 ---
Video ID: oC3fhUjg30E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oC3fhUjg30E
Title: Dr. David Berson: Your Brain's Logic & Function
Published: 2021-12-13 13:00:18 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. David Berson, Professor & Chairman of Neuroscience at Brown University. Dr. Berson discovered the neurons in your eye that set your biological rhythms for sleep, wakefulness, mood and appetite. He is also a world-renowned teacher of basic and advanced neuroscience, having taught thousands of university lectures on this topic. Many of his students have become world-leading neuroscientists and teachers themselves. 

Here Dr. Berson takes us on a structured journey into and around the nervous system, explaining: how we perceive the world and our internal landscape, how we balance, see, and remember. Also, how we learn and perform reflexive and deliberate actions, how we visualize and imagine in our mind, and how the various circuits of the brain coordinate all these incredible feats. 

We discuss practical and real-life examples of neural circuit function across the lifespan. Dr. Berson gives us a masterclass in the nervous system—one that, in just less than two hours, will teach you an entire course's worth about the brain and how yours works.

#HubermanLab #Brain #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors:
Athletic Greens - https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Magic Spoon - https://magicspoon.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
InsideTracker Interview - https://blog.insidetracker.com/longevity-by-design-andrew-huberman
Dr. Berson's Webpage - 
https://vivo.brown.edu/display/dberson
Eyewire - (Contribute to Neuroscience Research from Home/Computer -
https://eyewire.org/explore 
Best Neuroscience Textbook (NOTE this is a TEXTBOOK) - https://amzn.to/3lZWrL4
Book - We Know It When We See It by Richard Masland - https://amzn.to/31S60Vp

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Dr. David Berson 
00:02:55 Sponsors: Athletic Greens, InsideTracker, Magic Spoon 
00:08:02 How We See 
00:10:02 Color Vision 
00:13:47 “Strange” Vision
00:16:56 How You Orient In Time
00:25:45 Body Rhythms, Pineal function, Light & Melatonin, Blueblockers
00:34:45 Spending Times Outdoors Improves Eyesight 
00:36:20 Sensation, Mood, & Self-Image
00:41:03 Sense of Balance
00:50:43 Why Pigeons Bob Their Heads, Motion Sickness 
01:00:03 Popping Ears
01:02:35 Midbrain & Blindsight 
01:10:44 Why Tilted Motion Feels Good 
01:13:24 Reflexes vs. Deliberate Actions
01:16:35 Basal Ganglia & the “2 Marshmallow Test”
01:24:40 Suppressing Reflexes: Cortex 
01:33:33 Neuroplasticity 
01:36:27 What is a Connectome?
01:45:20 How to Learn (More About the Brain)
01:49:04 Book Suggestion, my Berson Appreciation
01:50:20 Zero-Cost ways to Support the HLP, Guest Suggestions, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today my guest is Dr. David Berson, Professor of Medical Science, Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Brown University. Dr. Berson's laboratory is credited with discovering the cells in the eye that set your circadian rhythms. These are the so-called intrinsically photosensitive melanopsin cells. And while that's a mouthful, all you need to know for sake of this introduction is that, those are the cells that inform your brain and body about the time of day. Dr. Berson's laboratory has also made a number of other important discoveries about how we convert our perceptions of the outside world into motor action. More personally, Dr. Berson has been my go-to resource for all things neuroscience for nearly two decades. I knew of his reputation as a spectacular researcher for a long period of time. And then many years ago, I cold called him out of the blue, I basically corralled him into a long conversation over the phone after which he invited me out to Brown and we've been discussing neuroscience and how the brain works and the emerging new technologies and the emerging new concepts in neuroscience for a very long time now. You're going to realize today why Dr. Berson is my go-to source. He has an exceptionally clear and organized view of how the nervous system works. There are many many parts of the nervous system, different nuclei and connections and circuits and chemicals and so forth, but it takes a special kind of person to be able to organize that information into a structured and logical framework that can allow us to make sense of how we function in terms of what we feel, what we experience, how we move through the world. Dr. Berson is truly one of a kind in his ability to synthesize and organize and communicate that information. And I give him credit as one of my mentors, and one of the people that I respect most in the field of science and medical science generally. Today Dr. Berson takes us on a journey from the periphery of the nervous system, meaning from the outside, deep into the nervous system layer by layer, structure by structure, circuit by circuit making clear to us how each of these individual circuits work and how they work together as a whole. It's a really magnificent description that you simply cannot get from any textbook, from any popular book and frankly, as far as I know, from any podcast that currently exists out there. So it's a real gift to have this opportunity to learn from Dr. Berson. Again, I consider him my mentor in the field of learning and teaching neuroscience, and I'm excited for you to learn from him. One thing is for certain, by the end of this podcast, you will know far more about how your nervous system works than the vast majority of people out there including many expert biologists and neuroscientists. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science, and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens every day since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens is that, it covers all of my vitamin mineral and probiotic needs. Nowadays there's a lot of data out there pointing to the fact that a healthy gut microbiome literally, little microbes that live in our gut, that are good for us is important to support our immune system, our nervous system, our endocrine system, and various aspects of our immediate and long-term health. With Athletic Greens I get all the vitamins and minerals that I need plus the probiotics ensure a healthy gut microbiome. It also tastes really good, I mix mine up with some water, a little bit of lemon juice, I'll have that early in the day and sometimes a second time later in the day as well. It's compatible with intermittent fasting, it's compatible with vegan diets, with keto diets, and essentially every diet that you could possibly imagine out there. It's also filled with adaptogens for recovery, it has digestive enzymes for gut health, and has a number of other things that support the immune system. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim their special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. There's now a lot of evidence that vitamin D3 supports a huge number of metabolic factors, immune system factors, endocrine factors, basically, we need vitamin D3, we can get it from the sun, but many people are deficient in vitamin D3 even if they are getting what they think is sufficient sunlight. And K2 is important for cardiovascular health. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you can claim their special offer, the five free travel packs, plus the year supply of vitamin D3K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get information about how your specific genes are impacting your immediate and long-term health. Now a problem with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, is you get the numbers back but you don't know what to do with those numbers, with InsideTracker they make it very simple to figure out what to do to bring those numbers into the ranges that are right for you. They have a dashboard that's very easy to use, you can see the numbers from your blood and/or DNA tests, and it will point to specific lifestyle factors, nutritional factors as well as supplementation maybe even prescription factors that would be right for you to bring the numbers into range that are ideal for your immediate and long-term health goals. Another feature the InsideTracker has is their inner age test. This test shows you what your biological age is and compares that to your chronological age and what you can do to improve your biological age, which of course is the important number. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Also an interview I did with Longevity Research Doctor and InsideTracker's Founder Dr. Gil Blander, is out now on their podcast, the longevity by design podcast and a link to that interview can be found in today's show notes. Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. I don't follow a ketogenic diet. The way that I eat is basically geared toward feeling alert when I want to be alert and feeling sleepy when I want to go to sleep. Which for me means fasting until about 11:00 am or noon most days, then I eat low carb during the day. So I'll have some meat or fish or chicken and some salad that's what works for me, and in the afternoon, I remain on a more or less low carb-ish diet, and then in the evening, I eat pastas and things primarily and I throttle back on the protein and that's what allows me to fall asleep at night. That's just what works for me. So if I want a snack in the afternoon, I want that to be a ketogenic or low carb snack and that snack these days is Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is really terrific, it has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, and only four net grams of carbohydrates in each serving. It's really delicious, they have a number of different flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut butter and frosted, I particularly like frosted. It tastes like donuts and I really like donuts although I try not to eat donuts too often if ever. What I do lately, is I take Magic Spoon, I put it in some Bulgarian yogurt which is really good and I mix that up, I put those in there and sometimes I put some cinnamon on them. And as I'm describing this, I'm getting hungry for Magic Spoon. So if you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman to get their variety pack. Just use the promo code Huberman at checkout to get $5 off your order. Again, that's magicspoon.com/huberman and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. And now for my discussion with Dr. David Berson, welcome. - Thank you. - Yeah. - So nice to be here. - Great to have you. For more than 20 years you've been my go-to source for all things, nervous system how it works, how it's structured. So today I want to ask you some questions about that. I think people would gain a lot of insight into this machine that makes them think and feel and see, et cetera. If you would, could you tell us how we see? A photon of light enters the eye, what happens? - Right. - How is it that I look outside, I see a truck drive by, or I look on the wall I see a photo of my dog, how does that work? - Right, so this is an old question obviously. And clearly in the end, the reason you have a visual experience is that your brain is got some pattern of activity that associates with the input from the periphery. But you can have a visual experience with no input from the periphery as well. When you're dreaming, you're seeing things that aren't coming through your eyes. - Are those memories? - I would say in a sense they may reflect your visual experience they're not necessarily specific visual memories, but of course they can be. But the point is, that the experience of seeing is actually a brain phenomenon. But of course, under normal circumstances, we see the world because we're looking at it and we're using our eyes to look at it. And fundamentally, when we're looking at the exterior world, it's what the retina is telling the brain that matters. So there are cells called ganglion cells, these are neurons that are the key cells for communicating between eye and brain, the eye is like the camera, it's detecting the initial image, doing some initial processing, and then that signal gets sent back to the brain proper and of course, it's there at the level of the cortex that we have this conscious visual experience. There are many other places in the brain that get visual input as well doing other things with that kind of information. - So I get a lot of questions about color vision. If you would, could you explain how is it that we can perceive reds and greens and blues and things of that sort. - Right, so the first thing to understand about light, is that it's just a form of electromagnetic radiation, it's vibrating, it's oscillating, but. - When you say it's vibrating, it's oscillating, you mean that photons are actually moving? - Well in a sense, photons they're certainly moving through space, we think about photons as particles and that's one way of thinking about light, but we can also think of it as a wave like a radio wave, either way is acceptable. And the radio waves have frequencies like the frequencies on the your radio dial, and certain frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum can be detected by neurons in the retina, those are the things we see, but there's still different wavelengths within the light that can be seen by the eye. And those different wavelengths are unpacked in a sense or decoded by the nervous system to lead to our experience of color. Essentially, different wavelengths give us the sensation of different colors through the auspices of different neurons that are tuned to different wavelengths of light. - So when a photon, so when a little bit of light hits my eye goes in, the photoreceptors convert that into electrical signal? - Right. - How is it that a given photon of light gives me the perception eventually, leads the perception of red versus green versus blue? - Right, so if you imagine that in the first layer of the retina where this transformation occurs from electromagnetic radiation into neural signals that you have different kinds of sensitive cells that are expressing, they're making different molecules within themselves for this express purpose of absorbing photons which is the first step in the process of seeing, now it turns out that altogether, there are about five proteins like this that we need to think about in the typical retina, but for seeing color really it's three of them. So they're three different proteins, each absorbs light with a different preferred frequency, and then the nervous system keeps track of those signals compares and contrasts them to extract some understanding of the wavelength composition of light. So you can see just by looking at a landscape, or it must be late in the day because things are looking golden that's all a function of our absorbing the light that's coming from the world and interpreting that with our brain because of the different composition of the light that's reaching our eyes. - Is it fair to assume that my perception of red is the same as your perception of red? - Well, that's a great question. - And that mine is better? I'm just kidding, I'm just kidding. [laughs] - It's a great question, it's a deep philosophical question. It's a question that really probably can't even ultimately be answered by the usual empirical scientific processes, 'cause it's really about an individual's experience. What we can say is that the biological mechanisms that we think are important for seeing color for example, seem to be very highly similar from one individual to the next whether it be human beings, or other animals. And so we think that the physiological process looks very similar on the front end, but once you're at the level of perception or understanding or experience, that's something that's a little bit tougher to nail down with the sorts of scientific approaches that we approach biological vision let's say. - You mentioned that there are five different cone types essentially, the cones being the cells that absorb light of different wavelengths. I often wondered when I had my dog, what he saw and how his vision differs from our vision. And certainly, there are animals that can see things that we can't see. - Right? - What are some of the more outrageous examples of that? - I've seen things. - And same things in the extreme. - Right. - Dogs I'm guessing see reds more as oranges, is that right? 'Cause they don't have the same array of of neurons that we have for seeing color. - Right, so the first thing is, it's not really five types of colons, there are really three types of colons. And if you look at the way that color vision is thought to work, you can sort of see that it has to be three different signals. There are a couple of other types of pigments. One is really mostly for dim light vision. When you're walking around in a moonless night and you're seeing things with very low light that's the rod cell that uses its own pigment. And then there's another class of pigments we'll probably talk about a little bit later, this melanopsin pigment. - I thought you were referring to like ultraviolet and infrared and things like that. - Right, so in the case of a typical, well, let's put it this way. In human beings, most of us have three cone types and we can see colors that stem from that. In most mammals including your dog or your cat, there really are only two cone types and that limits the kind of vision that they can have in the domain of wavelength or color as you would say. So really, a dog sees the world kind of like a particular kind of color blind human might see the world, because instead of having three channels to compare and contrast they only have two channels and that makes it much more difficult to figure out exactly which wavelength you're looking at. - Do colorblind people suffer much as a consequence of being colorblind? - Well, it's like so many other disabilities. The world is built for people of the most common type. So in some cases, the expectation can be there that somebody can see something that they won't be able to if they're missing one of their cone types let's say. So in those moments, that can be a real problem. If there's a lack of contrast to their visual system, they will be blind to that. In general, it's a fairly modest visual limitation as things go. For example, if not being able to see acutely can be much more damaging, not being able to read fine print for example. - Yeah, I suppose if I had to give up the ability to see certain colors or give up the ability to see clearly, I could certainly trade out color for clarity. - Right, of course, color is very meaningful to us as human beings, so we would hate to give it up. But obviously, dogs and cats and all kinds of other mammals do perfectly well in the world. - Yeah, because we take care of them. I spent most of my time taking care of that dog. - He took care of me too. Let's talk about that odd photopigment. Photopigment of course being the thing that absorbs light of a particular wavelength, and let's talk about these specialized ganglion cells that communicate certain types of information from eye to the brain that are so important for so many things. What I'm referring to here of course is, your co-discovery of the so-called intrinsically photosensitive cells, the neurons in the eye that do so many of the things that don't actually have to do with perception, but have to do with important biological functions. What I would love for you to do is explain to me why once I heard you say we have a bit of fly eye in our eye. - Yeah. - And you showed this slide of a giant fly from a horror movie. - Yeah. - Trying to attack this woman. - Yeah. - And maybe it was an eye also. So what does it mean that we have a bit of a fly eye in our eye? - Yeah, so this last pigment is a really peculiar one. One can think about it as really the initial sensitive element in a system that's designed to tell your brain about how bright things are in your world. And the thing that's really peculiar about this pigment, is that it's in the wrong place in a sense. When you think about the structure of the retina, you think about a layer cake essentially. You've got this thin membrane at the back of your eye, but it's actually a stack of thin layers and the outermost of those layers is where these photoreceptors you were talking about earlier are sitting. That's where the film of your camera is essentially, that's where the photons do their magic with the photo pigments and turn it into a neural signal. - I like that I've never really thought of the photoreceptors is the film of the camera, but that makes sense. - Or like the sensitive chip on CCD chip in your cell phone. It's the surface on which the light pattern is imaged by the optics of the eye, and now you've got an array of sensors that's capturing that information and creating a bitmap essentially, but now it's in neural signals distributed across the surface of the retina. So all of that was known to be going on 150 years ago, a couple of types of photoreceptors cones and rods. If you look a little bit more closely, three types of cones, that's where the transformation from electromagnetic radiation to neural signals was thought to take place. But it turns out that this last photopigment is in the other end of the retina, the innermost part of the retina, that's where the so-called ganglion cells are. Those are the cells that talk to the brain, the ones that actually can communicate directly what information comes to them from the photoreceptors. And here you've got a case where actually, some of the output neurons that we didn't think had any business being directly sensitive to light were actually making this photopigment, absorbing light, and converting that to neural signals and sending it to the brain. So that made it pretty surprising and unexpected, but there are many surprising things about these cells. - So, and what is the relationship to the fly eye? - Right, so the link there is, that if you ask how the photopigment now communicates downstream from the initial absorption event to get to the electrical signal, that's a complex cellular process involves many chemical steps. And if you look at how photoreceptors in our eyes work, you can see what that cascade is, how that chain works. If you look in the eyes of flies or other insects or other invertebrates, there's a very similar kind of chain. But the specifics of how the signals get from the absorption event by the pigment to the electrical response that the nervous system can understand, are characteristically different between fuzzy furry creatures like us and insects for example like the fly. - I see. - So these funny extra photoreceptors that are in the wrong layer doing something completely different are actually using a chemical cascade that looks much more like what you would see in a fly photoreceptor, than what you would see in a human photoreceptor, a rod or a cone for example. So it sounds like it's a very primitive aspect of biology that we maintain. - Exactly right, exactly. - And despite the fact that dogs can't see as many colors as we can and cats can't see as many colors as we can, we have all this extravagant stuff for seeing color and then you got this other pigment sitting in the wrong not wrong, but in a different part of the eye sending processing light very differently. - Right. - And sending that information into the brain. So, what do these cells do? Presumably, they're there for a reason. - They are, and the interesting thing is that, one cell type like this carrying one kind of signal which I would call a brightness signal essentially, can do many things in the brain. - When you say brightness signal you mean that, like right now, I have these cells do I have these cells? Of course. - You do. - I'm joking, I hope I have these cells in my eye. And they're paying attention to how bright it is overall, but they're not paying attention for instance to the edge of area or what else is going on in the room. - Right, so it's the difference between knowing what the objects are on the table and knowing whether it's bright enough to be daylight right now. So why does your nervous system need to know whether it's daylight right now? Well, one thing that needs to know that is your circadian clock. If you travel across time zones to Europe, now your internal clock thinks it's California time, but the rotation of the earth is for different part of the planet. The rising and setting of the sun is not at all what your body is anticipating. So you've got an internal representation of the rotation of the earth in your own brain, that's your circadian system it's keeping time. But now you've played a trick on your nervous system, you put yourself in a different place where the sun is rising at the quote wrong time. Well, that's not good for you, right? So you got to get back on track. One of the things this system does, is sends a oh, it's daylight now signal to the brain, which compares with its internal clock. And if that's not right, it tweaks the clock gradually until you get over your jet lag and you feel back on track again. - So the jet lag case makes a lot of sense to me, but presumably, these elements didn't evolve for jet lag. - Right. - So, what are they doing on a day-to-day basis? - Right, well one way to think about this is that, the clock that you have in not just your brain, in all the cells, almost all of the cells of your body, they're all oscillating, they're all. - They got local little clocks in them. - They got local little clocks in themselves, they're all clocks. They need to be synchronized appropriately, and the whole thing has to be built in biological machinery. This is actually a beautiful story about how gene expression can control gene expression, and if you set it up right, you can set up a little thing that just sort of hums along at a particular frequency. In our case it's humming along at 24 hours, 'cause that's how our earth rotates and it's all built into our biology. So this is great, but the reality is, that the clock can only be so good. I mean, we're talking about biology here. It's not precision engineering, and so it can be a little bit off. - Well, also it's in our brain, so it doesn't have access to any regular unerring signal? - Well, if in the absence of the rising and setting of the sun it doesn't, if you put someone in a cave, their biological clock will keep time to within a handful of minutes of 24 hours, that's no problem for one day. But if this went on without any correction, eventually you'd be out of phase and this is actually one of the things that blind patients often complain about. If they've got retinal blindness is insomnia. [indistinct] Exactly, they're not synchronized, their clock is there, but they're drifting out of phase because their clock's only good to 24.2 hours or 23.8 hours little by little if they're drifting. So you need a synchronization signal. So even if you never across time zones and of course we didn't back on the Savannah we stayed within walking distance of where we were, you still need a synchronizer, 'cause otherwise, you have nothing to actually confirm when the rising and the setting of the sun is, that's what you're trying to synchronize yourself to. - I'm fascinated by the circadian clock and the fact that all the cells of our body have essentially a 24-hour-ish clock in them. - Right. - We hear a lot about these circadian rhythms and circadian clocks the fact that we need light input from these special neurons in order to set the clock. But I've never really heard it described how the clock itself works and how the clock signals to all the rest of the body when the liver should be doing one thing and the stomach should be doing another. I know you've done some work on the clock. So if you would just maybe briefly describe where the clock is, what it does, and some of the top contour of how it tells the cells of the body what to do. - Right, so the first thing to say is that, as you said, the clock is all over the place. Most of the tissues in your body have clocks. - We probably have what, millions of clocks in our body. - Yeah, I would say that's probably fair. If you have millions of cell types, you might have millions of clocks. The role of the central pacemaker for the circadian system is to coordinate all of these. And there's a little nucleus, a little collection of nerve cells in your brain it's called the suprachiasmatic nucleus the SCN, and it is sitting in a funny place for the rest of the structures in the nervous system that get direct retinal input. It's sitting in the hypothalamus, which you can think about as sort of the great coordinator of drives and. - The source of all our pleasures and all our problems. - Right. - Or most our problems. - Yes, it really is. But it's sort of deep in your brain things that drive you to do things. If you're freezing cold, you put on a coat, you shiver, all these things are coordinated by hypothalamus. So this pathway that we're talking about from the retina and from these peculiar cells that are encoding light intensity, are sending signals directly into a center that's surrounded by all of these centers that control autonomic nervous system and your hormonal systems. So this is a part of your visual system that doesn't really reach the level of consciousness, it's not something you think about, it's happening under the radar kind of all the time and the signal is working its way into this central clock coordinating center. Now what happens then is not that well understood, but it's clear that this is a neural center that has the same ability to communicate with other parts of your brain as any other neural center. And clearly, there are circuits that involve connections between neurons that are conventional. But in addition, it's quite clear that there are also sort of humeral effects that things are being oozing out of the cells in the center and maybe into the circulation or just diffusing through the brain to some extent that can also affect neurons elsewhere. But the hypothalamus uses everything to control the rest of the body. And that's true, the supracosmetic nucleus this circadian center as well, it can get its fingers into the autonomic nervous system, the humeral system and of course, up to the centers of the brain that organize coordinated rational behavior. So if I understand correctly, we have this group of cells, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, it's got a 24-hour rhythm, that rhythm is more or less matched to what's going on in our external world by the specialized set of neurons in our eye. But then the master clock itself the SCN, releases things in the blood humeral signals that go out various places in the body. And you said to the autonomic system which is regulating more or less how alert or calm we are, as well as our thinking and our cognition. So I'd love to talk to you about the autonomic part, presumably that's through melatonin, it's through adrenaline how is it that this clock is impacting how the autonomic system, how alert or calm we feel? - Right, so there are pathways by which the suprachiasmatic nucleus can access both the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system. - Just so people know the sympathetic nervous system is the one that tends to make us more alert, and the parasympathetic nervous system is the portion of the autonomic nervous system makes us feel more calm. - Right. - In broadcasting. Right, to first approximation, right? So, this is both of these systems are within the grasp of the circadian system through hypothalamic circuits. One of the circuits that will be I think, of particular interest to some of your listeners is a pathway that involves this sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system the fight or flight system that is actually through a very circuitous route innervating the pineal gland which is sitting in the middle of your brain. - The so-called third eye. - Right, so this is. - We'll have to get back to why it's called the third eye, because, yeah. - That's an interesting thing. - You can't call something the third eye and just. - Just leave it there. - Just leave it there. - Right. - Right. - Anyway, this is the major source of melatonin in your body. - So light comes in to my eye. - Yes. - Passed off to the suprachiasmatic nucleus essentially, not the light itself, but the signal representing the light. - Sure. - Then the SCN, the suprachiasmatic nucleus can impact the melatonin system. - Right. - Via the pineal? - Right, the way this is seen is that, if you were to measure your melatonin level over the course of the day, if you could do this hour by hour, you'd see that it's really low during the day, very high at night. But if you get up in the middle of the night and go to the bathroom and turn on the bright full fluorescent light, your melatonin level is slammed to the floor. Light is directly impacting your hormonal levels through this mechanism that we just described. So this is one of the routes by which light can act on your hormonal status through pathways that are completely beyond what you normally would think about, right? You're thinking about the things in the bathroom. Oh, there's the toothbrush, there's the tube of toothpaste. But meanwhile, this other system is just counting photons and saying oh wow, there's a lot of photons right now let's shut down the melatonin release. - This is one of the main reasons why I've encouraged people to avoid bright light exposure in the middle of the night. Not just blue light, but bright light of any wavelength, because there's this myth out there that blue light because it's the optimal signal for activating this pathway and shutting down melatonin, is the only wavelength of light that can shut it down. But am I correct in thinking that if a light is bright enough. - Right. - It doesn't matter if it's blue light, green light, purple light, even red light. - Right. - You're going to slam melatonin down to the ground which is not a good thing to happen in the middle of the night. - Right. - Correct? Right, yeah, any light will affect the system to some extent, the blue light is somewhat more effective, but don't fool yourself into thinking that if you use red light that means you're avoiding the effect, it's certainly still there. And certainly, if it's very bright, it'll be more effective in driving the system than dim blue light would be. - Interesting, a lot of people wear blue blockers. - Right. - And in a kind of odd twist of misinformation out there, a lot of people wear blue blockers during the middle of the day, which basically makes no sense because during the middle of the day is when you want to get a lot of bright light and including blue light into your eyes, correct? - Absolutely, and not just for the reasons we've been talking about in terms of circadian effects, there are major effects of light on mood. And seasonal affective disorder apparently, is essentially a reflection of this same system in reverse. If you're living in the northern climes and you're not getting that much light during the middle of the winter in Stockholm, you might be prone to depression and phototherapy might be just the ticket for you and that's because there's a direct effect of light on mood, there's an example where if you don't have enough light it's a problem. So I think you're exactly right. It's not about is like good or bad for you, it's about what kind of light and when that makes the difference. Yeah, the general rule of thumb that I've been living by, is to get as much bright light in my eyes ideally from sunlight anytime I want to be alert. - Right. - And doing exactly the opposite when I want to be asleep. - Yeah. - We're getting drowsy. - And there are aspects of this that spin out way beyond the conversation we're having now to things like this. It turns out that the incidence of myopia. - Nearsightedness. - Nearsightedness, right. Is strongly related to the amount of time that kids spend outdoors. - In what direction of effect? - The more they spend time outdoors, the less nearsightedness they have. - So this is not because they're viewing things at a distance, or because they're getting a lot of blue light, sunlight? - It's a great question, it is not fully resolved what the epidemiological, what the basis of that epidemiological finding is, one possibility is the amount of light which would make me think about this melanopsin system again. But it might very well be a question of accommodation that is the process by which you focus on near or far things if you're never outdoors, everything is nearby. If you're outdoors, you're focusing far, so this is. - Or unless you are on your phone? - Right, exactly. - There's a tremendous amount of interest these days in watches and things that count steps. I'm beginning to realize that we should probably have a device that can count photons during the day. - Right. - And can also count photons at night and tell us hey, you're getting too many photons, you're going to shut down your melatonin at night, or you're not getting enough photons, today you didn't get enough bright light, whether or not it's from artificial light or from sunlight. I guess that, where would you put? I guess you put on the top of your head or you'd probably want it someplace outward facing? - Right, probably what you need is as many photons over as much of the retina as possible to recruit as much of the system as possible. - In thinking about other effects of this non-image forming pathway that involves these special cells in the eye and the SCN, you had a paper a few years ago looking at retinal input to an area of the brain which has a fancy name the peri-habenular, but names don't necessarily matter that had some important effects on mood and other aspects of light. Maybe you could tell us a little bit about what is the peri-habenular? - Oh, wow, so that's a fancy term, but I think the way to think about this, is a chunk of the brain that is sitting as part of a bigger chunk that's really the linker between peripheral sensory input of all kinds, virtually all kinds, whether it's auditory input or tactile input or visual input to the region of your brain the cortex that allows you to think about these things and make plans around them and to integrate them and that kind of thing. So, we've known about a pathway that gets from the retina through this sort of linker center which it's called the thalamus, and then. [indistinct] Exactly, but you want to arrive at the destination. Right now you're at grand central and now you can do your thing 'cause you're up at the cortex. So this is the standard pattern. You have sensory input coming from the periphery, you've got these peripheral elements that are doing the initial stages of. - The eye, the ear, the nose. - Your skin of your fingertips, right? The taste buds on your tongue they're taking this raw information in and they're doing some pre-processing maybe or the early circuits are. But eventually, most of these signals have to pass through the gateway to the cortex which is the thalamus. And we've known for years, for decades, many decades, what the major throughput pathway from the retina to the cortex is and where it ends up. It ends up in the visual cortex. You pat the back of your head that's where the receiving center is for the main pathway from retina to cortex. But wait a minute, there's more. There's this little side pathway that goes through a different part of that linking thalamus center. [indistinct] - Like a local train. - Yeah. - From grand central to. - It's in a weird part of the neighborhood, right? It's a completely different, it's like a little trunk line that branches off and goes out into the hinterlands and it's going to the part of this linker center that's talking to a completely different part of cortex way up front, frontal lobe, which is much more involved in things like planning, or self-image or. - Self-image literally, how one. - Views oneself, do you feel good about yourself, or what's your plan for next Thursday. It's a very high level center in the highest level of your nervous system and this is the region that is getting input from this pathway which is mostly worked out in its function by [indistinct] Tara's Lab. I know you had him on the podcast. - We didn't talk about this path. - This pathway at all right. So Dale Fernandez and [indistinct] and the folks that work with them, were able to show that this pathway doesn't just exist and get you to a weird place. But if you activate it at kind of the wrong time of day, animals can become depressed. And if you silence it under the right circumstances, then weird lighting cycles that would normally make them act sort of depressed, no longer have that effect. - So it sounds to me like there's this pathway from eye to this unusual train route through the structure we call the thalamus, then up to the front of the brain that relates to things of self-perception, kind of higher level functions. I find that really interesting, because most of what I think about when I think about these fancy, well, or these primitive rather, neurons that don't pay attention to the shapes of things, but instead to brightness I think of well, it regulates melatonin and circadian clock, mood, hunger, the really kind of vegetative stuff if you will. - Right. - And this is interesting because I think a lot of people experience depression not just people that live in Scandinavia in the middle of winter, and we are very much divorced from our normal interactions with light. It also makes me realize that these intrinsically photosensitive cells that set the clock et cetera, are involved in a lot of things. They seem to regulate a dozen or more different basic functions. I want to ask you about a different aspect of the visual system now, which is the one that relates to our sense of balance. So I love boats but I hate being on them. I love the ocean from shore, because I get incredibly seasick, it's awful. I think I'm going to get seasick if I think about it too much. [laughs] And once I went on a boat trip, I came back and I actually got motion sick or wasn't seasick 'cause I was rafting. So there's a system that somehow gets messed up. They always tell us if you're feeling sick to look at the horizon et cetera, et cetera. - Right. - So what is the link between our visual system and our balance system and why does it make us nauseous sometimes when the world is moving in a way that we're not accustomed to? - Right. - I realize this is a big question, because it involves eye movement, et cetera. - Right. - But let's maybe just walk in at the simplest layers of vision, vestibular, so-called balance system and then maybe we can piece the system together for people so that they can understand, and then also we should give them some tools for adjusting their nausea when their vestibular system is out of whack. - Cool, so the first thing to think about is that the vestibular system is designed to allow you to see how your or detect sense how you're moving in the world, through the world. It's a funny one because it's about your movement in relationship to the world in a sense, and yet it's sort of interoceptive in the sense that it is really in the end sensing the movement of your own body. - Okay, so interoception we should probably delineate for people is when you're focusing on your internal state as opposed to something outside you. - Right. - It's a gravity sensing system. - Well, it's partly a gravity sensing system in the sense that gravity is a force that's acting on you as if you were moving through the world in the opposite direction. - All right, now you got to explain that. You got to explain that to me. - Okay, so basically the idea is that, if we leave gravity inside, we're just sitting in a car, in the passenger seat and the driver hits the accelerator and you start moving forward, you sense that. If your eyes were closed, you'd sense it. If your ears were plugged in, your eyes would close, you'd still know it. - Yeah, many people take off on the plane like this they're dreading the flight and they know when the plane is taking off. - Sure, that's your vestibular system talking, because anything that jostles you out of the current position you're in right now will be detected by the vestibular system pretty much. So this is a complicated system, but it's basically in your inner ear very close to where you're hearing. - That they put it there. And I don't know. - And I don't really know, they're sort of derived. [indistinct] - Now I'm just kidding. To steal our friend Russ Van Gelder's explanation, we weren't consulted the design phase and no one. - That's a great [indistinct]. - But it's interesting it's in the ear. - Yeah. - Right? - Yeah, it's deep in there and it's served by the same nerve actually that serves the hearing system. One way to think about it is both the hearing system and this vestibular self-motion sensing system are really detecting the signal in the same way they're hairy cells and they're exciting. [indistinct] - Yeah, sort of they got little cilia sticking up off the surfaces. And depending on which way you bend those, the cells will either be inhibited or excited, they're not even neurons but then they talk to neurons with a neuron-like process and off you go. Now you've got an auditory signal if you're sensing things bouncing around in your cochlea which is. - Sound waves. - Sympathetically the bouncing of your eardrum which is symmetrically the sound waves in the world. But in the case of the vestibular apparatus, evolution has built a system that detects the motion of say fluid going by those hairs. And if you put a sensor like that in a tube that's fluid filled, now you've got a sensor that will be activated when you rotate that tube around the axis that passes through the middle of it, those we're just listening won't be able. [indistinct] - I was thinking of it as three hula hoops. - Right, three hoops. - One standing up, one lying down on the ground. - Right. - The other one the other way. - Three directions, the people who fly will talk about roll pitch and you all that kind of thing. So three axes of encoding just like in the. [indistinct] - Sort of the yes, the no and then I always say it's the puppy head tilt. - Yeah, that puppy tilt. - That's the other one. So the point is that, your brain is eventually going to be able to unpack what these sensors are telling you about how you just rotated your head in very much the way that the three types of cones we were talking about before are reading the incoming photons in the wavelength domain differently, and if. - Red, green, blue. - Yeah, you can compare and trust you get red, green, blue. So same basic idea if you have three sensors and you array them properly, now you can tell if you're rotating your head left or right, up or down that's the sensory signal coming back into your brain confirming that you've just made a movement that you will. - But what about on the plane? Because when I'm on the plane, I'm completely stationary the plane's moving. - Right. - But my head hasn't moved. - Right. - So I'm just moving forward, gravity is constant. - Exactly. - How do I know I'm accelerating? - So what's happening now is your brain is sensing the motion, and the brain is smart enough also to ask itself, did I will that movement or did that come from the outside? So now in terms of sort of understanding what the the vestibular signal means, it's got to be embedded in the context of what you tried to do, or what your other sensory systems are telling you about what's happening. - I see, so it's very interesting. But it's not conscious or at least if it's conscious, it's very not conscious, it's definitely very fast, right? The moment that plane starts moving, I know that I didn't get up out of my chair and run forward. - Right. - But I'm not really thinking about getting up out of my chair I just know. - I guess the way i think about it is that, the nervous system is quote, aware at many levels when it gets all the way up to the cortex and we're thinking about it, you're talking about it, that's cortical. But the lower levels of the brain that don't require you to actually actively think about it they're just doing their thing are also made aware, right? A lot of this is happening under the surface of what you're thinking, these are reflexes. - Okay, so we've got this gravity sensing system? - Right. - I'm nodding for those that are listening for a yes movement of the head, a no movement of the head or the tilting of the head from side to side. - Right. - And then you said that knowledge about whether or not activation of that system comes from my own movements, or something acting upon me like the plane moving. - Right. - Has to be combined with other signals. And so, how is the visual information or information about the visual world combined with balance information? - Right, so yeah. I guess maybe the best way to think about how these two systems work together, is to think about what happens when you suddenly rotate your head to the left. When you suddenly rotate your head to the left, your eyes are actually rotating to the right. Automatically, you do this in complete darkness. If you had an infrared camera and watched yourself in complete darkness, you can't see anything. Rotating your head to the left, your eyes would rotate to the right. That's your vestibular system saying, I'm going to try to compensate for the head rotation. So my eyes are still looking in the same place. Why is that useful, well, if it's always doing that, then the image of the world on your retina will be pretty stable most of the time and that actually helps vision. - Have they built this into cameras for image stabilization 'cause when I move, when I take a picture with my phone, it's blurry, it's not clear? - Well actually, you might want to get a better phone, because now what they have is software in the better apps that will do a kind of image stabilization post-hoc by doing a registration of the images that are bouncing around, they say the edge of the house was here, so let's get that aligned in each of your images. So you may not be aware if you're using a good new phone that if you walk around a landscape and hold your phone, that there's all this image stabilization going on. But it's built into standard cinematic technology now, because if we tried to do a handheld camera, things would be bouncing around, things would be unwatchable, you wouldn't be able to really understand what's going on in the scene. So the brain works really hard to mostly stabilize the image of the world on your retina and of course you're moving through the world so you can't stabilize everything. But the more you can stabilize most of the time, the better you can see. And that's why when we're scanning a scene looking around at things, we're making very rapid eye movements for very short periods of time and then we just rest, but we're not the only ones that do that. If you ever watch a hummingbird, it does exactly the same thing at a feeder, right? [indistinct] It is with its body. It's going to make a quick movement, and then it's going to be stable. And when you watch a pigeon walking on the sidewalk, it does this funny head bobbing thing. But what it's really doing, is racking its head back on its neck while its body goes forward so that the image of the visual world stays static. - Is that why they're doing it? - Yes, and you've seen the funny chicken videos on YouTube, right? - You take a chicken move it up and down the head stays in one place, it's all the same thing. All of these animals are trying hard to keep the image of the world stable on their retina as much of the time as they possibly can. And then when they've got to move, make it fast, make it quick and then stabilize again. - That's why the pigeons have their head back? - It is, yeah. - Wow. - Yeah. - I just need to pause there for a second and digest that, amazing. In case people aren't. Well, there's no reason why people would know what we're doing here, but essentially, what we're doing is we're building up from sensory light onto the eye, make color to what the brain does with the integration of that circadian clock, melatonin, et cetera. And now what we're doing is we're talking about multi-sensory or multimodal combining one sense vision with another sense balance. - Right. - And it turns out that pigeons know more about this than I do, because pigeons know to keep their head back as they walk forward. - Right. - All right, so that gets us to this issue of motion sickness. - Right. - And you don't have to go out on a boat. Anytime I go to New York, I sit in an Uber or in a cab in the back. And if I'm looking at my phone while the car is driving, I feel nauseous by time I arrive at my destination. - Right. - I always try and look out the front of the windshield, because I'm told that helps but it's a little tiny window. - Right. - And I end up feeling slightly less sick if I do that. So what's going on with the vision and the balance system that causes a kind of a nausea? And actually, if I keep talking about this. [indistinct] [laughs] I don't throw up easily, but for some reason motion sickness is a real thing for me. - It's a problem for a lot of people. I think the fundamental problem typically, when you get motion sick is what they call visual vestibular conflict. That is, you have two sensory systems that are talking to your brain about how you're moving through the world. And as long as they agree you're fine. So if you're driving, your body senses that you're moving forward. Your vestibular system is picking up this acceleration of the car, and your visual system is seeing the consequences of forward motion in the sweeping of the scene past you. Everything is honky-dory, right, no problem. But when you are headed forward but you're looking at your cell phone, what is your retina seeing? Your retina is seeing the stable image of the screen. There's absolutely no motion in that. - Or the motion is just or some other emotion like a movie. - If you're playing a game or you're watching a video, a football game, the motion is uncoupled with what's actually happening to your body. Your brain doesn't like that, your brain likes everything to be aligned. And if it's not, it's going to complain to you. - By making me feel nauseous. - By making you feel nauseous and maybe you'll change your behavior. So you're getting. - I'm getting punished. - Yeah, for setting it up. [indistinct] - Right. - By the vestibular? - You'll learn. - Visuals. [laughs] In time, I love it. I love the idea of reward signals and we've done a lot of discussion about this on this podcast of things like dopamine reward and things, but also punishment signals and I love this example. Well, maybe marching a little bit further along this pathway, visual input is combined with balance input. Where does that occur, and maybe 'cause I have some hint of where it occurs. You could tell us a little bit about this kind of mysterious little mini-brain that they call the cerebellum. - Cerebellum, yeah. So the way I tried to describe the cerebellum to my students is that, it serves sort of like the air traffic control system functions in air travel. So that it's a system that's very complicated and it's really dependent on great information. So it's taking in information about everything that's happening everywhere not only through your sensory systems, but it's listening into all the little centers elsewhere in your brain that are computing what you're going to be doing next and so forth. So it's just ravenous for that kind of information. - So it really is like a little mini-brain. - It is, it's got access to all those signals. and it really has an important role in coordinating and shaping movements, but if you suddenly eliminated the air traffic control system, planes could still take off and land but you might have some unhappy accidents in the process. So the cerebellum is kind of like that. It's not that you would be paralyzed if your cerebellum was gone because you still have motor neurons, you still have ways to talk to your muscles, you still have reflex centers, and it's not like you would have any sensory laws because you still have your cortex getting all of those beautiful signals that you can think about, but you wouldn't be coordinating things so well anymore. The timing between input and output might be off. Or if you were trying to practice a new athletic move like an overhead serve in tennis, you'd be just terrible at learning. All the sequences of muscle movements and the feedback from your sensory apparatus that would let you really hit that ball exactly where you wanted to after the nth rep, right? Now 1000th rep or something you get much better at it. So the cerebellum is all involved in things like motor learning and refining the precisions of movement so that they get you where you want to go if you reach for a glass of champagne that you don't knock it over or stop short. [indistinct] - People who have selective damage to the cerebellum. - Absolutely. - And I'm familiar with. Well, Korsakoff's is different, right? Isn't that a B vitamin deficiency in chronic alcoholics? - Right. - And they tend to walk kind of bow-legged and they can't coordinate their movements. That has some that not memory bodies but also a cerebellum? - I'm not sure about the cerebellar involvement there. But the typical thing would be a patient who has a cerebral or stroke or a tumor for example, might be not that steady on their feet if the dynamics of the situation you're standing on a street car with no handle pull to hold on to, they might not be as good at adjusting all the little movements of the car. There's a kind of tremor that can occur as they're reaching for things, because they reach a little too far and then they over correct and come back, things like that. So it's very common neurological phenomenon actually. Cerebellar ataxia is what the neurologists call it, and it can happen not just with cerebellar damage, but damage to the tracts that feed the information into the cerebellum. - Right, it is the private structure. - Exactly, or output from the cerebellum. - And so, the cerebellum is where a lot of visual and balance information is combined. - In a very key place in the cerebellum, which it's really one of the oldest parts. - In terms of flocculus. - The flocculus, right. It's a critical place in the cerebellum where visual and vestibular information comes together recording just the kinds of movements we were talking about. This image stabilizing network it's all happening there. And there's learning happening there as well. So that if your vestibular apparatus is a little bit damaged somehow, your visual system is actually talking to your cerebellum saying there's a problem here, there's an error, and your cerebellum is learning to do better by increasing the output of the vestibular system to compensate for whatever that loss was. So it's a little error correction system that's sort of typical of a cerebellar function and it can happen in many, many different domains. This is just one of the domains of sensory motor integration that takes place there. - So I should stay off my phone in the Ubers. if I'm on a boat, I should essentially look and as much as possible act as if I'm driving the machine. - Right. - That'd be weird if I was in the passenger seat pretending I was driving the machine. But i do always feel better if I'm sitting in the front seat passenger. - Right, so more of the visual world that you can see as if you were actually the one doing the motion I would think. - Let's stay in the inner ear for a minute as we continue to march around the nervous system. When you take off in the plane or when you land or sometimes in the middle of there, your ears get clogged or at least my ears get clogged, that's because of pressure buildup in the various tubes of the inner ear, et cetera, we'll get into this. But years ago, our good friend Harvey Karten, is a another world-class neuroanatomist gave a lecture and talked about how plugging your nose and blowing out versus plugging your nose and sucking in should be done at different times depending on whether or not you're taking off or landing. And I always see people trying to unpop their ears. - Right. - And when you do scuba diving you learn how to do this without necessarily I can do it by just kind of moving my jaw now 'cause I've done a little bit of diving. But what's the story there? We don't have to get into all the differences in atmospheric pressure, et cetera, but if I'm taking off and my ears are plugged, I've recently ascended, plane take off, my ears are plugged, do I plug my nose and blow out, or do I plug my nose and suck in? - Right, so the basic idea is that, if your ears feel bad because you're going into an area of higher pressure, so if they pressurize the cabin more than the pressure that you have on the surface of the planet, your eardrums will be bending in and they don't like that. If you push them more they'll hurt even more. - It's a good description that the pressure goes up then they're going to bend in. - Bend in and then reverse would be true if you go into an area of low pressure. So if you knew you started to drive up the mountain side the pressure's getting lower and lower outside, now the air behind your eardrum is ballooning out. - Yep. - Right? So it's just a question of are you trying to get more pressure or less pressure behind the eardrum and there's a little tube that does that and comes down into back your throat there. And if you force pressure up that tube, you're going to be putting more air pressure into the compartment. - To counter it. - If it's not enough and if you're sucking you're going the other way. In reality, I think as long as you open the passageway, I think the pressure differential is going to solve your problem. So I think you could actually blow in when you're not supposed to. - Okay, so you could just hold your nose and blow air out, or hold your nose and suck in the. - Right. - Effect either way is fine? - I think so. - Excellent, I just won $100 from Harvey Karten. [laughs] - Thank you very much, this is a lot. Harvey and I used to teach neuroanatomy together and I was like I don't think it matters, but thank you very much, I'll split that with you. - Okay. [laughs] - This is important stuff. But it's true you hear this. So it doesn't matter either way. - I'm no expert in this area. - Don't worry. - Don't quote me. - He's not going to, well, I'm going to quote you. But, okay, so we've talked about the inner ear, we've talked about the cerebellum. I want to talk about an area of the brain that is rarely discussed which is the midbrain. - Yeah. - And for those that don't know, the midbrain is an area beneath the cortex. I guess we never really defined cortex was kind of the outer layers or are the outer layers of the at least mammalian brain or human brain. But the midbrain is super interesting, because it controls a lot of unconscious stuff, reflexes, et cetera. And then there's this phenomenon even called blind sight. So could you please tell us about the midbrain about what it does, and what in the world is sight? - Yeah, so there's a lot of pieces there. I think the first thing to say is, if you imagine the nervous system in your mind's eye, you see this big honking brain and then there's this little wand that dangles down into your vertical column the spinal cord and that's kind of your visual impression. What you have to imagine is starting in the spinal cord and working your way up into this big magnificent brain and what you would do as you enter the skull, is get into a little place where the spinal cord kind of thickens out. It still has that sort of long, skinny trunk-like feeling. - It's more like a paddle or a spoon shape. - Right, it starts to spread out a little bit and that's 'cause your evolutionists packed more interesting goodies in there for processing information and generating movement. So beyond that is this tween brain we were talking about. This linker brain with diencephalon really means the between brain. - Oh, I thought you said tween. - Well, it is, yes. - No, no, no, between. Between. - Between. [indistinct] - You said tween. - Yeah, it's the between, it's the between brain is what the name means. It's the linker from the spinal cord in the periphery up to these grand centers of the cortex. But this midbrain you're talking about is the last bit of this enlarged sort of spinal cordy thing in your skull, which is really the brain stem is what we call it. The last bit of that before you get to this relay up to the cortex is the midbrain. And there's a really important visual center there, it's called the superior colliculus. There's a similar center in the brains of other vertebrate animals a frog for example or a lizard, would have this is called the optic tectum there but it's a center, then in these non-mammalian vertebrates, is really the main visual center. They don't really have what we would call a visual cortex although there's something sort of like that. But this is where most of the action is in terms of interpreting visual input and organizing behavior around that. You can sort of think about this region of the brain stem as a reflex center that can reorient the animal's gaze or body or maybe even attention to particular regions of space out there around the animal and that could be for all kinds of reasons. It might be a predator just showed up in one corner of the forest and you pick that up and you're trying to avoid it. - Or just any movement. - Any movement, right? It might be that suddenly something splats on the page when you're reading a novel and your eye reflexively looks at it. You don't have to think about that, that's a reflex. - What if you throw me a ball but I'm not expecting it? - Right. - And I just reach up try and grab it touch it or not. Is that handled by the midbrain? - Well, that's probably not the midbrain although by itself, because it's going to involve all these limb movements, this movement of your arm and body. - What about ducking if something's suddenly thrown in your head? - Sure, right, things like that will certainly have a brainstem component, a midbrain component, something looms and you duck. It may not be the superior colliculus we're talking about now, it might be another part of the visual midbrain. But these are centers that emerged early in the evolution of brains like ours to handle complicated visual events that have significance for the animal in terms of space, where is it in space? And in fact, this same center actually gets input from all kinds of other sensory systems that take information from the external world from particular locations and where you might want to either avoid or approach things according to their significance to you. So you get input from the touch system, you get input from the auditory system. I work for a while in rattlesnakes, they get input from a part of their warm sensors on their face, they're in these little pits on the face. - To work on baby rattlesnakes, right? - They were adults. - Oh, I wasn't trying to diminish the danger. I thought for some reason they were little ones. - No. - Why in the world would you work on rattlesnakes? - Well, because they have a version of an extra receptive sensory system that is they're looking out into the world using a completely different set of sensors. They're using the same sensors that would feel the warmth on your face if you stood in front of a bonfire. Except, evolution has given them this very nice specialized system that lets them image where the heat's coming from. You can sort of do that anyway, right? If you walk around the fire, you can feel where the fire is from the heat hitting your face. - Is that the primary way in which they detect prey? - It's one of one of the major ways. And in fact, they use vision as well and they bring these two systems together in the same place in this tectum regions brain stem, midbrain. - What's the tongue jutting about when the snakes? - That I don't know. That may be old factory, they're maybe. - They're sniffing the air with their tongue? - Yeah, there may be, 'cause. - On our drive you told me that flies actually taste things with their feet. - They do, yeah. - That's so weird. - Yeah, they have taste receptors and lots of funny places. I want to pause here just for one second before we get back into the midbrain. I think what's so interesting in all seriousness about taste receptors on feet, heat sensors, tongues shutting out of snakes and vision and all this integration is that, it really speaks to the fact that all these sensory neurons are trying to gather information and stuff it into a system that can make meaningful decisions and actions. And that it really doesn't matter whether or not it's coming from eyes or ears or nose or bottoms of feet, because in the end, it's just electricity flowing in. And so it sounds like it's placed on each animal, it always feels weird to call fly an animal. But they are creatures, they are animals. It's placed in different locations on different animals depending on the particular needs of that animal. - Right, but how much more powerful if the nervous systems can also cross-correlate across sensory systems? So if you've got a weak signal from one sensory system, you're not quite sure there's something there. And a weak signal from an another sensory system that's telling you the same locations is a little bit interesting. There might be something there if you've got those two together you've got corroboration. Your brain now says it's much more likely that that's going to be something worth paying attention to. - Right, so maybe I'm feeling some heat on one side of my face and I also smell something baking in the oven. - Right. - So now there's, it's neither is particularly strong, but as you said, there's some corroboration. - Right. And that corroboration is occurring in the midbrain. - Right, and then if you throw things into conflict, now the brain is confused and that may be where your emotion sickness comes from. So it is great to have, as a brain, it's great to have as many sources of information as you can have, just like if you're a spy or a journalist, you don't want as much information as you can get about what's out there, but if things conflict, that's problematic, right? Your sources are giving you different information about what's going on. Now you've got a problem on your hands, what do you publish? - The midbrain is so fascinating. I don't want to eject us from the midbrain and go back to the vestibular system, but I do have a question that I forgot to ask about the vestibular system which is, why is it that for many people including me, despite my motion sickness in cabs, that there's a sense of pleasure in moving through space and getting tilted relative to the gravitational pull of the earth? For me growing up it was skateboarding, but people like to corner in cars, corner on bikes, maybe for some people it's done running or dance. But what is it about moving through space and getting tilted a lot of surfers around here. Getting tilted that can tap into some of the pleasure centers. Do we have any idea why that would feel like? - I have no clue. - Is there dopaminergic input to this system? - Well, the dopaminergic system gets a lot of places. It's pretty much to some extent everywhere in the cortex a lot more in the frontal lobe of course, but that's just for starters. There's basically dopaminergic innervation most places in the central nervous system. So there's the potential for dopamine urging involvement but I really have no clue about the tilting phenomenon. - People pay money to go on roller coasters. - Right, well, I think that may be as much about the thrill as anything. - Sure. And the falling reflex is very robust in all of us when the visual world's going up very fast it usually means that we're falling. - Right. - But some people like that, some people don't. - Right. And kids tolerate a lot more sort of vestibular craziness spinning around until they've dropped. - And I've friends, it always you worries me a little bit that they throw their kids. I'm not recommending anyone do this. When they're little like throwing the kids really far back and forth, some kids seem to love it. - Yeah, yeah, our son loved being shaken up and down very vigorously, that's the only thing that would calm him down sometimes. - Interesting, yeah, so I'm guessing we can guess that maybe there's some activation of the reward systems from. - Yeah. - Being moving through space. - Well, if you think about how rewarding it is to be able to move through space and how unhappy people are who are used to that who suddenly aren't able to do that, there is a sense of agency, right? If you can choose to move through the world and to tilt, that's not only you're moving through the world, but you're doing it with a certain amount of finesse, maybe that's what it is. You can feel like you're the master of your own movement in a way that you wouldn't if you're going straight. I'm just blowing smoke here, right? - Yeah, well, we can speculate, that's fine. I couldn't help but ask the question. Okay, so if we move ourselves pun intended back into the midbrain, the midbrain is combining all these different signals for reflexive action. At what point does this become deliberate action? Because if I look at something I want and I want to pursue it, I'm going to go toward it and many times that's a deliberate decision. - Right, so this gets very slippery I think, because what you have to try to imagine is all these different parts of the brain working on the problem of staying alive and surviving in the world, they're working on the problem simultaneously, and there's not one right answer how to do that. But one way to think about it is that, you have high levels of your nervous system that are very well designed to override an otherwise automatic movement if it's inappropriate. So if you imagine you've been invited to tea with the queen and she hands you very fancy Wedgewood teacup very thin. - Wedgewood teacup? - Yes, with very hot tea in it and you're burning your hand, you probably will try to find a way to put that back down on the saucer rather than just dropping it on the floor because you're with the queen. You're trying to be appropriate to that. So you have ways of reining in automatic behaviors if they're going to be maladaptive. But you also want the reflex to work quickly if it's the only thing that's going to save you. The looming object coming at your head, you don't have time to think about that. So this is the interplay in these hierarchically organized centers of the nervous system at the lowest level. You've got the automatic sensors and centers and reflex arcs that will keep you safe even if you don't have time to think about it, and then you've got the higher center saying, well, maybe we could do this as well or maybe we shouldn't do that at all, right? So you have all these different levels operating simultaneously and you need bi-directional communication between high-level, cognitive centers, decision-making on the one hand, and these low-level very helpful reflexive centers, but they're a little bit rigid, a little hard-wired so they need some nuance. So they're both of these things are operating in tandem in real time, all the time in our brains and sometimes we listen more to one than the other. You've heard people in sports talking about messing up at the play 'cause they over thought it. Thinking too hard about it. That's partly you've already trained your cerebellum how to hit a fastball right down the middle. - Right, and if you start looking for something new or different, you're going to mess up your reflexive swing. - Right, if you're trying to think about the physics of the ball as it's coming at you, you've already missed, right? Because you're not using your, all those reps have built a kind of knowledge is what you want to rely on when you don't have enough time to contemplate. - This is important and a great segue for what I'd like to discuss next which is the basal ganglia. This really interesting of the area of the brain that's involved in go-type commands and behaviors instructing us to do things and no-go preventing us from doing things. Because so much of motor learning and skill execution and not saying the wrong thing or sitting still in class or as you use with the tea with the queen example feeling discomfort involves suppressing behavior and sometimes it's activating behavior. - Right. - A tremendous amount of online attention is devoted to trying to get people motivated. This isn't the main focus of our podcast. We touch on some of the underlying neural circuits of motivation dopamine and so forth. But so much of what people struggle with out there are elements around failure to pay attention. - Right. - Or challenges in paying attention which is essentially like putting the blinders on and they're getting a soda straw view of the world and maintaining that for a about of work or something of that sort and trying to get into action. So of course, this is carried out by many neural circuits not just the basal ganglia. But what are the basal ganglia, and what are their primary roles in controlling go type behavior and no-go type behavior? - Yeah, so the basal ganglia are sitting deep in what you would call the forebrains or the highest levels of the brain. They are sort of cousins to the cerebral cortex which we talked about as sort of the highest level of your brain, the thing you're thinking with. - The cerebral cortex being the refined cousins and then you've got the. - Right. - The brute, yeah. - Yeah. That's probably totally unfair, but. - That's right, I like the basal ganglia. I can relate to the brutish parts of the brain. A little bit of hypothalamus, a little bit of basal ganglia, sure. - We need it all, we need it all. And this area of the brain has gotten a lot bigger as the cortex has gotten bigger and it's deeply intertwined with cortical function. The cortex can't really do what it needs to do without the help of the basal ganglia and vice versa. So they're really intertwined. And in a way you can think about this logically is saying, if you have the ability to withhold behavior or to execute it, how do you decide which to do? Well, the cortex is going to have to do that thinking for you. You have to be looking at all the contingencies of your situation to decide is this a crazy move, or is this a really smart investment right now or what? - I don't want to go out for a run in the morning, but I'm going to make myself go out for a run, or I'm having a great time out on a run and I know I need to get back but I kind of want to go another mile. - I mean, another great example is that, the marshmallow test for the little kids. They can get two marshmallows if they hold off just 30 seconds initially, they can have one right away. But if they can wait 30 seconds, they got two. So that's the no go because their cortex is saying, I would really like to have two more than having one. But they're not going to get the two unless they can not reach for the one. So they've got to hold off the action and that has to result from a cognitive process. So the cortex is involved in this in a major way. - Yeah, as I recall in that experiment, the kids used a variety of tools. Some would distract themselves. I particularly related to the kid that would just put himself right next to the marshmallows and then some of the kids covered their eyes, some of them would count or sing. Yeah, so that's all very cortical, right? Coming up with a novel strategy, simple example that we're using here. But of course, this is at play anytime someone decides they want to go watch a motivational speech or something just a Steve Jobs commencement speech just to get motivated to engage in their day. - Should I take this new job? It's got great benefits, but it's in a lousy part of the country. - Why do you think that some people have a harder time running these go no-go circuits and other people seem to have very low activation energy we would say, they could just, they have a task, they just lean into the task. - Right. - Whereas some people getting into task completion or things of that sort is very challenging for them? - Yeah, I think it's really just another, it's a special case of a very general phenomenon which is brains are complicated. And the brains we have are the result of genetics and experience, and my genes are different from your genes and my experiences are different from your experiences. So the things that would be easy or hard for us won't necessarily be aligned, they might just happen to be just because they are, but the point is that, you're dealt a certain set of cards, you have certain set of genes, you are handed a brain, you don't choose your brain it's handed to you. Then there's all this stuff you can do with it. You can learn to have new skills or to act differently or to show more restraint which is kind of relevant to what we're talking about here. Or maybe show less restraint if your problem is you're so buttoned down, you never have any fun in life and you should loosen up a little bit. - Thank you, I appreciate that. - Yeah. - Yeah. [laughs] David's always encouraging me to have a little more fun in life. [laughs] So basil ganglia they're kind of the disciplinarian or they're sort of the instructor conductor of sorts, right? Go, no-go, you be quiet, you start now. - I wish I knew more about the basal ganglia than I do. My sense is that, this system is key for implementing the plans that get cooked up in the cortex, but they also influence the plans that the cortex is dishing out because this is a major source of information to the cortex. So it becomes almost impossible to figure out where the computation begins and where it ends and who's doing what because these things are all interacting in a complex network, and it's all of it. It's the whole network, it's not one is the leader and the other is the follower. - Right, of course, yeah, these are all the structures that we're discussing are working in parallel. - Right. - And there's a lot of changing crosstalk. I have this somewhat sick habit David. Every day I try and do 21 no-gos. So if I want to reach for my phone, I try and not do it just to see if I can prevent myself from engaging in that behavior, if it was reflexive, if it's something I want to do a deliberate choice, then I certainly allow myself to do it. - Right. - I don't tend to have too much trouble with motivation with go type functions, mostly because I'm so busy that I'd wish I had more time for more goes so to speak. But do you think these circuits have genuine plasticity in them? - Absolutely, everybody knows how they've learned over time to wait for the two marshmallows, right? You don't have to have instant gratification all the time. You're willing to do a job sometimes it isn't your favorite job because it comes with the territory and you want the salary that comes at the end of the week or the end of the month, right? So we can defer gratification. We can choose not to say the thing that we know is going to inflame our partner and create a meltdown for the next week. We learn this control, but I think these are skills like any other you can get better at them if you practice them. So I think you're choosing to do that to spontaneously, is kind of a mental practice, it's a discipline, it's a way of building a skill that you want to have. - Yeah, I find it to be something that when I engage in a no-go type situation, then the next time and the next time that I find myself about to move reflexively, there's a little gap in consciousness that I can make a decision whether or not this is really the best use of my time. Because sometimes I wonder whether or not all this business around attention certainly there's the case of ADHD and clinical diagnosed ADHD. But all the issue around focus and attention is really that people just have not really learned how to short circuit a reflex. And so much of what makes us different than rattlesnakes, or well, actually they could be deliberate, but from the other animals and is our ability to suppress reflex. - Yeah, well, that's the cortex. Or let's say the forebrain. Cortex and basal ganglia are working together sitting on top of this lizard brain that's giving you all these great adaptive reflexes that help you survive. You just hope you don't get the surprising case where the thing that your reflex is telling you is actually exactly the wrong thing and you make a mistake, right? [indistinct] Right, so that's what the cortex is for. It's adding nuance and context and experience, past association and in human beings obviously, learning from others through communication. - Well, I was, you went right to it and it was where I was going to go. So let's talk about the cortex. We've worked our way up the so-called neuraxis as the aficionados will know, so we're in the cortex. This is the seat of our higher consciousness, self-image, planning and action. But as you mentioned, the cortex isn't just about that, it's got other regions that are involved in other things. So maybe we should staying with vision, let's talk a little bit about visual cortex. You told me an amazing story about visual cortex and it was somewhat of a sad story unfortunately about someone who had a stroke to visual cortex. Maybe if you would share that story because I think it illustrates many important principles about what the cortex does. - Right, so the visual cortex you could say the projection screen. The first place where this information streaming from the retina through this thalamus connecting linker gets played out for the highest level of your brain to see. It's a representation, it's a map of things going on in the visual world that's in your brain. And when we describe a scene to a friend, we're using this chunk of our brain to be able to put words which are coming from a different part of our cortex to the objects and movements and colors that we see in the world. So that's a key part of your visual experience when you can describe the things you're seeing, you're looking at your visual cortex, and this is. - Could I just ask a quick question? So right now because I'm looking at your face. - Right. - As we're talking, there are neurons in my brain more or less in the configuration of your face that are active as you move about. And what if I were to close my eyes and just imagine, I do this all the time by the way David. I close my eyes and i imagine David Berson's face. [laughs] I don't tend to do that as often, maybe I should. But you get the point, I'm now using visualization of what you look like by way of memory. - Right. - If we were to image the neurons in my brain, would the activity of neurons resemble the activity of neurons that's present when I open my eyes and look at your actual face? - This is a deep question, we don't really have a full. - It seems like. [indistinct] - Yes, except you're talking about looking in detail at the activity of neurons in a human brain and that's not as easy to do as it would be in some kind of animal model. But the bottom line is that, you have a spatial representation of the visual world late as a map of the visual world lay down on the surface of your cortex. The thing that's surprising is that, it's not one map, it's actually dozens of maps. - What do each of those maps do? - Well, we don't really have a full accounting there either, but it looks a little bit like the diversification of the output neurons of the retina, the ganglion cells we were talking about before. There are different types of ganglion cells that are encoding different kinds of information about the visual world, we talk about the ones that were encoding the brightness. but other ones are encoding motion or color these kinds of things, the same kinds of specializations in different representations of the visual world in the cortex seem to be true. It's a complex story, we don't have the whole picture yet, but it does look as if some parts of the brain are much more important for things like reaching for things in the space around you. And other parts of the cortex are really important for making associations between particular visual things you're looking at now and their significance. What is that object, what can it do for me, how can I use it? - What about the really specialized areas of cortex like neurons that respond to particular faces, or neurons that I don't know can help me understand where I am relative to some other specific object? - Right, so these are our properties of neurons that are extracted from detected by recording the activity of single neurons in some experimental system. What's going on when you actually perceive your grandmother's face, is a much more complicated question and it clearly involves hundreds and thousands and probably millions of neurons acting in a cooperative way. So you can pick out any one little element in this very complicated system and see that it's responding differentially to certain kinds of visual patterns and you think you're seeing a glimpse of some part of the process by which you recognize your grandmother's face. But that's a long way from a complete description and it certainly isn't going to be at the level of a magic single neuron that has the special stuff to recognize your grandmother, it's going to be in some pattern of activity across many, many cells resonating in some kind of special way that will represent the internal memory of your mother. - So it's really incredible? - Yeah. - I mean that every time we do this deep dive which we do from time to time, you and I we kind of like march into the nervous system and explore how different aspects of our life experiences is handled there and how it's organized. After so many decades of doing this, it still boggles my mind that the collection of neurons one through seven active in a particular sequence gives the memory of a particular face and run backwards seven through to one, it gives you a, it could be rattlesnake pit viper heat sensing organs. - Right. - You were talking about earlier. So it sounds, is it true that there's a lot of multi-purposing of the circuitry, like we can't say one area of the brain does A and another area of the brain does B. So areas can multitask or have multiple jobs. They can moonlight. - Right, but I think in my career, the hard problem has been to square that with the fact that things are specialized that there are specific genes expressed in specific neurons that make them make synaptic connections with only certain other neurons. And that particular synaptic arrangement actually results in the processing of information that's useful to the animal to survive, right? So it's not as if it's either a big undifferentiated network of cells and looking at any one is never going to tell you anything that's too extreme on the one hand, nor is it the case that everything is hardwired and every neuron has one function and this all happens in one place in the brain, it's way more complicated and interactive and interconnected than that. - So we're not hardwired or soft-wired? - Both. - We're sort of, I don't know what the analogy should be what substance would work best David? - No idea there, but the idea is that, it's always network activity. There's always many, many neurons involved and yet there's tremendous specificity in the neurons that might or might not be participating in any distributed function like that, right? So you have to get your mind around the fact that it's both very specific and very non-specific at the same time. It's a little tricky to do, but I think that's kind of where the truth lies. - Yeah, and so this example that you mentioned to me once before about a woman who had a stroke in visual cortex, I think it speaks to some of this. - Right. - Could you share with us that story? - Sure, so the point is that, all those of us who see have representations of the visual world in our visual cortex. What happens to somebody when they become blind because of problems in the eye, the retina perhaps? You have a big chunk of the cortex, this really valuable [indistinct] for neural processing that has come to expect input from the visual system and there isn't any anymore. So you might think about that as fallow land, right? It's just used by the nervous system and that would be a pity, but it turns out that it is in fact used. And the the case that you're talking about is of a woman who was blind from very early in her life and who had risen through the ranks to a very high level executive secretarial position in a major corporation. And she was extremely good at braille reading and she had a braille typewriter and that's how everything was done. And apparently, she had a stroke and was discovered at work, collapsed and brought her to the hospital. And apparently, the neurologist who saw her when she finally came to said, "I've got good news and bad news." Bad news is you've had a stroke, the good news is that it was in an area of your brain you're not even using it's your visual cortex and I know you're blind from birth so there shouldn't be any issue here." The problem was, she lost her ability to read braille. So what appears to have been the case and this has been confirmed in other ways by imaging experiments in humans is that, in people who are blind from very early in birth, the visual cortex gets repurposed as a center for processing tactile information. And especially if you train to be a good braille reader, you're actually reallocating somehow that real estate to your fingertips. A part of the cortex that should be listening to the eyes. So that's an extreme level of plasticity. But what it shows, is the visual cortex is kind of a general purpose processing machine, it's good at spatial information and the skin of your fingers is just another spatial sense and deprived of any other input the brain seems smart enough if you want to put it that way to rewire itself to use that real estate for something useful, in this case, reading braille. - Incredible, somewhat tragic, but incredible. At least in that case tragic, yeah. - Very informative. - Very informative. And of course it can go the other way too. - Right. - Where people can gain function in particular modalities like improved hearing or tactile function in the absence of vision. - Right. - Tell us about connectomes, we hear about genomes, proteomes, microbiomes, ohms, ohms, ohms these days. - Yeah. - What's a connectome and why is it valuable? - Yeah, so the connectome actually now has two meanings. So I'll only refer to one that is my passion right now. And that is really trying to understand the structure of nervous tissue at a scale that's very, very fine. - Smaller than a millimeter. - Way smaller than a millimeter, a nanometer or less, as that's 1,000 times smaller, or it's actually a million times smaller. So really, really tiny on the scale of individual synapses between individual neurons or even smaller like the individual synaptic vesicles containing little packets of neurotransmitter they're going to get it released to allow one neuron to communicate to the next. So very, very fine, but the notion here is that, you're doing this section after section at very fine scale. So in theory what you have is a complete description of a chunk of nervous tissue that is so complete that if you took enough time to identify where the boundaries of all the cells are, you could come up with a complete description of the synaptic wiring of that chunk of nervous tissue because you have a complete description of where all the cells are and where all the synapses between where all the cells are. So now you essentially have a wiring diagram of this complicated piece of tissue. So the omics part is the exhaustiveness of it rather than looking at a couple of synapses that are interesting to you from two different cell types. You're looking at all the synapses of all of the cell types which of course is this massive avalanche of data, right? - So in genetics, you have genetics and then you have genomics which is the idea of getting the whole genome. - All of it. - And we don't really have an analogous word for genetics, but it would be connectivity and [indistinct]. - Right. [indistinct] - Right, so it's wanting it all and of course it's crazy ambitious, but that's where it gets fun. Really it's a use of electron microscopy, a very high resolution microscopic imaging system on a new scale with way more payoff in terms of understanding the connectivity of the nervous system and it's just emerging, but I really think it's going to revolutionize the field because we're going to be able to query these circuits how do they actually do it, look at the hardware in a way that's never been possible before. - The the way that I describe this to people is if you were to take a chunk of kind of cooked but cold spaghetti. - Right. - And slice it up very thin you're trying to connect up each image of each slice of the edge of the spaghetti as figure out which ropes of spaghetti belong to which. - And have a complete description of where this piece of spaghetti touches that piece of spaghetti is there's something special there obviously. - Meat sauces and all the other cell types and the pesto where it all is around the spaghetti because those are the other cells, the blood vessels and the glial cells. And so, what's it good for? Maps are great, I always think of connectomics and genomics and proteomics, et cetera as necessary, but not sufficient. - Right. Right, so I mean in many cases what you do is you go out and probe the function and you understand how the brain does the function by finding neurons that seem to be firing in association with this function that you're observing. And little by little you're work your way in and now you want to know what the conductivity is maybe the anatomy could help you. But this connectomics approach or at least the serial electron microscopy reconstruction of neurons approach, really is allowing us to frame questions starting from the anatomy and saying, I see a synaptic circuit here, my prediction would be that these cell types would interact in a particular way, is that right? And then you can go and probe the physiology and you might be right or you might be wrong. But more often than not, it looks like the structure is pointing us in the right direction. So in my case, I'm using this to try to understand a circuit that is involved in this image stabilization network we're talking about, keeping things stable on the retina and this thing will only respond at certain speeds of motion. These cells in the circuit like slow motion they won't respond to fast motion, how does that come about? Well, I was able to probe the circuitry, I knew what my cells looked like, I could see which other cells were talking to it, I could categorize all the cells that might be the players here that are involved in this mechanism of tuning the thing for slow speeds, and then we said it looks like it's that cell type and we went and looked and the data bore that up. But the anatomy drove the search for the particular cell type because we could see it connected in the right place to the right cells. So creates the hypothesis that lets you go query the physiology, but it can go the other way as well. So it's always the synergy between these functional and structural approaches it gives you the most lift. But in many cases, the anatomy has been a little bit the weak sister in this. The structure trying to work out the diagram because we haven't had the methods. Now the methods exist and this whole field is expanding very quickly, because people want these circuit diagrams for the particular part of the nervous system that they're working on. If you don't know the cell types and the connections, how do you really understand how the machine works? - Yeah, what I love about is, we don't know what we don't know. - Right. - And scientists we don't ask questions, we pose hypotheses. Hypotheses being of course some prediction that you wager your time on basically. - Right. - And it either turns out to be true or not true, but if you don't know that a particular cell type is there, you could never in any configuration of life or a career or exploration of a nervous system wager a hypothesis because you didn't know it was there. So this allows you to say ah, there's a little interesting little connection between this cell that I know is interesting in another cell that's a little mysterious but interesting, I'm going to hypothesize that it's doing blank, blank and blank and go test that. And in the absence of these connectomes, you would never know that that cell was lurking there in the shadows. - Right, right, yeah. And if you're just trying to understand how information flows through this biological machine, you want to know where things are. Neurotransmitters are dumped out of the terminals of one cell and they diffuse across the space between the two cells which is kind of a liquidy space and they hit some receptors on the postsynaptic cell and they have some impact. Sometimes that's not through a regular synapse, sometimes it's through a neuromodulator like you often talk about on your podcast that are sort of. - Dopamine. - Dopamine, exactly. Oozing into the space between the cells and it may be acting at some distance far from where it was released, right? But if you don't know where the release is happening and where other things are that might respond to that release you're groping around in the dark. - Well, I love that you are doing this and I have to share with the listeners that, the first time I ever met David and every time I've ever met with him in-person at least at his laboratory at Brown, he was in his office, door closed, drawing neurons and their connections. [laughs] And this is somewhat unusual for somebody who's a endowed full professor or chairman of the department et cetera for many years to be doing the hands-on work. Typically, that's the stuff that's done by technicians or graduate students or postdocs. But I think it's fair to say that you really love looking at nervous systems and drawing the accurate renditions of how those nervous systems are organized and thinking about how they work. - Yeah, it's pure joy for me. I mean, I'm a very visual person, my wife is an artist, we look a lot of art together just the forms of things are gorgeous in their own right. But to know that the form is in a sense the function that the architecture of the connectivity is how the computation happens in the brain at some level even though we don't fully understand that in most contexts, gives me great joy 'cause I'm working on something that's both visually beautiful but also deeply beautiful in a sort of a higher sort of knowledge context, what is it all about. - I love it, well, as a final question, I get asked very often about how people should learn about neuroscience, or how they should go about pursuing maybe an education in neuroscience if they're at that stage of their life or that's appropriate for their current trajectory. Do you have any advice to young people, old people, anything in between about how to learn about the nervous system more maybe in a more formal way? I mean obviously, we have our podcast, there are other sources of neuroscience information out there, but for the young person who thinks they want to understand the brain, they want to learn about the brain, what should we tell them? - Well, that's a great question. And there's so many sources out there. It's almost a question of how do you deal with this avalanche of information out there, I think your podcast is a great way for people to learn more about the nervous system in an accessible way. But there's so much stuff out there and it's not just that. I mean, the resources are becoming more and more available for average folks to participate in neuroscience research on some level. There's this famous Eyewire project of Sebastian. - Oh yeah, maybe you let us about Eyewire. - Yeah, so that's connectomics and that's a situation where a very clever scientist realized that the physical work of doing all this reconstruction of neurons from these electron micro-graphs, there's a lot of time involved. Many, many person hours have to go into that to come up with the map that you want of where the cells are, and he was very clever about setting up a context in which he could crowdsource this and people who were interested in getting a little experience looking at nervous tissue and participating in a research project could learn how to do this and do a little bit. - From their living room. - From their living room. - We'll put a link to Eyewire, it also is a great bridge between what we were just talking about connectomics and actually participating in research. - Right. - And you don't need a graduate mentor or anything like that. - Right. So more of this is coming and I'm actually interested in building more of this so that people who are interested, want to participate at some level don't necessarily have the time or resources to get involved in laboratory research can get exposed to it and participate and actually contribute, so I think that's one thing. I mean, just asking questions of the people around you who know a little bit more and have them point you in the right direction. Here's a book you might like to read, there's lots of great popular books out there that are accessible that will give you some more sense of the full range of what's out there in the neurosciences. - We can put some links to a few of those that we like. - Right. - On basic neuroscience. - Right. - Our good friend Dick Masland, the late Richard, people call him Dick Masland had a good book. I forget the title at the moment. It's sitting behind me somewhere over there on the shelf about vision and how nervous systems work. A pretty accessible book for the general public. - Right - Yeah. - Right, so that, and there's so many sources out there. I mean, Wikipedia is a great way. If you have a particular question about visual function, I would say by all means, head to Wikipedians and get the first look and follow the the references from there, or go to your library, or there's so many ways to get into it, it's such an exciting field now. There's so many, I mean, any particular realm that's special to you, your experience, your strengths, your passions, there's a field of neuroscience devoted to that. If you know somebody who's got a neurological problem or a psychiatric problem, there's a branch of neuroscience that is devoted to trying to understand that and to solve these kinds of problems down the line. So feel the buzz, it's an exciting time to get involved. - Great, those are great resources that people can access from anywhere zero-cost as you need an internet connection. But aside from that, we'll put the links to some. And I'm remembering, Dick's book is called, "We Know It When We See It." - Right, one of my heroes. - Yeah, a wonderful colleague who unfortunately we lost a few years ago. But listen David, this has been wonderful. - It's been a blast. - We really appreciate you taking the time to do this as people probably realize by now you're an incredible wealth of knowledge about the entire nervous system, today we just hit this top contour of a number of different areas to give a flavor of the different ways that the nervous system works and is organized and how that's put together, how these areas are talking to one another. What I love about you is that you're such an incredible educator and I've taught so many students over the years. But also for me personally as friends, but also any time that I want to touch into the the beauty of the nervous system, I rarely lose touch with it. But anytime I want to touch into it and start thinking about new problems and ways that the nervous system is doing things that I hadn't thought about, I call you. So please forgive me for the calls past, present and future unless you change your number. And even if you do, I'll be calling. - It's been such a blast Andy. This has been a great session and it's always fun talking to you. It always gets my brain racing, so thank you. - Thank you, thank you for joining me today for my discussion with Dr. David Berson. By now, you should have a much clearer understanding of how the brain is organized and how it works to do all the incredible things that it does. If you're enjoying and/or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. As well if you'd like to make suggestions for future podcast episode topics, or future podcast episode guests, please put those in the comments section on our YouTube channel. Please also check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of each podcast. That's the best way to support us. And we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support us at any level that you like. While today's discussion did not focus on supplements, many previous podcast episodes include discussions about supplements. And while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive benefit from them for things like sleep or focus or anxiety relief and so on. One issue with the supplement industry however, is that oftentimes the quality will really vary across brands. That's why we partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are of the absolute highest standards in terms of the quality of the ingredients that include and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients they include, in other words, what's listed on the bottle, is what's actually found in the bottle, which is not true of many supplements out there that have been tested. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman, and there you can see the supplements that I take and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site through that portal thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne happens to make. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter, feel free to do so. Both places I regularly post short video posts, or text posts that give tools related to health and neuroscience and so forth. And most of the time, that information is non-overlapping with the information on the podcast. Again, it's just Huberman Lab on Instagram and Twitter. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 298 ---
Video ID: 31wjVhCcI5Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=31wjVhCcI5Y
Title: Erasing Fears & Traumas Based on the Modern Neuroscience of Fear
Published: 2021-12-06 13:00:03 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss fear and trauma, including the neural circuits involved in the "threat reflex" and how specific experiences and memories come to activate that system. I also discuss how our body is involved in trauma and fear. First, I describe the logic of fear mechanisms and how "top-down" processing-- meaning connections from the parts of the brain that assign meaning to our feelings, are involved in fear and erasing fears and traumas. Then I discuss what successful fear and trauma treatment must include and consider various treatments for whether they meet that standard, such as EMDR, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Ketamine and other drug-assisted therapies and more. I also review new data on how 5 minutes per day of deliberate, self-imposed stress can erase fear and depression. And I review the role that social connection plays in erasing or maintaining fears by activating specific molecular pathways in the brain and body. Finally, I review supplementation with over-the-counter compounds for their effects on anxiety and fear and when to take them, if at all.

#fear #trauma #stress

Thank you to our sponsors:
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Fear, Trauma & Trauma 
00:02:15 Athletic Greens, InsideTracker, Helix Sleep
00:06:49 What is Fear? 
00:11:45 Autonomic Arousal: “Alertness” vs. “Calmness”
00:13:44 Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis (HPA axis)
00:17:36 “The Threat Reflex”: Neural Circuits for Fear
00:28:24 Controlling Fear: Top-Down Processing
00:32:27 Narratives: “Protective or Dangerous”
00:35:58 Attaching Fear to Events: Classical Conditioning & Memory
00:41:45 How Fear Learning Occurs: Long Term Potentiation, NMDA
00:46:10 Extinguishing (Reducing) Fears
00:50:25 Cognitive (Narrative) Therapies for Fear
00:57:56 Repetition of Narrative, Overwriting Bad Experiences with Good
01:05:28 EMDR: Eye Movement Desensitization Reprocessing
01:14:00 Social Connection & Isolation Are Chemically Powerful
01:18:23 Trans-Generational Trauma
01:25:00 PTSD Treatments: Ketamine, MDMA, oxytocin
01:39:25 How Do You Know If You Are Traumatized? 
01:46:16 Deliberate Brief Stress Can Erase Fears & Trauma
01:49:50 Erasing Fears & Traumas In 5 Minutes Per Day
01:59:42 Nutrition, Sleep, & Other General Support Erasing Fear & Trauma
02:02:30 Supplements for Anxiety, Fear: Saffron, Inositol, Kava
02:10:00 Synthesis 
02:11:46 Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Patreon, Supplements, Instagram, Twitter

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright music] - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk about the Neuroscience of fear. We are also going to talk about trauma and post-traumatic stress disorders. The Neuroscience of fear has a long history in biology and in the field of psychology. However, I think it's fair to say that in the last 10 years, the field of Neuroscience has shed light on not just the neural circuits, meaning the areas of the brain that control the fear response and the ways that it does it, but some important ways to extinguish fears using behavioral therapies, drug therapies, and what we call brain machine interfaces. Today, we are going to talk about all of those, and you're going to come away with both an understanding of the biology of fear and trauma, as well as many practical tools to confront fear and trauma. In fact, we are going to discuss one very recently published study in which five minutes a day of deliberate exposure to stress was shown to alleviate longstanding depressive and fear related symptoms. We will get into the details of that study and the protocol that emerges from that study a little later in the podcast. But it stands as a really important somewhat counter-intuitive example of how stress itself can be used to combat fear. To give you a sense of where we are going, I'll just lay out the framework for today's podcast. First, I'm going to teach you about the biology of fear and trauma. Literally the cells and circuits and connections in the body and chemicals in the body that give rise to the so-called fear response. And why sometimes, but not always fear can turn into trauma. I will also describe the biology of how fear is unlearned or what we call extinguished. And there too, you're going to get some serious surprises. You're going to learn for instance, that we can't just eliminate fears. We actually have to replace fears with a new positive event. And again, there are tools with which to do that, and I will teach you those tools today. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens every day since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens is that it covers all of my vitamin mineral and probiotic needs. Nowadays, there's a lot of data out there pointing to the fact that a healthy gut microbiome, literally little microbes that live in our gut that are good for us is important to support our immune system, our nervous system, our endocrine system, and various aspects of our immediate and long-term health. With Athletic Greens, I get all the vitamins and minerals that I need. Plus the probiotics ensure a healthy gut microbiome. It also tastes really good. I mix mine up with some water, a little bit of lemon juice. I'll have that early in the day, and sometimes a second time later in the day as well. It's compatible with intermittent fasting, it's compatible with vegan diets, with keto diets and essentially every diet that you could possibly imagine out there. It's also filled with adaptogens for recovery. It has digestive enzymes for gut health and has a number of other things that support the immune system. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, to claim their special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. And they'll give you a year supply of Vitamin D3 K2. There's now a lot of evidence that vitamin D3 supports a huge number of metabolic factors, immune system factors, endocrine factors. Basically we need vitamin D3. We can get it from the sun, but many people are deficient in vitamin D3 even if they are getting what they think is sufficient sunlight. And K2 is important for cardiovascular health. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. You can claim their special offer, the five free travel packs plus the year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get information about how your specific genes are impacting your immediate and long-term health. Now a problem with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there is you get the numbers back but you don't know what to do with those numbers. With InsideTracker, they make it very simple to figure out what to do to bring those numbers into the ranges that are right for you. They have a dashboard that's very easy to use. You can see the numbers from your blood and or DNA tests. And it will point to specific lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, as well as supplementation, maybe even prescription factors that would be right for you to bring the numbers into range that are ideal for your immediate and long-term health goals. Another feature that InsideTracker has is their inner age test. This test shows you what your biological age is and compares that to your chronological age and what you can do to improve your biological age, which of course is the important number. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are of the absolute highest quality. I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress for close to a year now, and it's the best sleep that I've ever had. Helix has a quiz that takes about two minutes to complete and matches your body type and sleep preferences to the perfect mattress for you. Some people sleep on their side, some people sleep on their backs, some people sleep on their stomach. Some people run hot, some people run cold. Some people don't know which part of their body they sleep on. You take this test, it's very brief, two minutes. And after that test Helix we'll match you to the mattress that's ideal for you. I match to the so-called Dusk, D-U-S-K mattress, because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm, not too soft. And I like to sleep sort of on my stomach and kind of a crawling soldier position. That seems to be always how I wake up in the morning anyway. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minutes sleep quiz and they'll match it to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and you'll get two free pillows. Again, if you're interested, please go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. So what is fear? Well, fear falls into a category of nervous system phenomenon that we can reliably call an emotion. And it is hotly debated nowadays. And it's been hotly debated really for centuries what an emotion is and what an emotion isn't. Now that's not a debate that I want to get into today. I think it's fair to say that emotions include responses within our body. Quickening of heart rate, changes in blood flow, things that we experience as a warming or a cooling of our skin. But that there's also a cognitive component. There are thoughts, there are memories. There's all sorts of stuff that goes on in our mind and in our body that together we call an emotion. And there's a vast amount of interest in literature devoted to try and understand how many different emotions there are, how different people experience emotions. And that's certainly a topic that we will embrace in a future podcast episode. But today I just want to talk about fear as a response. Because when we talk about fear as a physiological response and as a cognitive response, then we can get down to some very concrete mechanisms and some very concrete and practical tools that can be used to deal with fear when fear is not wanted. So let's talk first about what fear isn't. Most people are familiar with stress, both as a concept and as an experience. Stress is a physiological response. It involves quickening of the heart rate. Typically quickening a breathing, blood flow getting shuttled to certain areas of the brain and body and not to others. It can create a hypervigilance or an awareness. Typically that awareness is narrower, literally narrower in space, like a soda straw view of the world than when we are relaxed. And it is fair to say that we cannot have fear without having several, if not all of the elements of the stress response. However, we can have stress without having fear. Likewise, people are familiar with the phrase or the word rather, anxiety. Anxiety tends to be stress about some future event, although it can mean other things as well. We can't really have fear without seeing or observing or experiencing some of the elements of anxiety, but we can have anxiety without having fear. So what you're starting to realize is that fear is built up from certain basic elements that include stress and anxiety. And then there is trauma. And trauma also requires a specific, what we will call operational definition. An operational definition is just a definition that allows us to have a conversation because we both agree on or mostly agree on what the meaning of a given word is. It makes conversations much easier. In fact, I would argue if we all had operational definitions for more things in the world, that there would be fewer misunderstandings and arguments and we'd all move a lot further as a species. But that's another topic entirely. The operational definition of trauma is that some fear took place, which of course includes stress and anxiety. And that fear somehow gets embedded or activated in our nervous system, such that it shows up at times when it's maladaptive. Meaning that fear doesn't serve us well and it gets reactivated at various times. Like when you first wake up in the morning, if you're not in the presence of something that scared you, but you suddenly have what feels like a panic attack and you're in deep fear. Well, that's post-traumatic stress. That's post-traumatic fear. So I don't want to get bogged down too much in the nomenclature but what I'm doing here is building up a sort of a series of layers where stress and anxiety form the foundation of what we're calling fear and trauma. And then there are other phrases out there that we would be remiss if we didn't mention things like phobias and panic attacks. Panic attacks are the experience of extreme fear but without any fear inducing stimulus. So it's kind of like trauma. And a phobia tends to be extreme fear of something specific. Fear of spiders, fear of heights, fear of flying, fear of dying, these kinds of things, okay? The reason for laying all that out there is not to create a word soup to confuse us rather it is to simplify the issue because now that we acknowledge that there are many different phrases to describe this thing that we call fear and unrelated phenomenon. We can start to just focus on two of these issues, fear and trauma. As it relates to specific biological processes, specific cognitive processes. And we can start to dissect how fears are formed, how fears are unformed and how new memories can come to replace previously fearful experiences. So in this effort to establish a common language around fear and trauma, I want to point out autonomic arousal. Autonomic arousal relates to this aspect of our nervous system, that we call the autonomic nervous system. Autonomic means automatic that somewhat of a misnomer, because there are aspects of your autonomic nervous system that you can control. But your autonomic nervous system controls things like digestion, urination, sexual behavior, stress. When you want to be awake, when you want to be asleep, it basically has two branches to it. Two branches, meaning two different systems. One is the so-called sympathetic autonomic nervous system. Has nothing to do with sympathy, it has everything to do with increasing alertness. Think of the sympathetic nervous system as the alertness nervous system. It's what ramps up your levels of alertness, ramps up your levels of vigilant. Think about it as the accelerator on your alertness and attention. The other branch of the autonomic nervous system is the so-called, parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system. I know that's a mouthful. The parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system are the cells and neurons and chemicals and other aspects of your brain and body that are involved in the calming nervous system. So sympathetic is alerting, parasympathetic is calming. And it acts as sort of a seesaw to adjust your overall level of alertness. So for instance, right now I'm alert, but I feel pretty calm. I'm not ready to go to sleep or anything like that. I don't feel like I need a nap. I'm alert, but I'm calm. I'm not in a state of stress or panic. So that seesaw we could imagine is more or less level. Maybe it's tilted up a little bit to the side of increased sympathetic or alertness rather than parasympathetic because I feel wide awake. If I were sleepy, the opposite would be true. The parasympathetic side would be increased relative to the sympathetic side. There are many different aspects of the autonomic nervous system, but one of the main aspects is an aspect that's going to come up again and again and again today, it's very important that you understand what it is. It's called the HPA axis. The HPA axis stands for Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis. The hypothalamus is a collection of neurons. It's an area of your brain real estate, that's deep in the brain at the base of the brain that contains many, many different areas that control things like temperature, and desire to have sex, desire to eat, thirst. It also controls the desire to not mate, to have sex, not to eat, not drink more water or any other type of fluid. So it has accelerators and brakes in there as well. The hypothalamus connects to the so-called pituitary, the pituitary lives close to the roof of your mouth. It releases hormones into your bloodstream. And so the hypothalamus has this ability to trigger the release or prevent the release of particular hormones like cortisol or the hormones that go stimulate ovaries to produce estrogen or testes to produce testosterone or adrenals to produce Adrenaline. And speaking of the adrenals that [indistinct] and the HPA are the adrenals. You have two glands that sit above your kidneys and your lower back. They receive signals by way of nerve cells neurons, and by way of hormones and other things released from the brain and elsewhere in the body. And they release different hormones and other types of chemicals into the body. And the two main ones that you need to know about today are Adrenaline also called Epinephrine and Cortisol. Both of those are so-called stress hormones, but they're not always involved in stress. They're also involved in waking up in the morning when you arrive... Excuse me, when you rise from sleep. And so this HPA axis, should be thought of in the following way. The HPA axis includes a piece of the brain, the hypothalamus, the pituitary, and the adrenals. So it's a beautiful three part system that can use your brain to alert or wake up your body and prepare it for action. And it can do that in the short term, by triggering the release of hormones and chemicals that make you alert and ready to go right away and by triggering the release of neurotransmitters and hormones and other chemicals that give that alertness a very long tail, a very long latency before it shuts off. And that's important because one of the hallmarks of fear and one of the hallmarks of trauma is that they involve fear responses that are long lasting. Even if those fearful events, the events in the world that trigger the HPA axis can be very brief, like a car that almost hits you as you step off the curb or something... A gunshot that goes off suddenly, and it's just a very quick, like, you know, 500 millisecond or 1 second event. The fear response can reverberate through your system because the chemicals that are involved in this HPA axis have a fast component and a longer-lasting component. And the longer-lasting component can actually change not just the connections of different areas of the brain and the way that our organs work like our heart and the way that we breathe. It actually can feed back to the brain and literally control gene expression. Which can take many days and build out new circuits and new chemicals that can embed fear in our brain and body. And that might sound very depressing but there's a reason. And there's an adaptive reason why there's the slow and fast phase of the HPA axis and the fear response. And fortunately, that gene expression and the long arc of the fear response, the way it kind of lives in our system kind of like a phantom in some ways can also be leveraged to undo the fear response, to extinguish the fear response and replace it with non fearful associations. So let's dig a little deeper into the neural circuits and biology of fear. Because in doing that, we can start to reveal the logic of how to attack fear if that's the goal. We can't have a discussion about fear without discussing the famous amygdala. Famous because I think most people by now have heard of the amygdala. Amygdala means almond. It's an almond shaped structure on both sides of the brain. So you have one on the right side of your brain, and one on the left side of your brain. The amygdala is part of what we can call the threat reflex. And this is very important to conceptualize fear as including a reflex. So much as you have reflexes that cause you to lift your foot up if you are just step on something sharp. You literally have a reflex within your spinal cord that causes you to lift up one foot and extend the other one toward the ground. Believe it or not, you always think you step on something sharp you pull your foot up. But you actually step on something sharp, you pull your foot up and in pulling it up there's another reflex that's activated that as you extend your other legs so that you don't fall over. Similarly in the process of experiencing fear, you have a reflex for particular events in your brain and body. And that reflex involves things like, quickening of your heart rate, hypervigilance, your attentional systems pop on, increased ability to access energy stores for movement and thought and so forth. But just like that step on the tack reflex example, all of the neural circuits that are associated with being calm, with being able to go to sleep, with being able to visualize the full picture of your environment, literally to see your entire environment, or to hear other things around you. All of those get shut down when the so-called threat reflex gets activated. And the amygdala is part of the threat reflect so much so that we can really say, that it's the final common pathway through which the threat reflex flows. In other words, the amygdala is essential for the threat response. But the threat reflex and the threat response is kind of a dumb response. It's not a sophisticated thing, it's very generic. And this is also a very important point. One of the beauties of the fear system is that it's very generalizable. It's not designed for you to be afraid of any one thing. Sure, there are some debates and probably some good data out there that support the fact that human babies are innately, meaning requires no learning. Innately afraid of certain things like heights, or snakes or spiders. There's debate about this. And they depends on the quality of the experiment, et cetera. But the real capacity of the fear system is that we can become afraid of anything provided that this threat system is activated in conjunction with some external experience. So the way I'd like you to think about the amygdala is not as a fear center, but that it's a critical component of the threat reflex. I'd like you to also internalize the idea that the threat reflex involves this activation of certain systems and suppression of all the systems for calming the parasympathetic system. And now I'm going to describe the way that information flows into and through this threat reflex. And in doing that, it will reveal how specific things, like a spider, like a snake, like a physical trauma, like a car accident, like a fear of public speaking, whatever happens to scare you or scare somebody, how that gets attached to this reflex. Because this reflex is very generic. It doesn't really know what to be afraid of. It only knows how to create this sensation, this internal landscape that we think of as fear. So while the amygdala might look like an almond, it's actually part of a much bigger complex or collection of neurons called the amygdaloid complex. That complex has anywhere from 12 to 14 areas depending on who's... Which neuroanatomist is naming things and carving it up in Neuroscience and in much of biology. We like to joke that there are lumpers and there are splitters. So some people like to draw boundaries between every little distinct difference and say, "Oh, that's a separate area and other people are lumpers." And they say, "Well, listen, you know why complicate things? Let's lump those together." I'm neither a lumper nor a splitter, I'm somewhere in between. I think the number 12 is a good number in terms of the number of different areas of the amygdala. Why is that important to us? Well, it turns out that the amygdala is not just a area for threat, it's an area for generating threat reflexes that integrates lots of different types of information. So for those of you that want to know, I'm going to give you some names, some nomenclature, for those of you that don't, you can tune out for this. But basically information from our memory systems, like the hippocampus and from our sensory systems, our eyes, our ears, our nose, our mouth, et cetera. So taste information, vision, auditory information, touch, et cetera. Flow into the so-called lateral portion of the amygdala. Flows into... Or the amygdaloid complex. It flows into the lateral portion. And then there are multiple outputs from the amygdala. And this is where things get particularly interesting because the outputs of the amygdala have a lot of different areas, but there are two main pathways. One involves the hypothalamus, which you heard about before this collection of neurons that control a lot of our primitive drives for sex, for food, for thirst and for warmth, et cetera. And it also feeds out to our adrenals. Those glands that you learned about a few minutes ago to create a sense of alertness and action. It also feeds out what I mean by feeds out, by the way, is there are neurons that send wires. We call those wires axons connections. Where they can release chemicals and trigger the activation of different brain areas. So it feeds out to other brain areas such as the PAG. PAG is very interesting for our discussion today. It's the periaqueductal gray. The periaqueductal gray contains neurons that can trigger freezing, can trigger the... Some people talk about the fawning response, which has kind of an appeasing response to traumatic events. But some people outright freeze in response to fear, right? We've heard of fight or flight. And indeed the pathway that I'm describing can create a sense of fight and cause people to want to lean in, in an aggressive way to combat things that they're afraid of or flight to run away. Essentially to avoid by mobilizing the thing that they feel they're threatened by. Now, even in the absence of some threat, somebody that has say a fear of public speaking might hesitate or move away from a podium or hesitate or move away from raising their hand. If raising their hand meant that they might be called on and would be public speaking. So there's fight and flight, but there's also the freeze response. And the freeze response is controlled by a number of brain centers, but the periaqueductal gray, the PAG, is central for this freeze response and neurons. They're also create what are called Endogenous opioids. Many of you have heard of the opioid crisis, which is a crisis of prescription medication given out too broadly for people that don't need it, who are become addicted to opioids. Those are Exogenous opioid. But Endogenous opioids are chemicals released from neurons in the PAG and from elsewhere in the body that give us a sense of numbing. They actually numb us against pain. And you can imagine why biology would be organized this way. A threat occurs or something that we perceive as a threat, we're afraid of it. And a natural analgesic is released into our body because there's likely to be an interaction that's very uncomfortable. That's physically uncomfortable. So it's like we have our own Endogenous release of these opioids and that's occurring in the PAG. The other area and again, sorry to litter the conversation with these names of structures, but some people seem to enjoy knowing these structures. You're fine if you just understand what the structures do. If you want to know the names that's fine. But the other structure is the locus coeruleus. The locus coeruleus creates a sense of arousal, by releasing Adrenaline, Epinephrine and Norepinephrine, or related chemical into the brain. So basically the activation of the amygdaloid complex could be from any number of different things, a memory of something fearful. An actual sensory experience of something that's fearful. And but then the fear response itself is taking part because of the threat reflex gets activated. And that threat reflex then sends a whole set of other functions into action. Freezing, activation of the adrenals, activation of locus coeruleus for arousal and alertness, activation of this endogenous pain system or anti-pain system in the PAG. That's one pathway out of the amygdala. The other pathway out of the amygdala is to a very interesting area that typically is associated with reward and even addiction. So this might come as a surprise to many of you. In fact, it came as a surprise to me. I remember when these data were published, but the amygdala complex actually projects to areas of the Dopamine system. The so-called nucleus accumbens, the mesolimbic reward pathway, for those of you that want to look that up or that remember from the Dopamine episodes. We have pathways in our brain that are associated with pursuit, motivation and reward. And the neuromodulator Dopamine is largely responsible for that feeling of craving, pursuit and reward. And this threat center is actually able to communicate with and activate the Dopamine system. And later you will realize why that is very important and why you can leverage the Dopamine system in order to wire in new memories to replace fearful ones. So I've been hitting you with a lot of names of things, but for the moment, even if you're interested in all the Neuroscience names and structures and so forth. I'd like you to just conceptualize that you have a circuit in your brain, meaning a set of cells and connections that are arranged in the following way. You have a threat reflex that can be activated at any time very easily, but what activates that threat reflex can depend on two things. One are prior memories coming from brain areas that are involved in storage of memories, or it can be immediate experiences. Things are happening in the now, okay? So were something fearful to happen right now, your threat reflux could be activated. Where you to remember something very scary that happened to you in the past? Your threat reflex could be activated. And that threat reflex circuit has two major outputs. One of the major outputs is to areas that are involved in the threat response, freezing pain management and alertness. And the other major output is to areas involved in reward, motivation and reinforcement, okay? There's a fourth component. And I promise this is the last component that we need to put into this picture of the neural circuits for fear. And this is a circuit that involves an area of the brain called the prefrontal cortex and some of its subdivision. So literally in the front. And it's involved in what we call top-down processing. Top-down processing is the way that your prefrontal cortex and other areas of the brain can control or suppress a reflex, okay? A good example of this would be the step on the tack example that I gave before. So when you step on a tack, you immediately pull up your foot and you extend the other leg. That's the reflex that prevents you from injuring yourself and from falling over. However, if you wanted, not that you would want to. But if you wanted, you could for instance, place your foot onto a tack and decide not to pull your foot away. It would be difficult. And again, I don't recommend that you do that, but you could override that reflex, okay? There are other examples of reflexes, like for instance, getting into cold water, most people will start to huddle their body. Most people won't want to get into the cold water. Many people will jump out. But all of that is reflexive. And should you want to, you could override that reflex through top-down processing. You could tell yourself, "Oh, I heard on a previous Huberman Lab Podcast, or on an Instagram post that cold water exposure can be beneficial for metabolism and resilience, et cetera." And indeed it can, and you can decide to get into the water and to stretch out your body, not to huddle, and you can fight those reflexes, okay? The fighting of reflex is carried out through top-down processing, largely through the prefrontal cortex. You provide a narrative. You tell yourself, "I want to do this or I should do this. Or even though I don't want to, I'm going to do it anyway." So top-down processing is not just for getting into cold water, and it certainly isn't for overriding reflexes that can damage us like a stepping on the tack example. It is the way in which we can override any number of internal reflexes, including the threat reflex. And the way that we do that is by giving a new story or a new narrative to this experience that we call threat. And you know the threat response, the threat response is quickening of the heart rate, quickening of the breathing. We don't generally like the feeling of Adrenaline in our system. Some people are so-called Adrenaline junkies, and they get a mixture of Dopamine and Adrenaline from certain high intensity events. I confess in previous aspects of my life, I've tended to like Adrenaline. I don't think I was at the extreme of thrill seeking, but I'm somebody that for instance, I tend to like... I like roller coasters, I've done various things where I'm familiar with and I enjoy the sensation of Adrenaline in my body. But I enjoy it because of the alertness that it brings and the hyperacuity that it brings, many people don't feel that way. In fact, most people don't like the sensation of a lot of Adrenaline in their system. That it makes them feel very uncomfortable and out of control. We will do an entire episode about Adrenaline and Adrenaline junkies and Adrenaline aversives in the future. But the threat reflex inevitably involves the release of Adrenaline into the system. And then it becomes a question of whether or not you remain still, move forward or retreat from that Adrenaline experience. And when I say the Adrenaline experience, I mean the threat reflex. So this fourth component of fear is really our ability to attach narrative, to attach a meaning and to attach purpose to what is by all accounts and purposes, a generic response. There's no negotiating what fear feels like. There's only negotiating what it means. There's only negotiating whether or not you persist, whether or not you pause or whether or not you retreat. So this is usually the point in the podcast where I think people start asking, "Okay, well, there's the biology, there's the mechanism, there's the logic. How do I eliminate fear?" Well, it's not quite that simple. Although by understanding the logic and the mechanisms by which these circuits are built, we can eventually get to that place. I do want to plant a flag around a particular type of tool or a logical framework around a particular set of tools rather, that we are going to build out through this episode. And based on what you now know that the threat reflex gets input and it has outputs and it's subject to these top-down processing events, these narratives. You should be asking yourself, what sort of narratives should I apply to eliminate fear? Well, first let's take a step back and just acknowledged the reality, which is that fear is in some cases, an adaptive response. We don't want people eliminating fears that can get them injured or killed, right? The reason that the fear threat response and reflex exists at all is to help us from dying, to help us from making really bad decisions. It just so happens that a number of things happened to us that are not lethal, that don't harm us, but that harm us from the inside. And I think that and here I'm borrowing language from an excellent researcher who's done important work in this area at Harvard. His name is Dr. Kerry Ressler. He's both a medical doctor and a PhD, so an MD-PhD. He's the chief scientific officer at McLean Hospital. He's a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, and he's done extensive and important work on fear. I'm going to refer back to Dr. Ressler's work several times during this podcast, including important and super interesting work on transgenerational passage of trauma. He's a absolutely world-class biologist, absolutely world-class clinician. And Dr. Ressler has described fear before as containing a historical component. So it's not just about a readiness for things that might injure us or kill us in the immediate circumstance but also protecting us for the future because of our important need and ability to anticipate. And what he describes our memories as protective or memories as dangerous. You know, some memories, even if they evoke a sense of fear in us are protective. They protect us from making bad mistakes that could get us injured or killed, or put us into really horrible circumstances. Other memories are dangerous because they create a sense in us of discomfort, and they tend to limit our behavior in ways that are maladaptive. That prevent us from having healthy relationships to others, healthy job relationships, healthy relationship to ourselves, frankly. So this language of memories as protective or memories as dangerous in the context of fear is not something that I said, it's really something that I lifted from Dr. Ressler in one of his many impressive lectures. And it's an important aspect of fear because much of the fear system is a memory system. Is designed to embed a memory of certain previous experiences in us. Such that the threat reflex is activated in anticipation of what might happen, okay? So let's talk for a second about how certain memories get attached to this fear system. And this brings us to a beautiful and indeed Nobel Prize winning aspect of biology and physiology, which is Pavlovian conditioning. Many of you are probably familiar with Pavlov's dogs and the famous Pavlovian conditioning experiments. They go something like this. And Pavlov did these experiments and ring a bell, a dog doesn't do much in response to a bell. It might attend to it but it doesn't salivate typically in response to the bell. However, if you pair the ringing of a bell with a presentation of food enough times, the dog will salivate in response to the food. Eventually you take away the food, you just rang the bell and the dog will salivate in response to the bell, okay? So in the context of so-called Pavlovian conditioning, these things have names like conditioned stimulus, and unconditional stimulus and responses. People often get these mixed up and it can be a little confusing, but I'm just going to make it really simple for you. The unconditioned stimulus is the thing that evokes a response unconditionally. So food is the unconditioned stimulus in the example I just gave. A foot shock or a loud bang would be the unconditioned stimulus in a... For instance say, an experiment geared toward exploring fear. That unconditioned stimulus is unconditional. It unconditionally evokes a startle or in the case of food salivating. The bell in the previous example is what we call the conditioned stimulus or the conditioning stimulus. Sometimes people mix these up. The condition stimulus is paired with the thing that naturally creates a response. And then eventually the condition stimulus creates the response itself. You might think, well, that just seems endlessly boring and simple, but this is actually the way that our fear systems work. Except unlike Pavlov's dogs, you don't need many, many pairings of a bell with some unconditioned stimulus in order to get a response. You can get what's called one trial learning. And in this circuit that involves the amygdala, the threat reflex, and all this other stuff that I was talking about earlier, the system is set up for learning. It's set up to create memories and to anticipate problems. It's a very good system because it was designed to keep us safe. And so the way to think about this is that for many people, one intense experience, one burn, one bad breakup, one bad experience, public speaking. One bad experience with somebody pet snake or whatever it happens to be can cause intense fear in the moment, a long [indistinct] experience of fear, like trouble sleeping that night and the following night. Memories of the experience that are troubling, physiological responses that are troubling. Essentially it gets wired in as a fear with one trial. Which is quite different than the other forms of neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity, of course, just being the nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. Other forms of neuroplasticity like learning a language, learning music, learning math, those take a while. We don't generally get one trial learning to positive or neutral experiences. We get one trial learning to negative experiences. So there's this asymmetry in how we're wired. So now you should understand how classical conditioning as it's called occurs. You go to give a piano recital as a kid, you sit down and you freeze up and it's horribly embarrassing. And even if you just freeze up for a few seconds, the heart rate increase and the perspiring, the sweating and the shame that you feel leads you to want to avoid playing instruments or public displays of performances for a long period of time unless you do something to overcome it. That's one trial learning. Some people, it tends to be more an accumulation of experiences. They have a bad relationship that lasts an entire summer, an entire year, or God forbid a decade. And then they have what they feel is of a general sense of fear about closeness to others, an attachment. These are common fears that people experience. Fears can be in the short-term, fears can be in the long-term, they can be in the medium term. Again, the fear system is very generic. It's wired to include memories that are very acute, that happened within a moment, or that include many, many events in long periods of time. That kind of funnel into a general sense of relationships are bad or this particular city or location is bad. So there's a key what we call temporal component. There's a component of the fear system being able to batch many events in time and create one specific fear or take one very specific isolated incident that happened very briefly and create one very large general sense of fears. And I'll give an example of the latter, just to kind of flesh this out a little bit. I had a friend come visit me in San Francisco some years ago, and their car got broken into. Unfortunately, a frequent occurrence in San Francisco even in the middle of the day. Never leave anything your car in San Francisco they'll break in, in the middle of the day, doesn't matter. Police can be having coffee right there in front of them they'll still do it, for reasons we could discuss, this is a problem. They got their belongings taken and they decided they were never coming back to San Francisco. This was an isolated incident that forever colored their view of the city. Which I frankly, understanding the fear system, I can understand. We can have isolated incidents that wick out to broad decisions about entire places, or we can have many experiences that funnel into very specific isolated fears about particular circumstances, places and things. So I like to think that by now you have a pretty good understanding of the circuits that underlie the threat reflex, the fear response, and how we have top-down control, meaning we can attach a narrative to the fear response. And that the fear response can be learned in association with particular events, okay? I haven't really talked about how the learning occurs. And so I just want to take a moment and describe that because it leads right into our discussion about how to eliminate fears, and indeed how to replace fears with more positive experiences. There's a process in our nervous system that we call neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity broadly defined is the nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. But at a cellular level, that occurs through a couple of different mechanisms. One of the main mechanisms is something called long-term potentiation. Long-term potentiation involves the strengthening of particular connections between neurons. The connection sites between neurons we call synapses, actually technically synapses are the gaps between those connections. But nonetheless, synapses are the point of communication between neurons and those can be strengthened so that certain neurons can talk to other neurons more robustly than they happened to before. And anytime we talk about a particular event, the car, the snake, the public speaking, the trauma, the horrible experience, wiring into the fear system. What we're talking about is a change in synaptic strengths. We're talking about neurons that previously did not communicate well, communicating very well. It's like going from a old school dial up connection, or even an old school telephone connection or Morse code connection of communication to high speed ethernet, okay? To a 5G connection. It gets faster, it gets more robust, and it's very, very clear. That's what happens when you get long-term potentiation. And long-term potentiation involves a couple of cellular mechanisms that are going to be relevant to our discussion about treatments to undue fear. And I'll just throw out a couple of the names of some of those cellular elements right now. The main one is the so-called N-M-D-A receptor, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. And what this is, is this is a little docking site, like a little parking slot on a neuron. And when a neuron gets activated very strongly like from an intense event in the example of my friend, the intense event. Almost certainly activated and NMDA receptors related to their concept of protecting their property in their cars, the break into their car caused the NMDA receptor to be activated. Normally that NMDA receptor is not easily activated when it is activated it sets off a cascade, a series of signals within those neurons that change those neurons. It changes the genes they express, it shuttles more parking spots to the surface of those cells so that the communication to those cells becomes easier, it becomes faster. And so the way to think about the NMDA receptor is it's used sometimes for normal things that we do every day, making cups of coffee and things like that. But it's often used for learning. It's used for creating a new associations in our nervous system. And so the activation of the NMDA receptor and LTP, and it involves some other things that you may have heard of like, brain-derived neurotrophic factor and calcium entry, things that we can leave for a discussion for a future time. But basically a whole cascade of events happen within cells that then make just even the mere thought of something or somebody or some event that happened able to activate that threat reflex, okay? So long-term potentiation is one of the main mechanisms by which we take formerly innocuous or irrelevant events, and we make them scary. We make them traumatic. Our neurons have mechanisms to do this. Now, fortunately, the NMDA receptor and long-term potentiation can also run the whole system in reverse. You can get what's called a long-term depression, and that doesn't have anything to do with the depression associated with low mood. What we're talking about is a weakening of connections. You can go from having a very high speed ethernet connection between neurons, so to speak, to a connection that's more like Morse code, or as like a poor dial up connection or really weak signal. And that's what's happening when you extinguish a fear, when you unlearn a fear. So now I'd like to talk about therapies that are carried out in humans that allow fears to be undone, that allow traumas to be reversed, such that people no longer feel bad about a particular person, place or thing. Either real interactions with that person, place or thing, or imagine interactions with that person, place or thing. That process as I just mentioned also involves things like the NMDA receptor but rather than strengthening the connections the first thing that has to happen is there needs to be a weakening of connections that associate the person, place or thing with that threat reflex. Subsequent to that, we will see there needs to be a strengthening of some new experience that's positive, okay? This is a key element of where we are headed contrary to popular belief, it is not going to work to simply extinguish a fear. One needs to extinguish a fear and or trauma and replace that fearful or traumatic memory or idea or response with a positive response. And this is something that's rarely discussed both in the scientific literature, but certainly in the general discussion around fear and trauma. There's this idea that we can extinguish fears, we can rewire ourselves, we can eliminate our traumas and indeed we can. But that process has to involve not just becoming comfortable with a particular fearful event or trauma, but also attaching a new positive experience to that previously fearful or traumatic event. There are a lot of different approaches out there that are in clinical use to try and alleviate fear and trauma and indeed PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder. It might be surprising to learn that many of those treatments such as SSRIs, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Things like Prozac and Zoloft and similar and other antidepressants. Or things like Benzodiazepines, which are essentially like painkillers. They create elevation in certain transmitters in the brain like GABA among others. They can have a pain relieving effect. They are generally however, considered anxiolytics, they reduce anxiety and even antipsychotic drugs or Beta blockers sometimes called adrenergic blockers. Drugs that are designed to prevent the heart from beating too fast or to reduce blood pressure, to reduce some elements of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis response that we talked about earlier. Many people experienced some degree of relief from the symptoms of anxiety and fear and PTSD in taking these various compounds. Indeed, that's why they're prescribed so broadly. But you may find it interesting to note that none of those current treatments are based on the neurobiology of fear, at least not directly, right? People that take SSRIs oftentimes will experience a reduction in anxiety. It depends on the dosage and the individual of course, right? And you have to work with a doctor, a psychiatrist, to determine whether or not they're right for you in the correct dosage, if they are right for you. But that modulation of anxiety can indirectly reduce the likelihood that one will have a panic attack or experience of fear, an intense experience of fear or reliving of a trauma. But the SSRIs themselves are not plugging into some specific mechanism related to how fear comes about in the system. It's an indirect support. That's important because if the goal of modern psychiatry and the goal of modern biology is to provide mechanistic understanding that leads to treatments. We need to think about what are the sorts of treatments that tap into the very fear circuits that we described before. The fact that there are memories attached to a generic threat reflex and response. And the threat reflex and response can be linked up with the Dopamine system and can be linked up with other systems that are involved in pain, relief and anxiety and so forth. And so that brings us to which treatments are directly related to the fear circuitry and the circuitry related to trauma? And the primary one to begin with is the so-called behavioral therapies. Now, oftentimes we all wish I think from time to time that there's some specific pill that we can take or there's some machine or device that we can plug our finger into or that we can put on a headset and all of a sudden we just rewire our nervous system. Fear has gone, trauma's gone, but it doesn't work that way. And when we think of language and narrative as a tool to rewire our nervous system in comparison to those kinds of ideas about pills and machines and potions, it starts to seem a little bit weak, right? If we just think, "Oh, well, how could talking actually change the way that we respond to something?" But actually there are three forms of therapy that purely through the use of language have been shown to have very strong positive impact, meaning reduce fears and traumas. And those three are prolonged exposure therapy, cognitive processing, or CPT and cognitive behavioral therapy. And I not going to go into the entire literature around prolonged exposure, cognitive processing, and cognitive behavioral therapy. But I will just illustrate the central theme that allows them to work. Now, remember that the circuit for fear, the circuit for trauma involves this generic reflex. And then there are those top-down elements coming from the forebrain. It's very clear because it's been measured that if you look at the amount of anxiety, the pure physiological anxiety response of quickening of heart rate, flushing of the skin, sometimes quaking of the hands, that the experience of fear over time when people recount or retell their trauma that the first time they do that especially when it's recounted in a lot of detail there's a tremendous anxiety response. Sometimes even as great or greater than the actual exposure to the fearful event or trauma. And obviously this is something that is done with a clinician present, because it is very traumatic to the person. They're literally reliving the trauma in full rich detail, and they are encouraged to provide full rich detail. They're often encouraged to speak in complete sentences to flush out details about how they felt in inside, to flush out details about their memories going into this traumatic or fearful event, going through it. And after really digging into all the nuance and contours of these horrible experiences. But what's remarkable is that in the second and the third and the fourth retelling of these traumatic or fearful events that anxiety response and the amount of the physiological response, I should say that the amplitude of the physiological becomes progressively diminished with each retelling. Now, some of you might be saying, "Well, duh, you know, you tell a story enough times, that eventually it wears off." Just like if you watch a movie enough times and you hear the same joke enough times eventually it doesn't have the same impact. But that [indistinct] be the case, right? You could imagine that this high amplitude anxiety response, this high amplitude activation of the sympathetic nervous system in retelling would actually create a even deeper routed fear response and trauma but that's not what happens. And every clinician I spoke to in anticipation of this episode which include clinical psychologists, psychiatrists and people who actually work on the fear system at a biological level said the exact same thing which is that, "A detailed recounting of the traumatic and fearful events is absolutely essential in order to get the positive effects of prolonged exposure, cognitive processing and cognitive behavioral therapy." Again, this has to be done with the appropriate support. This isn't something that should be taken lightly because as we've mentioned before the fear response can have a very long lasting contour to it. People can sometimes have trouble sleeping for days and days. And afterwards we'll talk about sleep in a little bit. But the point is that the retelling is important. And the idea here is to take what was a terrible and extremely troubling, meaning physiologically troubling, psychologically troubling story, and turn it into what is essentially a boring, bad story, okay? It never really becomes a good story at this point in the treatment process that we're describing. So a terrible event is a terrible event period. But there's a way in which the retelling of that event starts to uncouple the threat reflex from the narrative. And with each successive retelling in detail of these traumatic events, of these fearful events, the threat reflex is activated at a progressively lower and lower amplitude. Such that eventually it just becomes a really bad, really boring story. Now that's one part of the process of getting over a fear. It's what we call fear extinction. And we can bring ourselves back to our earlier example of Pavlovian conditioning, because many studies have been done both in animals and in humans showing that, for instance, if you pair a tone, a bell or a buzzer with a foot shock that an animal or a person will brace themselves for the foot shock. Eventually you can just give the bell or a tone and the person will experience that same freezing up or the same fight or flight or freeze response. So you conditioned that. But if you give the tone or the bell over and over, and there's no foot shock, there's no pain, and in human [indistinct] sometimes I'm with foot shocks, sometimes believe it or not with mild burn, even some studies, there is older studies you couldn't do those now, nor would you want to. But eventually what happens is the tone... The bell no longer evokes that response, okay? So you see this as a reversal of the classical conditioning and we call that reversal extinction. So the retelling of this traumatic or fearful narrative, excuse me, fearful narrative is essentially an extinction process. Now, how is this done? One can do this in a therapist office face-to-face, that's sometimes done. It's sometimes done in group type settings where people actually stand up or sit in front of a group small or large and recount in detail their traumatic experience. It's sometimes done by people writing out the experience in detail. And which one of these is the most effective? Isn't really clear. The literature points to the fact that a feeling of trust obviously between the patient and the clinician or the person and the group is essential. Some people don't have access to because of finances or other limitations to therapy of that sort. In that case, journaling in detail has been shown to be effective. Although, again, I want to caution people about reactivating traumas without consideration for the kinds of social support they might need around that reactivation. And we will talk a little bit later about some of the chemicals involved in social support and why those help extinguish fears. So the thing to embed in your mind is that recognition of the early traumatic or fearful event in detail over and over is key to forming a new non-traumatic association with that event or person. So that's part one, you need to diminish the old experience. And when I say diminish, I mean, reduce the amplitude of the physiological response. Now this is just but one approach. I'm going to talk about other approaches to eliminating fear and trauma as we go forward. But I want to emphasize that diminishing the amplitude of the physiological response is the first step. So it's like a clearing away of the association between the person, place or thing and that threat reflex. But even after that's occurred, there's an essential need to relearn a new narrative. Why is their essential need to relearn a new narrative or create a new association? Well, that has to do with that fear reflect circuitry. As you recall, there outputs two areas of the brain that are associated with Dopamine release and reinforcement. And that we now know offers the capacity for these fear circuits in these circuits that underlie trauma to be mapped onto new experiences that are of positive association. So I'm going to give a kind of basic example. It's a kind of a silly example, but I'm giving it as a template for what could be any number of other different examples. Example I'll give is let's say a kid is biking to play soccer, soccer practice, and they get into a bad car accident, okay? Terrible thing to happen, but they survive. They recover. And somehow... And we really don't know why certain fear memories get wired in more broadly or more narrowly. Somehow this kid just doesn't even want to bicycle anymore. And they actually don't even want to play sports. And they actually just don't want to go anywhere. They're kind of isolating and not interacting with friends very much at all. It's a pretty broad response. It didn't have to be that way. Some kids would just decide they don't want to cycle any more down that particular street. Well, the process of retelling the narrative to a clinician would allow an extinction of the fear response, right? So a reduction in the heart rate, a reduction in the narrowing of focus, a reduction in all the things that we consider fear. But a really good cognitive behavioral therapist or somebody that understands the Neuroscience of fear and trauma would understand that that's not sufficient. That's what it's really important is that this child, this hypothetical child relearn a new narrative that they don't just manage to bike to soccer practice or manage to spend time with friends, but that they actually start wiring in new positive associations with biking to practice, with playing soccer, with social events. And, and this is the somewhat surprising feature of this and that they link that back to that early traumatic experience. That it's not just that they're replacing that bad experience and memory with a good experience and memory, but they're actually holding in mind in these top-down narrative circuits, if you will. They're holding in mind, "Ah, I'm not just biking to soccer practice. I'm actually biking to soccer practice and I'm enjoying it despite the fact that I was in a bad car accident. Despite the fact that two months ago or two years ago, or maybe even 10 years ago, I couldn't even leave my room or I didn't want to associate with anybody." So the building up of the positive associations are key. And the linking of those positive associations with the earlier traumatic event is key for the following reason, the top-down circuitry from the prefrontal cortex to this threat reflex circuit is not like the other connections in that circuit. The other connections in that circuit are what we call glutamatergic and excitatory. They are all about activating other neurons, like a chain reaction. One neuron activates, the next activates, the next like dominoes falling. These top-down circuits that feed into the threat reflex and all its parts is what we call inhibitory. It tends to prevent activation of those given circuitries. It tends to prevent activation of the threat reflex. So it's acting as a break. And so when we think of positive experiences being associated with what was previously a negative experience, we're not talking about forgetting that the car accident was horrible or forgetting that the assault was absolutely dreadful. We're talking about attaching a new positive memory to the circuitry so that the previous fear response is far less likely to occur and that it remains extinguished. So just to make sure this is absolutely clear, there's a first step which involves retelling and reliving in order to extinguish the fear and the trauma, to reduce the amplitude of the response. Then there's a need to replace or attach positive experiences to the earlier what would be traumatic response. The extinction has to go first, this is key. You can't simply say, "Oh, you know, the car accident was actually a good thing because I stayed home a lot that year and I got to study." You can tell yourself that and that could also be true. But that won't necessarily and probably won't eliminate the fear or the traumatic association of the car accident. And again, I'm using car accidents as a general example or a generic example here, okay? So there's a three-part process. One diminished the old experience through repetitive narrative. And almost inevitably the initial repetition of that is going to be very high amplitude and quite troubling. But over time it will reduce, right? You're turning that terrible really upsetting story into a terrible boring story. That's the extinction process. Then there's a relearning of a new narrative that includes some sort of sense of reward. And that sense of reward has to be tacked back on to the traumatic event or what was previously a traumatic event. And that is all through narrative. It's all through cognition. And I think this is a very important point. Oftentimes I think we tend to undervalue the importance of rationalization and of story and of narrative. But the prefrontal cortex is this amazing capacity of our brain real estate to create meaning, to attach meaning and purpose to things that otherwise are just reflexive. And in the example of an ice bath, it might be a little trivial. In the example of the kid with a car accident, it becomes a little more relevant. And in the example of things like people surviving, you know, genocide or attaching stories of great victory to what were previously thought of as stories of great loss of time, of people, of any number of things. That process of narrative is one of the major ways that the human brain rewires itself. Narrative should not be undervalued as a tool for relieving fear and trauma. In fact, narrative is one of the best and most potent ways that we can rewire our fear circuitry. And that indeed we can form completely new relationships to things over time. So basically narratives should not be undervalued as a tool to rewire our nervous system but it has to be engaged in the correct sequence. And that correct sequence is first extinction, then relearning a new narrative with positive associations and attaching those positive associations to the formerly traumatic or fearful event. Now I mentioned prolonged exposure therapy, cognitive processing, and cognitive behavioral therapy. For those of you that are seeking relief from fear and traumatic events, you can look up licensed clinicians that can carry out those one or several of those types of therapies. I get a lot of questions about other forms of therapy. One of the ones that comes up a lot is so-called EMDR, Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing developed by Francine Shapiro in the 80s. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing involves moving the eyes side to side while recounting a traumatic or fearful narrative typically with a clinician present. Why would that work? Well, basically when I first heard about EMDR from my stance as a vision scientist I thought the whole thing was kind of crazy and half-baked frankly. I heard these theories that, "Oh, it recreates the eye movements in rapid eye movement sleep or REM sleep." And that's completely false. It does not. I heard the argument EMDR activates both sides of the brain, which I guess hypothetically was thought to be important somehow. And frankly, there's no evidence whatsoever that EMDR activates both sides of the brain in a way that's beneficial. I mean, by looking from side to side, just because of the way that binocular vision circuits are organized it will do that. But it never made any sense to me why EMDR would work until several years ago when I saw. Because I reviewed no fewer than five papers. Some in animal models, others in humans looking at lateral eye movements. Meaning I moving from side to side with eyes open, not eyes up or down. And what was observed in these experiments in all of them actually, all five of those papers was a dramatic reduction in the activation and actually an inhibition a suppression of the fear or threat reflect circuitry which was a jaw dropper for me. I thought, "Wow, it actually was a jaw dropper." I widened that. For me, I thought, "Oh my goodness, maybe this EMDR stuff works according to some mechanism. And maybe this is the mechanism." And indeed many laboratories, not mine, but many laboratories are now pursuing that idea. And it's looking very likely. Why would that happen? Well, just very briefly, a lateralized eye movements of the sort that I'm describing and I'm moving my hand like this but I'll just do it with my eyes even though it's a little embarrassing to do that. Cause I know it looks strange, I don't mind cause I'm doing EMDR and EMDR reduces activation of the amygdala and related circuitries which reduces anxiety and reduces the amplitude of the threat reflex. Reduces sympathetic autonomic arousal. In other words, we feel calmer or we feel less alert, less stressed when moving our eyes from side to side. I just heard a story about this is that these are the sorts of eye movements that we do when we are ambulating, moving through space, through some sort of self-generated motion. And one can make up a pretty reasonable story in the evolutionary context or ecological context that forward movement and fear are generally incompatible with one another. That generally a fear response involves a freezing or a retreating. Some people will advance, but that's usually a trained advance in response to fear so first responders and so forth. Most people freeze or retreat when they're afraid. Forward movement generates these eye movements. It does seem to suppress activation of this threat reflex and the amygdala in particular. So for the many EMDR practitioners out there these papers I think are a great celebration. And I think there is now increasing excitement about EMDR in the psychiatric and psychological community for its utility, for treating fear, trauma and PTSD. However, I should point out that in discussing EMDR with various colleagues of mine at Stanford and elsewhere, I was told that EMDR has been shown to be beneficial in particular for single event type traumas or fearful experiences. Not so much for relieving the trauma or feelings of fear associated. For instance, with an entire bad marriage or an entire childhood. But more for single more acute events that can be described within a very kind of brief narrative. Brief, not necessarily in time, but that the car accident, the bad interaction with another individual, the assault, God forbid, these sorts of things. And I realize we're down in the weeds of topics that are unpleasant. And so I have great sensitivity to that but I think it's also important that we be realistic about the kinds of things that traumatize people. So is EMDR useful? Well, it seems like it works for these single event or kind of constrained event type traumas that people can describe while moving their eyes from side to side generally in the presence of a clinician. However, if we think back to the model of how you extinguish and then replace a trauma or fear, remember you have to diminish the old experience the amplitude of that. You need to... That's the extinguish portion. Then you need to relearn a new narrative and attach reward to the old traumatic event. EMDR only really taps into the extinction of the physiological response to the old experience. I'm sure that there are EMDR practitioners out there that are thinking about the attaching of the new narrative and reward, but there I've heard less and I've seen fewer peer-reviewed papers on that. So let's think about this logically. Let's say, and indeed it's the case that I'm sitting down in a chair and moving eyes side to side deliberately for some period of time reduces activation of the threat reflex. I or the patient in this case, recites or repeats over and over the traumatic event or the fearful event. I'm doing that in the presence of a lower amplitude response. Remember back to where we talked about how the retelling works best if the first time it's done there's a huge amplitude response. And then with each successive repeat that response the threat response gets lower and lower. With EMDR, you're sort of short circuiting you're kind of sneaking around the corner of that high amplitude response. And so it's taking a somewhat different approach of trying to extinguish the bad feelings in body and mind associated with an experience by reducing the physiological response. So it's somewhat different. And at least to my knowledge and EMDR practitioners please correct me, but at least to my knowledge, there isn't an active component to EMDR of relearning a new narrative and attaching reward. Now reward and attaching reward requires a somewhat high amplitude sympathetic arousal. It requires a feeling of a victory which is arousal, okay? It's positive arousal, not negative arousal, but it is arousal. So I'm not focusing on this to try and diminish the potential impact of EMDR. I know many people have achieved great relief from EMDR but it doesn't tap into all the aspects of the extinction and relearning that we talked about previously. And therefore, I think on its own at least in many cases is unlikely to be a complete therapy for fear and trauma. If there are people out there who've had terrific results with the EMDR, please let us know in the comment section, on YouTube would be the ideal place. If you've had bad experiences with EMDR or it didn't work for you also let us know. I think that EMDR practitioners like most practitioners in the psychiatric and psychological space are eager to expand their practices in order to make them more effective rather than clinging ardently to something that perhaps is incomplete or that doesn't work for certain individuals. So I think they would appreciate that feedback as would I. So, as I mentioned before, most of these therapies are done in conjunction with a skilled often one would hope credentialed clinician. There are many people however, that don't have access to that or who are working through stuff. They have things in their past that are very uncomfortable to them. And I'm aware that many people are working through those things. Through journaling, through talking to a friend, through any number of different sort of non-traditional approaches. One thing that really pertains to everybody who's working through fear and trauma of any kind is the importance of social connection as it relates to the chemical systems and the neural circuits associated with fear and trauma. And this is a emerging literature in Neuroscience that is really a beautiful one because it's a very conserved biology. We see it, believe it or not in flies and fruit flies, a commonly used model system. In mice and indeed in humans as well. And this is the work of David Anderson's group at Caltech, again, of Dr. Ressler's group at Harvard Medical and elsewhere, of course. And this is the work as it relates to Tachykinin. Tachykinin is a very interesting molecule in our brain and it turns out the Tachykinin is activated in neurons of what's called the central amygdala and some nearby structures. So really smack dab within the middle of this threat reflex. Very soon after some traumatic or fear inducing event occurs. And it actually sets in motion a number of other things including changes in gene expression and potentiation meaning long-term potentiation, activation of an NMDA receptors and so on. In the circuits that reinforce that fearful or traumatic experience. Now what's interesting about Tachykinin is also that it's been shown to lead to low to moderate levels of anxiety and even kind of aggression, irritability. Tachykinin levels are further increased by social isolation. And that social isolation is oftentimes what can exacerbate pre-existing traumas or fearful events. And in a kind of beautiful symmetry to that kind of dark and depressing story, social connection with people that we trust. And it doesn't have to be direct physical contact but just social connection conversing with, sharing a meal with, it could be physical touch if that's appropriate. Those sorts of connections actually serve to reduce the effectiveness or even the levels of Tachykinin. So the important point here is that trauma is traumatic in and of itself. Fearful events are hard in and of themselves. And if people are working through them either through clinical work or through individual work. It is important and in ideally one would still be trying to access social connection outside of that specific work-related to the trauma. Now it doesn't necessarily have to be outside of that. For instance, if you have a good relationship with a clinician or therapist to the point where there's real trust and you feel a social connection with them, wonderful. But for many people, they have a more transactional relationship to the EMDR practitioner or to their therapist, or they're working through things on their own. And it's really important to understand that regular social connection, trusting social connection of any kind is going to be very beneficial for that process. And so this is not the kind of just hand-wavy, a new agey stuff like, "Oh, you know you need social connection." There's a actual neurochemical basis for social isolation that has an amplifying effect on fear and trauma. And there is a neurochemical basis for the relief from fear and trauma and isolation. And in the ideal circumstance, one is working through these traumas and fears very intensely in a very dedicated way. But then is also engaging in the sorts of social interactions that are going to diminish the amount of Tachykinin and going to suppress those very circuits that would otherwise be amplified. So next I'd like to talk about some really interesting and almost kind of eerie scientific findings. And that's the transgenerational passage of trauma or predisposition to fear and trauma. This is a scientific literature that's been debated many times over the last really 50 plus years. But in more recent studies have really proven that we as humans have the capacity to inherit a predisposition to trauma or fear. Now that doesn't necessarily mean that we will become traumatized or experience extreme fear just because our parents or grandparents experienced that. It's a predisposition, it's a bias. Let me explain the papers that focus on this for a little bit. And then we'll talk about what this means for each of us. One of the most important papers in this area comes to us from someone I mentioned earlier, Dr. Kerry Ressler at Harvard. And the title of the paper is, Association of FKBP5 polymorphisms and childhood abuse with risk of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in adults. And there are other papers as well. Another one from the Ressler's Lab, first author, Brian Dias, D-I-A-S. Parental olfactory experience influences behavior and neural structure in subsequent generations. I'm going to summarize these papers and their general contour and papers related to them. Although, feel free to look up the papers I just described. We will provide a link to them in the caption if you'd like to go further. But basically these explorations involve looking at the histories of human individuals who had trauma or abuse of some kind in their childhood. And then looking at the likelihood of fear and PTSD type symptomology in their offspring. And essentially what they identified is that indeed, if you had a parent and there does seem to be a kind of a bias toward an effect where if the father had abuse and it's severe abuse or moderate abuse. That abuse causes a change in his genetics, in his sperm that can be passed on to offspring such that the offspring have a lower threshold to develop trauma or extreme fear to certain types of events. Now what's important to point out is that predisposition or bias is not necessarily to the same sorts of events. It's not that the abuse itself gets passed from one generation to the next it's a predisposition. And the title of that paper mentioned, FKB5, excuse me, FKBP5 polymorphisms. And the FKBP5 polymorphisms maps to a location in the genome that's associated with the so-called glucocorticoid system with cortisol release. So the predisposition that one might inherit from having a parent father or mother but stronger tendency to inherit it from the father. Who experienced abuse is one in which the glucocorticoid system, the cortisol system, and that HPA axis that we talked about before the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is sensitized or reactive in a way that sets a lower threshold to become traumatized or very afraid of certain types of events. But it's not unique to the specific type of abuse that the parent experienced. Now, this is really, really important because a lot of times out there I will hear that there's passage or transgenerational passage of actual trauma, the specific trauma. Now that could be through narrative telling, if somebody is exposed to a lot of narrative about their parents' trauma in one form or another. It may be that they start to internalize some of that trauma. And there could be because we obviously can't rule it out. There could be some other signatures of prior specific traumas they get passed on to offspring. But more likely and certainly what these data about these polymorphisms point to is that what gets passed on is a propensity for the threat reflex to get activated and attached to a wider variety or to less intense types of inputs and experiences. And the important point to take away from this is that it's not some magical, mysterious, and mystical thing that's being transplanted from parent to child. It's a gene or it's a modification in a set of genes that gives a heightened level of responsivity to fearful type events. Or even a high level of responsivity such that things that wouldn't be fear inducing or trauma inducing to certain individuals can trigger fear and trauma in these children that inherit this particular gene. Now that doesn't necessarily mean that they are faded to forever be traumatized or live in fear. It's simply not the case. It's just a genetic predisposition regardless of whether or not you had a parent or parents that were traumatized or not. There's no evidence, at least as far as I'm aware that the treatments for trauma should be any different. As far as I know there aren't gene therapies currently aimed at these particular variants, like FKBP5 and so forth that could reverse those particular genetic underpinnings of the trauma predisposition. So this transgenerational passage of trauma, I think is extremely interesting in large part because it brings us back to this idea that the threat reflux is part of a larger sensory system. You know, normally we think of seeing as a sensory system or hearing as a sensory system. But the threat detection and threat learning system, the fear learning system is in many ways a sensory system. It's just a sensory system that is very generic in its response. That generic response again is good because it allows for flexibility but it's bad because it reduces specificity, right? We can essentially become fearful or traumatized by anything if the circuit gets activated. And these particular children inherit a predisposition for more things and less intense things to traumatize them. In a few minutes, we are going to discuss some of the behavioral treatments including some really new exciting protocols for dealing with fear and trauma. But for a few minutes, I'd like to discuss some of the drug treatments that are starting to emerge as potential therapeutics in particular for PTSD. The two drug treatments I'd like to focus on are Ketamine-Assisted Psychotherapy, and MDMA-Assisted Psychotherapy. Currently Ketamine-Assisted Psychotherapy is legal. It is approved, provided it is prescribed by a board certified physician in the United States. I'm not certain about other areas of the world. MDMA also sometimes called Ecstasy therapy is in clinical trials in the U S, it is still an illegal drug to possess or to sell. So I want to be very clear about that. However, MDMA is being explored as a potential therapeutic for PTSD and other forms of trauma. And of course, Ketamine and MDMA are also both being explored for chronic depression, eating disorders and a number of other psychiatric disorders. But for the moment I would just like to touch on Ketamine and MDMA as they relate to the fear circuitry and trauma circuitry that we've described in the early part of the episode and throughout the episode. Because I think that in viewing them through that lens, we can gain some additional insight into how they might be providing the sorts of relief that some of the early clinical studies are starting to point to. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic. That's right. It's a dissociative anesthetic. It's main function is to create a state of dissociation. And I've never taken ketamine personally so I can't describe the experience of it. But a colleague of mine in psychiatry shared their experience with a patient's experience of it as making that patient feel as if, "They were getting out of the cockpit of a plane, but that they were observing themselves doing it." And this was of course, during a approved therapeutic session that they were doing this and they were in some sort of intense visualization about a traumatic experience. They were describing some of their depressive symptoms as well as the trauma. And their narrative that they basically created or took away from this. And that was relayed to me was one in which the patient felt like they were in their own body but they were also viewing their own body from the outside. So dissociative, in other words. Again, I've never had this experience. Some of you may have with Ketamine or through other means. But we might want to just take a moment and think about what Ketamine actually does and what dissociation actually does at the level of neurocircuits? And for that, we can look to this really beautiful paper that was published by my colleagues, Karl Deisseroth in psychiatry, Robert Malenka, also in psychiatry, Liqun Luo, also at Stanford. They paired up or teamed up rather to explore how systemic Ketamine adjust circuitries in the brain. And what they discovered was that it changes the rhythm of cortical activity in certain layers of the cortex. The cortex is like a layered sandwich. The cortex of course, being the outside of the brain. And there was a particular rhythm a one to three hertz rhythm. One to three hertz just means a particular frequency of electrical activity. In this case, in these layer 5 neurons of Retrosplenial cortex. So you don't need to know much about Retrosplenial cortex or a one to three hertz rhythms. I think the important thing to just take away from this is that there is now starting to be an understanding of how drugs like Ketamine work to create this subjective experience that this patient and other patients describe as dissociation. You know, dissociation in its essence is really about not feeling what's happening. It's about viewing what's happening from a different perspective than what normally one would view that experience from. And so if we add a plug that general notion of dissociation and Ketamine induced association into the circuit that we talked about before, where we have this threat reflex involving the amygdala. These outputs for freezing or for reward and the accumbens. And we've got this prefrontal narrative coming down as top-down processing. It brings us right to that prefrontal cortical input to the threat system and that narrative. What seems to be the case in my review of the paper I just described, plus a review on how Ketamine-assisted trauma relief might work is that it somehow allows the patient, the individual to recount their trauma while feeling either none or a very different set of emotional experiences that they experienced in the actual trauma or fearful experience. So it's a remapping of new onto old. New meaning new feelings onto old feelings while staying in the exact same narrative. So it's a little bit like EMDR of suppressing the threat reflex but it seems to bring in a replacement of previous emotional experiences and sensations in the body with new ones. And so in that way we can sort of view or we can try and view Ketamine-Assisted Psychotherapy for the treatment of trauma as bringing together the three elements that we talked about before. You want to diminish the intensity, the potency of the old original trauma experience or fear experience. So that seems to be accomplished through this dissociation and maybe through the kind of anesthetic component. So it's a reduction in pain in the body, a dissociation, a kind of observing of the self that leads to the extinction of the trauma and the fear. But then there also seems to be an automatic or kind of built in a relearning of a new narrative, a new set of experiences which is the next step that we described earlier. So it's an intriguing therapy. It's one that's really catching on and there are many, many clinics around the U S that are now doing it. Whether or not it turns out to be the ultimate treatment for trauma and for fear isn't clear. My colleagues in psychiatry tell me that that's unlikely, although it does seem to be beneficial for a number of people. Especially people that are experiencing trauma or have existing traumas and fear that are coupled with depressive symptoms. Because the data on Ketamine and depression seems to be quite strong. So now let's talk about MDMA. MDMA also sometimes called Ecstasy or Molly in its recreational form is a powerful synthetic drug that at least as far as we know, creates a state in the brain and body that is unlike any other chemical state in the brain and body that's normally experienced. What do I mean by that? Well, we have several Neuromodulator systems in our body. Neuromodulators are chemicals that change the likelihood that certain neural circuits will be active. Meaning they can make it very likely that certain circuits will be active and make it very unlikely that other neural circuits will be active. Good examples of neuromodulators are dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, norepinephrine. These tend to work on different systems in the brain and body but they tend to be activated more or less in parallel, right? You can have Dopamine released in your brain and also Norepinephrine. You can have Serotonin released in your brain and also Acetylcholine. So it's not an all or none kind of thing, but the degrees to which these things are activated tends to vary. And there is a little bit of a seesaw type phenomenon with Dopamine and Serotonin. Dopamine most commonly associated with activating neurocircuits related to motivation, craving, and reward. And Serotonin more typically activated in response to situations or conditions in which we are very happy and content with what we have. So Dopamine is more about pursuing and seeking. Serotonin is more about kind of pleasure and satisfaction with resources that we have in our immediate sphere. They don't tend to... Serotonin doesn't tend to place the brain and body into a mode of action quite as much as Dopamine does, more or less. MDMA is a unique compound in that it leads to very large increases in the amount of both Dopamine and Serotonin in the brain and body simultaneously. And that's a unique circumstance that is just simply not seen under normal conditions. From a subjective standpoint, people under the influence of MDMA in the therapeutic setting, tend to report immense feelings of connection or resonance with people or even things with music, with objects. Certainly if it's being done in conjunction with a family member or a partner or with a therapist, they will feel extremely connected to that person. They'll feel a very close understanding and association. Oftentimes that goes beyond words. There is a chemical reason for that. It turns out that MDMA causes massive release of oxytocin. This neuropeptide that's associated with pair bonding and with bonding generally. The oxytocin system and the Serotonin system are closely linked to one another in the brain and body. And they tend to be co-released often at the same times and by the same sorts of events. So MDMA is one mechanism by which oxytocin is released in these massive amounts. And I should just relay some of the levels of oxytocin because they're really quite striking, gives a kind of a more vivid picture of why it is the MDMA would make people feel so associated in a positive way with the various things that are happening them while they're under the influence of the drug. So the paper related to this that I'd like to highlight is in the journal Psychoneuroendocrinology. The title of the paper is Plasma oxytocin concentrations following MDMA or intranasal oxytocin in humans. And just remarkably MDMA increased plasma oxytocin levels to 83.7, this is an average, 83.7 picograms per milliliter. About 90 to 120 minutes into the MDMA session compared to a typical level of 18.6. So this is a massive increase in oxytocin. And I think that massive increase in oxytocin is part of the reason why people have these feelings of close resonance and association. Now, the Dopamine increases are generally what lead to the feelings of euphoria inside of the MDMA session. And then the Serotonin increases it is thought are what lead to the feelings of safety and comfort. So again, a very unusual chemical cocktail that would never be seen at least not at this amplitude under any normal conditions outside of an MDMA clinical psychotherapeutic session. Why would this state of mind and body be potentially useful for the treatment of trauma? Well, indeed it is revealing itself to be useful for the treatment of trauma. Again, these are legal clinical trials where people are doing this and discovering this. What it seems to allow is a very fast relearning or new associations to be tacked on to the previously traumatic experience. So again, it brings us back to the same model of how people extinguish fears and traumas and replace them with new experiences when there is no drug treatment involved. There needs to be a diminishing of the old experience, meaning an extinction and then a relearning of a new narrative. What the chemical [indistinct] of MDMA seems to be doing is creating an opportunity for all that to happen very fast without the need for many repetitions of the original trauma and reliving of the original trauma. Probably because the reliving of it inside of one of these MDMA sessions is very acute, very intense, plus it seems to be offering the opportunity to extinguish and rewrite in or write in a new narrative associated with that trauma very quickly as well. So what this means is that treatments like MDMA that are under investigation in these clinical trials are unlikely to be magic potions, if you will, that allow access to a particular process that would otherwise not be accessible. It's more that the typical process of trauma and fear reduction that's carried out in things like prolonged exposure, cognitive processing, cognitive behavioral therapy seems to be compacted into a much shorter session. And that session is performed at a much higher intensity. Higher intensity because the chemical [indistinct] of the brain is completely different. I mean, the experience of MDMA is one in which people have a very heightened sense of euphoria, very heightened sense of connection. So those positive experiences are essentially primed to be written in and over the traumatic experience and because of the high levels of Serotonin in the system and probably oxytocin as well, there's a safety that's written into the situation that allows people to lean into perhaps narratives or components of narratives that they would otherwise be holding back from. So these are powerful compounds, and I think the future of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for a trauma in particular is holding great promise. As of now, meaning at the time of the recording of this podcast. Again, I want to reiterate that these are clinical trials are being done legally. These drugs are still illegal to possess or sell outside of clinical trials. Doing this sort of thing is punishable. But it does seem that the FDA and some of the related bodies that control these sorts of things are eyes open to this stuff. And I think it's very likely in the next few years, things like MDMA and certainly Ketamine has already in widespread use within the psychiatric community. And I think we're going to be seeing a lot more of that. One thing we have not touched on yet is how do you know if you're traumatized? How do you know if you have chronic fear or a debilitating fear? You know, much of the psychiatric community focuses on how many other problems people might have. Trouble sleeping, trouble eating, trouble maintaining quality work, or schoolwork and so forth. And all of those are certainly very valid criteria and necessary criteria for determining whether or not somebody meets a clinical diagnosis or not. But there's a biological component that I think we can all assess for ourselves. And that's one of interoceptive versus exteroception balance. And that sounds confusing, but it's actually really easy to understand. We can focus our perception on the external world, events going on around us, beyond the confines of our skin or within the confines of our skin. A focus and a perception on the external world is what's called exteroception and a focus on what's happening inside us is interoception. And we have the capacity to build mental appraisal into that, right? I can for instance, stop for a moment and assess how my stomach feels, how hungry I feel, how quick my heart is beating. Some people by the way are much better at sensing whether or not their heart is beating at a particular rate and others, not so much. Some people can actually count their heartbeats without having to take their pulse by placing pressure on their wrist or their neck. Some people can't. In other words, some people have very high interoceptive awareness and other people less so. This whole business of fear and trauma relates to taking external experiences and funneling those experiences into this thing that I'm calling a threat reflux or the fear circuitry. A recent paper published in the journal Science. So absolutely spectacular journal, science, nature and cell being the apex journals of scientific publishing. Gets at this issue of where in our mind and how do we assess whether or not what we are feeling internally is reasonable given what's going on externally. And it's a really fascinating study. I'm just going to highlight a little bit of it for you and then I'll touch on some of the relevant aspects and how that can be adopted into a practice to assess and reduce fear and anxiety. The title of this paper published just a few weeks ago in Science is, Fear balance is maintained by bodily feedback to the insular cortex in mice. We've not talked too much about the insular, also called the insular cortex. This is a brain area that my lab has worked on and other labs have worked on. It's a brain area that has within it a map of our internal interoceptive landscape. It's a map of our internal bodily sensations. And it's a really interesting structure. So the way this study was carried out is that subjects were taught or conditioned to a particular danger signal through repeated presentation of a sound with a foot shock. So there's a sound and there's a foot shock. And as you know, from our earlier discussion about Pavlovian learning, conditions stimulate, an unconditioned stimulate. Eventually the sound alone comes to evoke the fear response. And that's just classic, classical conditioning. The insular is this brain area that's associated with determining whether or not one's internal sensations, gut, heart, lungs, et cetera, are reasonable or not given the external circumstances. It can even measure or is associated with our understanding of what are called arterial baroreceptors. These are blood pressure sensors. So believe or not, when you know your pulse rate increases or you feel like you're stressed out, your arterial baroreceptors are sending a signal to your insular cortex and your insular cortex is saying, wow, like I'm really stressed out, my blood pressure is up, right? You don't actually have to measure your blood pressure with a cuff, your insular is doing it for you. It's not getting a quantitative readout, but it's getting a qualitative readout. The main effect of inhibiting or reducing the activity of the insular was that the intensity of an outside world experience led to a range of different internal effects. In other words, for most people a mild shock would induce a mild increase in heart rate, a mild increase in blood pressure. Whereas an intense shock to the skin would lead to a big increase in heart rate and a big increase in blood pressure. Turns out the insular is important for establishing that match of intensity. And when the insular is inhibited, what ends up happening is that a mild shock can create a big increase in blood pressure. And that can be maintained such that anything that's paired with that shock like a bell, or a tone would lead to a big increase in blood pressure. You've probably seen examples of this in the real world. Maybe this is even you. Some people are very jumpy in response to just even small changes in their environment. So if somebody is working and you walk in and you say, "Hello." And they'll go, they're jumpy. They have a low threshold to a big anxiety or fear response. Other people are really calm. I recall my bulldog, unfortunately passed away, but before he passed away, if you walked in the room and he said, "Hey, Costello." He might turn his eyes in your direction. He had a very high threshold to respond. He was pretty low anxiety animal. A lot of people are like that. You'd come up behind someone you say, "Hello." And they just turn around real slow, or they might just turn around at normal speeds and say, "Hello." Whereas other people jump out of their seat. The insular seems to be involved in calibrating how big or how high amplitude a given physiological response is. So it's pairing the internal landscape with the external world. And this might seem like just a mechanistic, but non-actionable point. But what you'll see from the next study that I'm going to describe is that recalibrating the relationship between outside events and internal responses, which is the job of the insular is actually something that's under our control. And through a very simple, very short protocol, we can actually recalibrate that system so much so that we can potentially reduce the amount of fear and trauma that we experience, in response to a memory or to a real event. And the entire process can occur very quickly. So I'm really excited to tell you about this next study for a number of reasons. First of all, it's extremely recent. Second of all, it's very well grounded in our current understanding of the mechanisms of stress, trauma and PTSD and unlearning of stress, trauma and PTSD. And third, it points to a actionable protocol that while certainly is not the only approach that I think people could or should take for fear, trauma and PTSD. Is one that I think we are going to see implemented into the clinical setting very soon if it's not happening already. Now, there's a fourth reason I'm very interested in it, which is that my lab works on stress, stress-relief and tools for managing sleep and improving focus, et cetera. And one of the hallmarks of the studies we've been doing lately is very brief five minute a day interventions of the sort that was used in this particular study. Although I should emphasize, I had nothing to do with this particular study. Now this particular study was carried out in an animal model in mice. The work in my laboratory focuses on human subjects. But the similarities of the stress system at least at the level that it was explored in this study I think have great relevance maybe even direct relevance to humans. So the title of this study is, Repeated exposure with short-term behavioral stress resolves pre-existing stress-induced depressive-like behavior in mice. Again, this study was in mice. And basically what they did is they stressed out mice, got them depressed, and you actually can do that in a mouse using a restraint protocol. And that's a long lasting restraint protocol, a 15 minutes or more. Mice Don't like it, you do it often enough. They stop working so hard in their life, in their mouse life to gain food, to gain mates. They show depressive symptoms in a number of levels. They show elevated glucocorticoids. You see the same thing in humans, Okay? Chronic stress in humans lasting weeks or more does the same exact thing. So again, a very close match here in terms of mechanism overall. And then what they did was a very counterintuitive thing. Rather than give these animals stress relief at the level of reducing their anxiety with Benzodiazepines, or giving them a nice little mouse vacation, or enriched environment. Things that have been done in a lot of previous studies. What they did is they subjected them to five minutes a day of intense stress, but only five minutes a day. And what they found was miraculously, but also very convincingly. Daily short bouts of intense stress actually undid, reversed the effects of chronic stress. And it did this at the level of glucocorticoids, of hormones, of neurotransmitters and a number of other different mechanisms. Now, I find this very exciting for a number of reasons but in particular, because my laboratory in collaboration with David Spiegel laboratory, our associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford. Been exploring how five minute a day respiration protocols can alleviate stress. And while those data are not yet published, they are at the stage where I'm comfortable talking about them. And we are seeing some very impressive and significant effects on stress reduction not just from respiration protocols that allow people to calm themselves but also respiration protocols that bring people into a heightened state of autonomic sympathetic arousal, AKA stress. As my colleague, Dr. David Spiegel, he's an MD psychiatrist and PhD. Likes to say, "When it comes to trauma, anxiety and PTSD, and the treatment of trauma, anxiety, and PTSD, it's not just the state that you are in or that you go into. It's how you got there and whether or not you had anything to do with it." And this brings us right back to those top-down mechanisms and the narrative around what we are experiencing internally. So let's zoom out and I'll explain how this works and what to do about it. We have this brain structure called the insular. We talked about the insular a few minutes ago. The insular is calibrating how we feel internally versus what's going on externally. It's involved in setting whether or not what we are feeling is appropriate given what's happening. We have a system that can generate threat responses. And in the case of trauma, PTSD, and extreme stress, chronic stress, that system gets ramped up so that it takes very little, maybe even just a memory or maybe even an association that we're not even aware of, our location trigger something, we're not even aware of it. And we start experiencing that symptomology. How do we recalibrate the system? Well, most of the approaches that are out there involving drug treatments, typical drug treatments would involve suppressing the level of internal arousal. Just trying to bring that down. Now, some of those drug treatments work. But oftentimes they don't. And if you think about it, it's probably not surprising that they don't because by taking a drug that just lowers your anxiety overall you're creating a different sort of miscalibration of the system. So what we've been doing in human subjects is having them do either breathing protocols that calm them, and I'll explain what that is in a moment, or doing breathing protocols that increase their level of autonomic arousal and seeing how that impacts their response to stress overall not just during that particular breathing protocol. So the calming protocol that we use involves these physiological size. I've talked about these previously on the podcast and elsewhere but if you just need a reminder, if you haven't heard about it. There's a pattern of breathing that we all do in sleep. When our carbon dioxide levels in our bloodstream get too high. And we do this when we get claustrophobic, meaning we do it reflexively. And that's a double inhale through the nose followed by a long exhale. So it's, [Andrew breathing] And yes, the inhales should be through the nose and yes, the exhales should be done through the mouth, ideally. So it's a big filling of the lungs through two breaths back to back. Inhales. [Andrew breathing] Even if you could only sneak in a little air on that second one, no talking to if you're going to do it right. And then a long exhale, which allows you to offload a lot of carbon dioxide in the exhale. And we have people doing that in real time anytime they experienced stress but the particular breathing protocol that we've been giving human subjects is for them to do the repeated... What we call cyclic sign. So double inhale, exhale, double inhale, exhale, double inhale, exhale repeatedly for five minutes. Which is actually a pretty long time to repeat that. But you can do it pretty slowly and people report and the data point to the fact that it's very calming. People feel more relaxed afterwards and that relaxation wicks out into other aspects of their life. Now, we did not look at stress and trauma in that condition. We also have another condition where people do what's called cyclic hyperventilation, which is very different and creates a very different internal state and is somewhat stressful. It's five minutes a day of stress much like the study that I just described. And involves basically doing this, what I'll do in a moment for five minutes which is hyperventilating. Which is, [Andrew breathing] But not continuously for the five minutes because many people would pass out or feel extremely uncomfortable. It involves inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, very deep inhale through the nose, exhale through the mouth. And then every 25 or 30 breaths or so doing a full exhale and holding one's breath, lungs empty for about 25, maybe 30, maybe even 60 seconds. And then continuing until five minutes is up. Subjects report and our data indicate that people feel a heightened level of autonomic arousal. In fact, I can feel it right now even from a very brief cyclic hyperventilation about I just did. You feel a heating up, you feel a... Some people will perspire, some people get wide-eyed, some people feel agitated. That's Adrenaline being released into your system. Now I'm not suggesting everyone run out and do this. And if you have a predisposition to panic attack or anxiety attacks please don't do this because it is very stimulating and can trigger those sorts of attacks. But this five minute a day protocol of cyclic hyperventilation does lead to big increases in autonomic arousal. So it's "Stressful" but to bring us back to my colleague, David Spiegel's quote. It really was him that said it, not me. It's not just about the state that you're in. It's about the state that you're in plus how you got there and whether or not you directed entry into that state. And that point one directs their own entry into a state deliberately is really key. And I think has an important implications for whether or not their stress relief and fear relief and trauma relief from bringing oneself into a state of increased autonomic arousal. Why? Because of the way that that fear and trauma circuitry is organized. If you recall, it's got these components of how external events can trigger an internal stress response and fear response and trauma response. But there's that top-down prefrontal component that can inhibit certain aspects of that fear and threat circuitry. Now, earlier we were talking about that prefrontal circuit being engaged through narrative, through self-directed deliberate narrative. It's the person deliberately retelling the story? Here we're talking about a deliberate reactivation of the sensations in the body. So where I think this is all going, meaning where my laboratory and the Spiegel laboratory and other laboratories out there are taking this. Is you can imagine a very brief five minutes a day, two weeks was the time that they did this for five minutes a day for two weeks. Intervention in which people, with the support of a clinician we would hope, would deliberately induce a physiological state that's very stressful, right? Not shying away from the stress response but increasing their own stress response deliberately. And maybe in conjunction with recounting the traumatic or fearful circumstance. This is far and away different than the kind of state of mind and body that would come about in a Ketamine-assisted trauma induced psychotherapy session, or a MDMA-assisted trauma psychotherapy session. Or in a purely narrative based psychotherapy session aimed at alleviating fear or trauma. The reason I like these sorts of interventions is that, A, they are very low cost or even zero cost, right? One you could imagine doing this while journaling or while recounting a particular experience. Again, they're very compact five minutes a day for two weeks is what was done in this particular mouse study. We don't know if that translates directly to the human study or not. What was interesting is that if they use the longer daily bouts of stress, like 15 minutes a day, that actually exacerbated the trauma and exacerbated the fear. So one has to be very careful. Stress and deliberate entry into stress and self stressing are very potent tools. They're very sharp blades that it does appear or it's likely can help alleviate trauma and fear. But how long to do this? Exactly what the protocol should be is still something that needs to be cultivated. I know there are going to be people out there that that nonetheless are going to want to experiment with some of this. I will say that I do not think it matters how one gets into that stressed state provided it as self-directed and that therefore could be cold shower. It could be ice bath. It could be anything that induces an acute, meaning a sudden onset of Adrenaline and is self-directed that's really the key feature here. So I'm very excited about these data both the five minute intervention data from the animal study. The work that's ongoing in my laboratory and Dr. Spiegel's laboratory, and the work that's being done on the insular. Because I think what we're starting to see now is a picture of fear and trauma and PTSD that has the sensory component, what's happening in the world around us. This internal interoceptive component, how appropriate are the signals that are occurring in my body? I mean, let's face it. If you almost get hit by a car and your heart rate is 140 beats per second. And that lasts for a little while and you're stressed out, you don't get the best night's sleep, that's pretty normal. That means you have a healthy fear system. If that persists and you're dealing with a lot of issues a week later, six weeks later, two years later. Then it's moved into the realm of trauma and PTSD. So we need to always be taking into account the different components of the circuitry. I do think that deliberate self-directed entry into these short bouts of stress is a very promising approach. And it's one that if people are going to experiment I just again, want to caution people with anxiety or panic disorders be very cautious, probably don't do it. Ideally you would do this in conjunction with support from a clinician. But I'm also aware that there are a lot of people out there that are dealing with trauma and dealing with post-traumatic stress of various kinds. And that they're desperate for various self directed intervention approaches. So just very briefly, I want to touch on some of the lifestyle and supplementation factors that can impact things like fear and trauma and getting over fear and trauma. To make a long story short. There are many things that we all can and should do to support our overall mental and physical health. And these are the foundational elements of quality nutrition. What that means to you? Quality sleep on a regular basis, ample sleep on a regular basis. We have an episode on how to master sleep in bed. We have four episodes that you can go to hubermanlab.com or elsewhere and scroll down and you can find those episodes in order to get your sleep really dialed in as they say. If you're sleeping regularly and for sufficient duration, all of the systems of your fear circuitry are going to function better. Mainly because the autonomic nervous system becomes very dysregulated when we are not getting good sleep on a regular basis. Dysregulated means that out of nowhere we can have a higher propensity to have sympathetic activation or we can feel really tired and wired. That seesaw that I described earlier of alertness and calmness of sympathetic and parasympathetic. In that analogy we can imagine that seesaw has a hinge and that hinge can neither be too tight nor too loose. If it's too tight, you can get locked into chronic activation of alertness or chronic fatigue. If it's too loose, you're bouncing all over the place and you might be [indistinct] tired and wired one moment and then really hyper alert. Sleep resets that balance and resets that hinge to the appropriate tightness, if you will. So that all these circuits and not just the circuits related to fear but also the circuits related to cognition, clear thinking to be able to spell out very clear detailed narratives, to feel like you are in control. You are deliberately bringing yourself into these protocols if that's what you intend to use. All of that functions much better when you're sleeping well and eating well. We talked about social connection. Those are all indirect supports of trauma relief and of getting over fear but they are essentia, okay? I think of them sort of like the tide. When the tide is high enough a boat can leave harbor. And if the tide is not high enough, then that boat is going to be stranded on shore. And in this analogy, the boat stranded on shore is your attempt or anybody's attempt to try and work through something. Very hard to do when we're sleep deprived, very hard to do when we're not fed enough or fed the proper foods for you. And that's a highly individual thing. And social connection as we talked about earlier, creates a general sense of support for the ability to move through things. But also chemical support at the level of suppressing Tachykinin, okay? So those foundational elements are absolutely key, but they are indirect. I just want to briefly mention a few of the things that some people find great benefit from in the supplementation realm as it relates to anxiety, stress, fear and PTSD. But I want to point out that again, these are somewhat indirect in their support and most of them focus on reducing anxiety overall. The two that I want to focus on are two that I've never talked about on this podcast before because I've done podcasts before on stress and managing stress in the kind of shorter term. So we've talked about Ashwagandha in a previous podcast, check out the podcast on stress, if you're interested in how that might be relevant as well as other tools. But the two are interesting ones. The first one is Saffron of all things. But there are 12 studies, believe it or not. That orally ingested Saffron at 30 milligrams seems to be a reliable dose for reducing anxiety on the standard inventories. The Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, for those of you that want to know. And these are significant effects. And these were carried out in both male and female subjects. Here I'm only referring to human studies. Several of these were double-blind studies. There's a meta analysis of the positive effects. Meaning anxiolytic affects, anxiety reducing effects that is of things like Saffron. Definitely have to check with your doctor and make sure it's right for you. But they're fairly impressive effects when you really think about it given that these are legal over the counter substances. Again, check with a doctor. The other one is a Inositol. Inositol has been shown to create a very notable decrease in anxiety symptoms. It's a fairly high dose that's used but believe it or not, the potency of this effect is on par with many of the prescription antidepressants. That's pretty impressive. These studies again are double-blind studies that all showed decreases in anxiety. These were done in males and females. The age range is very broad, which is great 18 all the way up to 64 across the studies that I at. One of the more important things is that the dosages are quite high 18 grams of Inositol taken for a full month. And it does take some time for these symptoms of anxiety to be improved. The low dose range was about 12 grams of Inositol, so as high as 18 as low as 12 grams. But then again, pretty impressive results considering that these are over the counter supplement compounds. There's even some evidence, I should just mention that the Inositol is also used for things like obsessive-compulsive disorder. We will do a full episode on OCD in the future, you can count on that. But in the meantime, Inositol does seem to have some positive effects on anxiety. And therefore it might provide a kind of supportive indirect effect for people that are trying to work through trauma and PTSD. Now, the question is when would you take it? Well, by the logic of what we spelled out today, you probably would not want to take it during a session or prior to a session where you were trying to amplify the intensity of an experience and the recounting of an experience in efforts to eventually extinguish that experience, right? Because if you put a drug or a compound of any kind prescription drug or supplement or any kind into your system you are essentially short-circuiting the extinguishing effect, right? So you could imagine doing this outside of that session as a way to kind of bring your system back to baseline, perhaps. So if you're going to use these sorts of things you want to think about them logically. And this also really points to the fact that many of the things that people are doing out there to self-medicate over use of alcohol or other substances to try and calm themselves because they have fear, anxiety and PTSD are actually driving that fear, anxiety and PTSD deeper into their system. Or at least is not allowing it to relieve itself through any attempts to recount or replay and using these top-down narrative circuits or other approaches. And the last compound I want to mention is a particularly interesting one, because it's neither an anxiolytic, nor is it something that increases overall levels of stress and alertness. But it has some kind of MDMA ish light contour to it. It does not produce as far as we know, the same mental effects or physical effects as MDMA by any stretch but that's... The substance I'm referring to rather is Kava. Kava has been shown in eight studies to have a very potent effect on reducing anxiety. But what's interesting about kava is that kava functions by increasing GABA, this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. Remember GABA is the inhibitory neurotransmitter that is used, that's employed by the very neurons in the prefrontal cortex that serve to inhibit the threat reflex. So it seems to increase GABA, but it also increases Dopamine. And that's a somewhat unusual compound. I'm not aware of many compounds that simultaneously increase GABA and increase Dopamine. And as you recall, that threat reflex has outputs that tap into the Dopamine system. Now that's a big leap to go from a compound that increases GABA and Dopamine and look at a circuit spelled out on paper in front of us and say, "Oh, there's GABA and Dopamine in this circuit and therefore this is a good compound to take." But the effects of Kava in human studies are pretty interesting as it relates to anxiety, stress, PTSD and fear. I'm not going to summarize all of these because there are eight studies that I'm aware of. But I'll just mention, again, these are double blind studies. So the trial design is solid. The age ranges are anywhere from 18 to 64 which is a nice broad age range. The number of subjects is quite high both men and women. No signs of hepatotoxic signal so meaning liver toxicity, although of course, check with your doctor. But what was interesting is that after a period of about three weeks of treatment with anywhere from 150 milligrams of what are called active kava lactones, okay? So there are dosages that relate to that kava. So a hundred milligrams of extract of Kava is a kind of a reasonable typical dose in these studies. But that spells out to a certain amount of Kava lactone. So you have to kind of boil down to what is the appropriate dosage. And it turns out it's extremely broad. You'll see evidence of 50 milligrams, you'll see evidence of 300 milligrams, is kind of all over the place. But each of these studies alone and together point to the fact that Kava does seem to produce a very potent anxiolytic and general kind of improvement in depressive symptoms and reduction in generalized anxiety across the board. So it's an interesting compound. I've never actually tried any of the compounds I just mentioned. Kava, Saffron or Inositol. So I can't report on them personally. I just know that a number of listeners of this podcast are interested in supplements and legal over the counter approaches to their biology and psychology. And so that's why I mentioned them. Those were the three for which I found the most convincing evidence and the largest bulk of evidence. So if you're interested in exploring those proceed with caution but they do seem quite interesting. So today we've reviewed a large amount of information about the biology of pathways in the brain and body that underlie the fear response. And they give rise to chronic fear and in some cases to trauma and PTSD. We also touched on a large variety of approaches to dealing with fear, trauma and PTSD that currently exist in the clinical landscape out there. I also touch on some of the emerging themes, for instance, this short five minute a day deliberate self-directed stress of any kind through respiration or other approaches of increasing Adrenaline. As an approach that might be viable, I should emphasize might, be viable for enhancing the speed or the potency of treatments to reduce fear or eliminate trauma. Most important I believe is to understand and really think about the logical structure of the circuits that underlie fear and PTSD. Because in doing that each of us, all of us, can think about what sorts of treatments and approaches make the most sense for them. I also hope that it will help people lean into certain practices involving re-exposure, provided that's done in a supportive environment. Re-exposure to a given traumatic event in an attempt to extinguish that. Obviously you want to do that safely, meaning psychologically safely and physically safely. There are great practitioners out there that can help you with that work. There are also a number of people out there I am certain that are carrying certain traumas or certain fears that they would like to alleviate that are not in the extreme clinical realm. And that's the reason why I touched on a number of things including some self-directed practices that might be useful and reasonable for them to explore. I realize we covered a lot of information today. If you're enjoying and are learning from this podcast and you're not traumatized by the amount of information covered, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on apple and Spotify. And on apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have suggestions of guests you'd like us to host on the podcast or you have topics that you'd like us to cover. Please put that in the comment section on YouTube. Also, please check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of this episode. That's a terrific way to support us. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support this podcast at any level that you like. On this podcast episode and in many previous podcast episodes, I describe supplements. While supplements aren't necessary and perhaps aren't right for everybody many people derive great benefit from supplements. It is important however, that if you're going to use supplements that they be a very high quality and that you can trust that the amounts of supplement listed on the supplement bottle are actually what's contained in the bottle. That's a serious issue with a lot of supplements out there. For that reason, we partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-E. Because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of their supplements and the amounts of the supplements listed on the bottle are actually what's are contained in the bottle. They've partnered with all the major sports teams as well as the Mayo Clinic. So we have a very high degree of trust with Thorne products. If you want to see the Thorne products that I take you can go to Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, .com/u/huberman. And there you can see the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site, through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following Huberman Lab on Twitter and Instagram, there I do short neuroscience tutorials. I offer a lot of tools oftentimes that don't overlap with the content of the podcast. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [bright music]

========================================

--- Video 299 ---
Video ID: HXzTbCEqCJc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXzTbCEqCJc
Title: Dr. David Buss: How Humans Select & Keep Romantic Partners in Short & Long Term
Published: 2021-11-29 13:00:20 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. David Buss, Professor of Psychology at the University of Texas, Austin, and one of the founding members of the field of evolutionary psychology.

Dr. Buss describes his work on how people select mates for short and long-term relationships, the dynamics of human courtship, and mate value assessment — meaning how people measure up as potential partners. We also discuss the causes of infidelity and differences for infidelity in men and women. He explains how people evaluate and try to alter other people’s mate value as a means to secure and even poach mates. We discuss monogamous and non-monogamous relationships in humans. And we discuss what Dr. Buss calls “the dark triad”— features common in stalkers and narcissists that relate to sexual and psychological violence in relationships.

This episode is sure to be of interest to anyone single or in a relationship who seeks to know how people select mates and anyone who is interested in forming and maintaining healthy romantic partnerships.

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Dr. Buss' New Book "When Men Behave Badly" - https://amzn.to/3FThTsG
Dr. Buss' Website at University of Texas, Austin - https://labs.la.utexas.edu/buss/david-buss/
Dr. Buss' Twitter - https://twitter.com/ProfDavidBuss

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. David Buss
00:04:10 Sponsors: ROKA, InsideTracker, Headspace
00:08:33 Choosing a Mate
00:13:40 Long Term Mates: Universal Desires
00:18:31 What Women & Men Seek in Long-Term Mates
00:25:10 Age Differences & Mating History 
00:32:20 Deception in Courtship
00:37:30 Emotional Stability
00:38:40 Lying About Long-Term Interest
00:41:56 Short-Term Mating Criteria, Sliding Standards & Context Effects
00:46:25 Sexual Infidelity: Variety Seeking & (Un)happiness & Mate Switching
00:54:25 Genetic Cuckolds, How Ovulation Impacts Mate Preference
00:57:00 Long-Term vs. Short-Term Cheating, Concealment
00:59:15 Emotional & Financial Infidelity
01:04:35 Contraception 
01:06:22 Status & Mating Success
01:10:10 Jealousy, Mate Value Discrepancies, Vigilance, Violence
01:24:13 Specificity of Intimate Partner Violence  
01:25:12 Mate Retention Tactics: Denigration, Guilt, Etc.
01:27:33 Narcissism, Machiavellianism, Psychopathy
01:33:25 Stalking
01:39:15 Influence of Children on Mate Value Assessments 
01:43:24 Attachment Styles, Mate Choice & Infidelity
01:46:40 Non-Monogamy, Unconventional Relationships  
01:54:00 Mate Value Self Evaluation, Anxiety About the Truth
02:02:12 Self Deception
02:05:35 The Future of Evolutionary Psychology & Neuroscience  
02:06:56 Books: When Men Behave Badly; The Evolution of Desire, Textbooks
02:10:42 Concluding Statements, Zero-Cost Support: Subscribe, Sponsors, Patreon, Thorne

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is Dr. David Buss. Doctor Buss is a Professor of Psychology at the University of Texas, Austin, and he is one of the founding members and luminaries in the field of evolutionary psychology. Doctor Buss's laboratory is responsible for understanding the strategies that humans use to select mates in the short- and long-term. And he is an expert in sex differences in mating strategy. His laboratory has explored for instance, why women cheat on their spouses or their long-term partners, as well as why men tend to cheat on their spouses and long-term partners. He's also explored a number of things related to the courtship dance that we call dating and securing a mate, including the use of deception related to proclamations of love or promises of finances or sexual activity. Doctor Buss's laboratory has also evaluated how status is assessed, meaning how we evaluate our own worth, and our potential as a mate, and who is, let's just say within range of a potential mate, both in the short- and long-term. For instance, today we talk about how people don't just make direct assessments of their own and other people's value as a potential mate, but also using the assessments of others to indirectly determine whether or not they stand a chance or not in securing somebody as a short- or long-term mate. His laboratory has also focused on some of the complicated and varied emotions related to mating, love, and relationships, such as lust and jealousy. And he's extensively explored something called mate poaching, or the various strategies that men and women use to make sure that the person that they want to be with, or the person they are with, is not with anyone else or seeking anyone else, and indeed that other people don't seek their mate. Doctor Buss's work also relates to how biological influences, such as ovulation or time within the menstrual cycle influences mate selection or tendency to have sex or not with a potential short- or long-term mate. And more recent work from Doctor Buss's laboratory focuses on the darker aspects of mating and sexual behavior in humans, including stalking and sexual violence. Today, we discuss all those topics. We also discuss some of the strategies that humans can use to make healthy mate selection choices, and for those that are already in committed relationships to ensure healthy progression of those committed relationships. In addition to publishing dozens of landmark scientific studies, Doctor Buss has authored many important books, a few of those include, The Evolution of Desire, and Why Women Have Sex. And his most recent book is the one that I'm reading now, which is called, When Men Behave Badly: The Hidden Roots of Sexual Deception, Harassment, and Assault. And it's an absolutely fascinating read. It has endorsements from Doctor Robert Sapolsky, Professor at Stanford, who's been on this podcast as a guest before, as well as Steven Pinker and Jonathan Haidt, who wrote The Coddling of the American Mind. It's a really important book I believe, and one that doesn't just get into the darker aspects of human mating behavior and violence, but also strategies that people can take to ensure healthy mating behavior and relationships. There's so much rumor, speculation, and outright fabrication of ideas about why humans select particular mates in the short- and long-term, what men and women do differently, and so on. What I love about Doctor Buss's work is that it's grounded in laboratory studies that are highly quantitative using rigorous statistics. And so throughout today's discussion, you'll notice that I'm wrapped with attention, trying to extract as much information as I can from Doctor Buss about the real science of human mate selection and mating strategy. I'm certain that everyone will take away extremely valuable knowledge that they can use in existing or future relationships from this discussion with Doctor Buss. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that the cells and connections of our brain and visual system have to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order to see clearly. For instance, when you go from a brightly lit environment to a dimmer environment or into a shadow, your visual system has to adjust. The problem with a lot of sunglasses and eyeglasses out there is that they don't work well with those adjustments. Roka has overcome those challenges, and as a consequence, no matter what environment you're in, you see with crystal clarity. Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses are also terrific because they are extremely lightweight, so you don't even notice that they're on your face. And they can be worn when working or for school or just walking about, but also when running or cycling. And indeed, if you get sweaty, they won't slip off your face. That's a terrific feature, but they can be worn to do anything. I wear readers at night, and sometimes when I drive at night, and a wonderful thing about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses is that unlike a lot of other performance glasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, or make it look like you're definitely off to exercise, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have a range of terrific aesthetics that you could wear anywhere. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses, you can go to roka.com, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's Roka, roka.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. Inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done, for the simple reason that many of the factors that strongly impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can get additional information about how your body and your nervous system work, your immune system, in ways that can inform better health choices. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there is that you don't get any information about what to do with the data that you get. Inside Tracker solves that problem. They have a very easy to use dashboard, so when you get your numbers back, it can direct you towards specific nutrition, supplementation, or lifestyle changes that you can make in order to bring the numbers for given hormones, metabolic factors, immune factors into the range that's ideal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's supported by 25 peer-reviewed published studies, and benefits from over 600,000 five star reviews. There is now a plethora of scientific data pointing to the fact that a regular meditation practice is immensely beneficial for reducing anxiety, improving sleep, improving focus, many, many other aspects of mental and physical health. The challenge many people have, however, is maintaining a regular meditation practice. And indeed, I am one of those people. I've been meditating on and off for about 30 years, and I confess a lot of times it's more off than on, until a few years ago when I started using the Headspace app, and then I found it very easy, and I continue to find it easy to maintain a daily meditation practice. And that's because Headspace has many meditations to select from. So even if I only have five minutes or 15 minutes, I'm able to do a meditation. I really enjoy those meditations, and I always see the benefits of those meditations. In fact, if I just miss a couple of days, I start to notice that I'm not doing as well as when I'm meditating regularly. The Headspace app makes it exceedingly easy to meditate regularly. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one-month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations for every situation. That's the best offer they have right now. So again, if you're interested, go to headspace.com/specialoffer today. And now my conversation with Doctor David Buss. David, delighted to be here. I've followed your work for a number of years, and I'm excited to ask you a number of questions about these super interesting topics about how people select mates, how they lie, cheat, and, but also behave well in this dance that we call mate choice. - Yes, fortunately, there are well-behaving humans in the mix here. - Good to know. Just to start off, perhaps you could just orient us a little bit about mate choice. You know, some of the primary criteria that studies show men and women use in order to select mates, both, shall we call them transient mates as well as lifetime mates? - Right, well, that's a critical distinction, because what people look for in a long-term committed mateship, like a marriage partner or a long-term romantic relationship is different from what people look for in a hookup or casual sex, or one night stand, or even a brief affair. So that's actually critical. I wonder if we could maybe just back up a second and just talk a little bit about the theoretical framework for understanding mate choice. So it basically stems from Darwin's theory of sexual selection, and most people, when they think about evolution, they think about, the cliche is like survival of the fittest or nature, red in tooth and claw. And Darwin noticed that there were phenomena that couldn't be explained by this so-called survival selection, things like the brilliant plumage of peacocks, sex differences, like in, you know, stags, for example, have these massive antlers and the females of the species do not. And so he came up with the theory of sexual selection, which deals not with the evolution of characteristics due to their survival advantage, but rather due to their mating advantage. And he identified two causal processes by which mating advantage could occur. One is intrasexual competition with the stereotyping, two stags locking horns in combat with the victor gaining sexual access to the female, loser ambling off with a broken antler and dejected in low self-esteem and needing psychotherapy perhaps, or mate value improvement therapy. And the logic was whatever qualities led to success in these same-sex battles, those qualities get passed on in greater numbers. And so you see evolution, which is change over time and increase in frequency of the characteristics associated with winning these, what Darwin called contest competition. And we know that the logic of that is more general now and involves things like in our species competing for position in status hierarchies. So anyway, so intrasexual competition is one, but the second most relevant to your question about mate choice is preferential mate choice, that was the second causal pathway. And the logic there is that if members of one sex agree with one another, if there's some consensus about the qualities that are desired, then those of the opposite sex who possess the desired qualities or embody those desired qualities, they have a mating advantage. They get chosen, they get preferred. Those lacking desired qualities get banished, shunned, ignored, or in the modern environment become incels. And so the logic there is very simple, but also very powerful. And that is that whatever qualities are desired, consensually desired, if there's some heritable basis to those, then those increase in frequency over time. And so, and in the human case, these two causal processes of sexual selection are related to each other, in that the preferences, the mate preferences of one sex basically set the ground rules for competition in the opposite sex. So if, for example, hypothetically women preferred to mate with men who were able and willing to devote resources to them, then that would create competition among men to claw their way, you know, and beat out other men in resource acquisition, and then displaying that their willingness to commit that to a particular woman. And same with women though. One of the interesting things about humans is that we have mutual mate choice, which is not true in all species. And that is that it's not just a matter of, you know, you selecting someone to be your mate, they have to reciprocally select you. And so with mutual mate choice, we have both preferences, mate preferences, that women have, and mate preferences that men have, and consequently competition among men for access to the most desirable women in competition among women for access to the most desirable man. So that's sort of a little bit of theoretical backdrop. So you asked, well, what are the qualities that men and women desire, and maybe we'll start with long-term mating, and then shift to short-term mating. And long-term mating is interesting in and of itself in that it's very rare in the mammalian world. So there are more than 5,000 species of primates of which, I'm sorry, more than 5,000 species of mammals, of which we are one, but the percentage of mammals that have anything resembling like a pair bond of long-term mating strategy, it's about 3-5%. It's extremely rare. And even our closest primate relatives, the chimpanzees, they don't have a long-term mating strategy. They don't have anything resembling pair bond in mating. In chimps, the females come into estrus, almost all the sexual activity occurs during the estrous phase. After that, males and females basically ignore each other for the most part, with some exceptions. But with humans, you have the evolution of long-term pair bonding, attachment, a heavy male investment in offspring, relatively concealed by ovulation. And so these are kind of unique aspects of the human mating system. So to get to your question, so what are the qualities? So the best, the most large scale study that's been done on this, is a study that I did a while back of 37 different cultures. And it's now been replicated by other researchers, but basically what we found is three clusters of things. We found qualities that both men and women wanted in a long-term mate. We found some qualities that were sex differentiated, where women prefer them more than men or men prefer them more than women. And then we found some attributes that were highly variable across cultures in whether people found these as desirable or indispensable or irrelevant, in a mate. And so I could give examples of each of these. - Yeah, that would be great. I'd love to know what some of the common themes were across these cultures in terms of what's being mate and sexually select for. - Yeah, so some of the things that were, so we talk about universal desires, so things that men and women share. There are things like intelligence, kindness, mutual attraction and love, which is really kind of heartwarming because some people think that love is a recent western invention by some European poets, but it turns out it's not true. You can go to the Kung San in Botswana, and they describe pretty much the same experience as a falling in love as we do. And even describe the distinction between this kind of infatuation stage of love and the attachment phase where, you can't maintain this frenzy of infatuation and obsession for very long, six weeks, maybe six months at most, otherwise you can get nothing else done in your life. Those are those dopamine circuits firing at high frequency. - Yeah, so mutual attraction, love, good health, dependability, emotional stability, although there's a bit of a sex difference there with women preferring it a bit more than men. And so basically, and these may seem obvious. So no one wants a stupid, mean, ugly, disease-ridden mate. And so perhaps obvious, but, but no one knew this in advance of the 37 culture study. So these were some universal preferences. So you go to the Zulu tribe in South Africa or, you know, Rio de Janeiro in Brazil or Portugal or Oslo, or anywhere in the world, and these are qualities that people universally desire in long-term mates. Sex differences. So sex differences basically fell into two clusters. So women more than men prioritized good earning capacity, slightly older age, and the qualities associated with resource acquisition. So these are things like a man's social status. Does he have drive? Is he ambitious? Does he have a good long-term resource trajectory is one way that I like to phrase it, because women often they don't look at necessarily the resources that a guy possesses at this moment, but what is his trajectory? - Just sorry to interrupt, but may I ask, is there anything known about the commonalities of how that is assessed? You know, is it, you know, he's rolling out of bed early in running eight miles, he's showing proficiency in school, he handles himself well socially at parties, isn't drinking too much, but knows when, obviously they're integrating multiple cues, the brain is a complex place, but is there any information about what those variables are across cultures? - Yeah, well I think that there's been less attention to that, so that's a great question. One of the things that we do know across cultures is that women attend to the attention structure. So the attention structure is a key determine of status. So the people who are high in status are those to whom the most people pay the most attention. - So the attention of others to them, not how well a given potential mate can focus and pay attention, necessarily. - Yeah, exactly. And, but women look, I mean, you know, is the guy, even in the modern environment, the guy spending eight hours a day playing video games, eating Cheetos and drinking beer, or is he devoting effort to his professional development? So hard work, ambition. Does he have clear goals or is he in an existential crisis not knowing what he's going to do with his life? So those are some of the qualities that people look for. And also women use what's called in the literature, mate choice copying. And this is related in part to the attention structure, that is, guys who have passed the filters of multiple women. Those are like, pre-approved men. So we've done studies where you just take a guy, photograph him alone versus, take the same guy, put an attractive woman next to him, or put two women next to him, and women judge exactly the same guy to be much more attractive, if he's paired with women, then if he's not. And some guys exploit this in the modern world by hiring wing women to go with them on dates and so forth, this is my sister or a former girlfriend or whatever. So, but you're correct in, in that women use multiple cues to assess these things, and they change over time. You know, so, in the modern environment, even when things like the attention structure, does this guy have a million Twitter followers or three Twitter followers. So that is an index of the attention structure and hence the status of the guy within the broader community. So, and from an evolutionary perspective, it's reasonable that women would prioritize these qualities because of the tremendous asymmetry in our reproductive biology, namely that fertilization occurs internally within women, not within men, women bear the burdens of the nine month pregnancy, which is metabolically expensive, as well as creating opportunity costs in terms of mobility and, and solving other tasks that people need to solve in the course of their lives. And so one way to phrase that is that the costs of making a bad mate choice are much heavier for women when it comes to sexual behavior certainly, because, and the benefits correspondingly of making a wise mate choice are higher for women in the sexual context. But as I said, we have mutual mate choice in our species. And so what do men value more than women? Physical attractiveness. - They ranked that as a more important criteria than do women about men? - Yes, exactly. - Consistently across cultures? - Consistently, and it's not that women are indifferent to it. So women do pay attention to a guy's physical appearance, his fitness and so forth, and guys are actually off base in thinking that women prefer more muscular men than they actually do. So like in muscle magazines, these men with bulging biceps and so forth, women don't find that especially, but they do prioritize fit men, a good shoulder to hip ratio and other qualities of physical appearance, as well as things like cues to health. So physical appearance provides a wealth of information about a person's health status, but also provides for men a wealth of information about a woman's fertility, her reproductive value. Now not that men think about that consciously. I mean, men don't walk down the street and see a woman and say, oh, I find her attractive because I think she must be very fertile. Maybe a few weird people do that, but most men just it's like, they just find those cues attractive. And the cues are cues associated with youth and health because we know that youth is a very powerful cue to fertility and reproductive value. So men prioritize physical appearance, and in the field of psychology, I was taught when I was an undergraduate that you can't judge a book by its cover, that physical attractiveness was infinitely arbitrary, infinitely culturally variable. And it's simply not true. We know now based on the last 20 years of scientific studies, that the cues that men find attractive women are not at all arbitrary. There is some variation across cultures, like in relative plumpness versus thinness, but things like clear skin, clear eyes, symmetrical features, a low waist to hip ratio, full lips, lustrous hair, all these are qualities that are associated with youth and health, and hence have heavy evolved to be part of our standards of attractiveness. And so, it's not just that men are these superficial creatures who evaluate women on the basis of appearance, there is an underlying logic to why they do so. And as I said, relative youth, this age thing is one of the largest sex differences that you find in long-term mate selection, with women preferring somewhat older men, and men preferring somewhat younger women. Is there a consistent age gap to relate to that statement? - Yes, there is. So the age gap though depends on the age of the man. So, we can document this, so in my studies, what we found is that men preferred women who were about three to four years younger than they were on average. And I'll qualify this in a second. Women preferred guys who were about three and a half to four and a half years older than they were. So there was a sex difference going in the opposite direction. But as men get older, they prefer women who are increasingly younger than they are. So one way to gauge this, so there are actual marriage statistics, and then there are expressed preferences, and both sexes kind of converge. So if you look at, you know, first marriage, second marriage, third marriage, if people get divorced and remarried. Average age gap is, in America anyway, is three years at first marriage with the guys being older, five years at second marriage, and eight years at third marriage. So that is, as men are getting older and getting divorced and remarried, they are marrying women who are increasingly younger than they are. In terms of preferences, it's also expressed in preferences. So it doesn't go down, so like a, say a 25-year-old man would say, prefer a woman who's 20 or in her early 20s, 35-year-old man might prefer a woman who's in her late 20s or early 30s. A 50-year-old man might prefer a woman who is say, 35 to 38. So the preferences do go up, but the gap gets increasingly larger. And the reason that you don't see things like, why aren't men preferring women? So peak fertility in humans is around age 24, 25. And so you say, well, why aren't the 60-year-old men prioritizing 25-year-old women? Well, as I mentioned, it's a reciprocal mutual mate choice phenomenon. - She constraints the equation. - Well, she constrains it, but also a marriage and long-term mating are things other than reproductive unions in the modern environment. That is they're, you know, you're supposed to do things as a couple. And if you get too large an age gap, then essentially you're in different cultures. You grow up with different songs, and if the cultural gap gets too large, you don't understand each other. So, there are constraints on that, but if you look at contexts where there are no constraints of that sort, so historically kings, emperors, despots, et cetera, and I'll give one more modern example, they basically prefer young, fertile, attractive females. And if they have harems, they stock the harems with those, and then circulate them out when they're 30, and so forth. And so if you look at marriage systems that are unconstrained, the preferences are more likely to be revealed, or within cultures. That is, if you look at men who were in a position to get what they want. So as Mick Jagger noted, you can't always get what you want, but if you try sometimes, you get what you need. - I hear that most of the time he got what he needed, - He got what he wanted, and maybe what he needed, but he was in a position. I don't know if he still is, he's in his seventies now, but he was in a position as was, let's say, Rod Stewart, to take another example, or Leonardo DiCaprio. If you were a male who's in a position where there are thousands of women potentially available to you, and you can have your pick, then you see that clearer expression for younger females. There was a chart that was floating around the internet of the girlfriends of Leonardo DiCaprio as he got older. And as he's getting older and older, and the graph of the age of his girlfriends, it basically stayed the same, it was in the early twenties or so. - He values consistency. - Consistency. But, so anyway, the data converge on that. So these are universal sex differences in long-term mate selection. So now when we shift to, and I should mention cultural variability, because that's a critical thing, because there is in my 37 culture study, what I found was the preference for virginity, that is no prior sexual experience, that was the most variable desire across cultures. So you had cultures, like at the time of the study, China, it was basically indispensable that a partner be a virgin. And then at the other end, you have Sweden where Swedes typically place close to zero value on it, and some even find it undesirable. Like, you're weird if you're a virgin. And so you have this whole spectrum. - This is virginity in the female, or is this also, in China was it preference that the male and the female be virgins? It's a mutual mate a selection? - Yeah, it was a preference for both sexes. - Interesting. - But it's a good question, because where there was a sex difference, it was always in the direction of males preferring virginity more than females, and we've gone back to China. So I still do research in China among other places. And we've gone back and retested modern urban populations, and the importance of virginity has gone down in China, especially in the urban areas, and the sex difference that didn't exist before, has now emerged, where males value it more than females. And I think part of it was in previous times, you hit ceiling effects, you know, where both sexes say, yeah, it's absolutely important to be a Virgin. So, there's cultural variation and cultural change over time in some of these qualities. But the sex differences that I described have remained invariant over the years. So since my 37 culture study, this has been replicated in, at least a couple of dozen different cultures, and we've gone back to some of the cultures. So I mentioned, we've gone back to China, Brazil, and India, to look at cultural changes over time, and there have been, you know, in some cases, dramatic cultural changes over time. But the sex differences that I described are invariant. They haven't changed a bit. - I'd be remiss if I didn't ask about truth telling and deception, because some of the measures that you're describing, age, for instance, one can potentially lie about, right? I'm guessing that there are people who do that on online profiles and whatnot. From what I understand, people also lie about height and other features on online profiles, but some of them are much harder to hide, right? Eventually the truth comes out about some, if not all of these things. So, if you would, could you tell us about how men and women leverage deception versus truth telling and communicating some of the things around mate choice selection? - Yeah, well, so basically both men and women do deceive, so we have the modern cultural invention of online dating, which, you know, was little-used 10 years ago, and virtually absent 20 years ago. And people do lie, but they lie in predictable ways. They lie in ways that attempt to embody the mate preferences of the person they're trying to attract. And so men do lie. They deceive about their income, their status. So they exaggerate their income by about 20%. They tack on about two inches to their height. So if they're five ten, they round up to six feet. So they don't like, if they're five ten, they don't say that they're gigantic, but they kind of round it up in the more desirable direction. Women tend to deceive about weight. So they tend to shave about 15 pounds off of their reported weight, and both sexes post photos that are not truly representative of what they actually look like. So they might post photos of themselves when they were younger, or they're even advice, tips on how to create the best selfie, of the best angle, that will maximally, you know, enhance what you look like. - Or just doctoring of photos I'm guessing. - Oh yeah, Photoshopping, absolutely. And one of the things about it now, you say, well, do people find out, of course, people do find out. I'll just give you one story about a colleague of mine, who is a male, who's doing internet dating. And he picked only women who self-described as sevens on the one to seven on attractiveness. So the most attractive, as self-reported, and se he went out with this one woman, and she was missing her front teeth. And he said, well, call me picky, but missing her front teeth. And she thinks she's like the top of attractiveness, he was a little disappointed about that. And women of course are disappointed, they meet a guy who they think is this physically fit, you know, athletic guy, and he comes up he's, you know, 300 pounds and overweight. So people do find out. And there are some internet dating sites have kind of a vetting of the accuracy of something. So some things you can look up through public records, and does this guy have a criminal record, for example, is he on a, you know, a sexual offenders website? So there's some things you can verify. But what I tell people is, you really have to meet the person and interact, you know, because in part because of the deception, but also because what happens with internet dating is that the photograph tends to overwhelm all the other cues and all the other cues are written statements. And we weren't really evolved to process written statements, but we were evolved to respond to physical cues, but, and men tend to attend to the visual cues much more than women. So women in their mate selection, they have olfactory cues to what does the guy sound like? His vocal qualities, that's auditory cues, but olfactory cues, what does he smell like? And so women have a more acute sense of smell than men do. And so if the guy doesn't smell right, even if he embodies all these other qualities women want, that's a deal breaker. And so I encourage people just, you know, stop with a hundred texts back and forth or messaging, and meet a person for a cup of coffee and interact. And then you'll, you know, you'll get a more accurate bead on the person. And then of course, some qualities you can't assess even with a half-hour interaction, you can tell a lot, but things like emotional stability, or things that have to be assessed over time. And so one of the things that I advise people to do, and I'm not in the advice-giving business, but people ask me all the time. If they find out what I study, they say, well, I got this problem, can you give me advice? But one of the things to assess, things like emotional stability, which is absolutely critical in long-term mating, is to do something like go on a trip together, take a vacation where you're even in an unfamiliar environment where you have to cope with things that you're not familiar with. And as opposed to an environment where it's very predictable, and so you get a greater exposure, because one of the hallmarks of emotional instability is how they respond to stress. So emotionally unstable people tend to have a long latency to return to baseline after a stressful event. And so this is the sort of information you can't get on a coffee date, you can only get by assessing it over time. - Somebody whose laboratory studies stress and tools to combat stress. That's great, it's yet more incentive for people to develop self-regulatory mechanisms for themselves. I'm guessing many of the features of deception in this context were present long before internet dating. And so is it, it's somewhat dark to think about, but is, is deception built into this dance that we call mate selection? And has it been built in for a long time, or is this something that you think has emerged more as people are approaching each other through these electronic, web-based mediums? - I mean, some forms of deception have been there for a long time over human evolutionary history. So one form of deception, which we haven't mentioned is deception about whether you're interested in a long-term committed relationship or a short-term hookup. And so there's deception about that, especially on the part of men. So men who were interested, like on Tinder, it has been reported, although Tinder denies this, there's been reported that something like 30% of the men on Tinder, are either married or in long-term committed relationships, and they're looking for something on the side, but in terms of successfully attracting a mate, the overt display that, hey I'm interested in just a short-term hookup. I'm interested in sex, so I want to have sex right now. Let's just go back to my apartment. These are very ineffective tactics. And so effective tactics for men are often displaying cues to long-term interests. And so, and of course that's effective for a woman who's seeking a long-term interest. And so, that's a deception. So we find in our studies of deception, that men tend to exaggerate the depths of their feelings for a woman, exaggerate how similar they are, and how aligned they are in their values and religious orientations and political values and so forth. And so, I think there's deception around that, and I think that's probably an evolutionarily recurrent form of deception that women have defenses against by the way. But I think that modern internet dating opens the door for certain types of deception, that were at a minimum, more difficult to accomplish ancestrally. So like things like Photoshopping, you know, wasn't available back then. plus we evolved in the context of small group living, where you not only had your own personal observations of someone's qualities, you had also your relatives, your friends, allies, the social reputation that someone had. And these are all critical sources of information that are less available in modern environments because, you know, people migrate, they move from place to place. They can close down one internet profile and put up another, or that could have six going simultaneously. So the modern environment opens up the door for forms of deception that weren't available or weren't available to the same degree, ancestrally. - I see. Very interesting. Would you mind touching on some of the features that are selected for, in terms of sexual partner choice? We talked a little bit about mate choice, but in terms of sexual partner choice, are there any good studies exploring what people are selecting for, or is it that they are both just in a state of pure hypothalamic drive? I'm a neuroscientist, after all. And therefore it's hard to recreate in the laboratory. - Well, no, no. We do know something about that, and we know something about how the preferences for a sex partner differ from preference for a long-term mate. There is overlap of course, but one thing is physical appearance. So physical appearance for women is important in long-term mating, not as important as it is for men, but it becomes more important in short-term mating. And so it is the guy good-looking? So those physical attributes are more important for women. They are, they remain important for men, physical appearance in short-term mating, but with the footnote that men are willing to drop their standards in short-term mating, if it's low commitment, low risk, just sex, without entangling commitments. Women are more likely to prioritize what I call bad boy qualities. So guys who are very self-confident, guys who are strut, guys who are a little arrogant, guys who are risk-taking, guys who defy conventions, women are more attracted to those guys in short-term mating than long-term mating. And whereas in long-term mating, they go more for the good dad qualities. Is this guy dependable? Is he going to be a good father to my children? And then also in short-term mating women use that mate-copying a heuristic. That is, if there are thousands of other women who find him attractive, women find him attractive. And so that's why you have the groupie phenomenon. So, with the rock stars, for example, there are thousands of screaming women, all of whom want to sleep with this famous rock star. And they use that as information they find, if you took like a still photo of some of these rock stars and asked women how attractive the guy is, versus tell 'em he's a famous rock star and showed the thousands of women screaming at him, that they judge him entirely differently, in terms of his attractiveness. So even, and this is an important point that women's attraction to men is more context specific, and varies more across contexts, than men's attraction to women. And so I'll give you just an example of that. This is a female colleague of mine went to a conference, an academic conference, and she found the organizer of this conference to be really attractive, and then saw him six months later and wondered, well, what was I thinking? He doesn't seem very attractive at all. And what it was is when he was the organizer, he was at the center of the attention structure. You know, he was the guy up on stage directing everybody and everyone was attending to him. And then when he was just a normal presenter at a conference, he didn't command the attention structure like he did when he was the organizer. And so this is just an illustration of how circumstance-dependent women's mate attraction is for guys. It depends on, you know, his status, the number of women that are attracted to him, the attention structure, how he interacts with a puppy, or a baby. If he's ignoring a baby in distress or positively interacting with a young child. All these things, whereas for men, it almost doesn't matter. Context is more irrelevant. They're honing in on the specific psychophysical cues that the woman is displaying, and context be damned. - Very interesting. Let's talk about infidelity in committed relationships. What are some of the consistent findings around reasons for, and maybe even long-term consequences of infidelity for men and women, and this could be marriage, or long-term partnership, or, you know, infidelity of any kind, I suppose. I'm guessing it does happen. How frequent is it? - Yeah, that's the interesting thing. Well, how frequent it is, is difficult to gauge because, it's one of the forms of human conduct that people like to keep secret. So, if you go back now say 70 years to the classic Kinsey studies, the questions about infidelity were the questions that most people refused to answer. And when the question was brought up, caused more people to drop out of the study. And so that kind of tells you something that, I mean, what do people conceal? You know, infidelity, incest, murder, there is a small handful of things that people universally want to conceal, and infidelity is one of them. So, but people do it. And so Kinsey estimated 26% of married women committed an infidelity at some point during their marriage, and about 50% of men. Other studies have given lower figures. And so the exact figures bounce around, depending on, you know, anonymity provided and how comfortable they are with the interviewer and so forth. - And by infidelity, does that mean intercourse with somebody else? So we're not talking about quote unquote, emotional affairs. We're talking about just sex with somebody other than their committed partner unbeknownst to their partner. - Right, right. And there are other forms of infidelity, which we could get into, including emotional infidelity and financial infidelity. But here, we're just talking about, for the moment, sexual infidelity. And the interesting thing about sexual infidelity is that the sexes really differ fundamentally in the motives for committing infidelity. So for men, the primary motive, and these are on average sex differences. So whenever I talk about sex differences, I'm talking about on average sex differences, cause there's overlap in the distributions. So these are generalizations of which there are exceptions. So for men, it's mainly a matter of sexual variety. So about 70% of the men, it's the opportunity presented itself, I was out of town and I had this opportunity. So low risk, low cost pursuit of sexual variety, sexual novelty, is a key motivation for men. - Sorry to interrupt. So 70% of men that cheat that's the primary cause, or is it that 70% of men do cheat? - No, no, no. Of the men who cheat, 70%, thank you for that clarification, of the men who do cheat 70% cite that as the key motive, the key reason why they committed an infidelity. - Sort of like why mountain climbers climb mountains, because they're there? - Right, right. Because they're there, the comedian, I think it was Chris Rock said, men are only as faithful as their opportunity. - Or how available their password on their phone is to their partner. - Right, right. So, but, and that's an exaggeration, but if you look at women, this just desire for pure novelty, sexual variety, is much less of a motive, but women who have affairs cite that they're unhappy with their primary relationship, emotionally unhappy, or sexually unhappy, and typically both. And this may seem like totally obvious that, well, of course, people if they're unhappy in a relationship are more likely to stray, but in fact, it's not true for men. So if you compare men who are happy with their marriage, and men who are not happy with their marriage, there's no difference in their infidelity rates. And I think it goes down to that issue of, you know, motive for seeking variety. So now why do women do it? Because it's a risky endeavor. She risks her long-term mate or losing her long-term mate. It's risky in terms of reputational damage for both sexes. So it's a risky thing. Why do women do it? And there are two competing hypotheses, at least two, but there are two primary competing hypotheses in the evolutionary literature. One is called the dual mating strategy hypothesis, where women are seeking to get resources and investment from one guy and good genes from another guy. And in principle that can work. And I initially this wasn't a hypothesis original with me. This is, Steve Gangestad, Randy Thornhill, and some others, Marty Hazelton, a former student of mine, have advocated this dual mating strategy hypothesis. And originally I was endorsed it, because the data seemed to support it, and we can get into which data seemed to support it. But over time I became more and more dubious about this hypothesis, and instead have advocated what I call the mate switching hypothesis. And so if you look at a whole host of information around why women have affairs, it's not compatible with the dual mating strategy hypothesis. So, and is compatible with the mate switching, that is, women who are looking to either divest themselves from an existing mateship, or trade up in the mating market to a mate who's more compatible with them or higher in mate value, or simply see whether they're sufficiently desirable, so that it eases the transition into the mating pool, or keeping a mate made as a potential backup mate, what I call mate insurance. You have car insurance if something bad happens to your car, house insurance, we also have mate insurance, you know. One women said, men are like soup, you always want to have one on the back burner. So, whether that's the best analogy or not, I'm not sure, but it kind of captures something, about why so, well, what evidence am I talking about? Well, for one thing, women who have affairs, and this is about 70% of them. - Again, sorry, just, I want to make sure. Of women who have affairs. - So let's say, ballpark, Kinsey was, let's say roughly right, 25-26% of women will have affairs. Let's just assume that he's right. And we don't know exactly, but of the women who do have affairs, about 70% say they have fallen in love with their affair partner. They become deeply emotionally involved with their affair partner. And to me, if you're just trying to get good genes from a guy, that is the last thing you want to do is fall in love with them or get emotionally involved, but it's very compatible if you want to switch mates. And so that's sort of, that's one piece of evidence that suggests that women, the mate switching function of infidelity is a more likely explanation. Now, these two are not inherently incompatible hypotheses. In other words, it's possible that some women do pursue a dual mating strategy hypothesis, but there's other evidence that suggests, so for example, what are the actual rates of genetic cuckoldry? Well in the modern environment anyway, they're pretty low. It turns out they're like 2-3%. - Could you just explain for the audience what genetic cuckoldry is? - So this is where the woman, where the man believes he is the genetic father of a child, but it turns out he's not, might be the mailman or the next door neighbor or the guy she's having an affair with. So mistaken paternity and genetic cuckoldry is just one way to capture it. - Named after the cuckoo bird, right? - Named after the cuckoo bird, yeah. - Who sneaks its eggs into the nest of the other, destroys the future offspring of the bird, and then basically offloads all the work onto another. - Right. - Father. - Parasitizes, yeah the parental investment of different bird species. So anyway, so I think that, and there's other sources of evidence that I think points, so one of the sources of evidence that initially seemed to support the dual mating strategy hypothesis was ovulation shifts. So in other words, it looked like from the early studies that when women are ovulating, these are among non-pill-taking women, women not on hormonal contraceptives, that they experienced a preference shift toward more men who were masculine and symmetrical, which were hypothesized markers for good genes. And there's an explanation for that, but it turns out the effects of ovulation on women's mate preferences are far weaker than the initial studies looked like. And in fact, some larger scale studies have failed to replicate them entirely. And so that was one of the key sources of evidence. These ovulation shifts that women were going after the genes, because it's only when she's ovulating, and she can get pregnant by having sex with another man that it would make sense for her to have sex with another man. And there was even some early evidence that women were timing their affairs, timing sex with their affair partners to coincide with when they were ovulating. But, as I said, some of these subsequent studies have failed to replicate these early findings, calling into question the dual mating strategy notion. And so I've shifted my views on this, and now endorse the mate switching hypothesis as a more likely explanation for why most women have affairs. - The way you describe this makes me wonder if, of the women that have affairs, do those affairs tend to be more long lasting than the affairs that men have, because the way you describe it, as men are seizing an opportunity to sort of a carpe diem type approach to infidelity, and women potentially on average, are capitalizing on something that is longer term. Now, of course, if they're doing this around ovulation, then it would constrain the amount of times they would need to see or have sex with this other person that they're not married to. But is there any evidence that women have more ongoing affairs and men have more transient affairs? - Yeah, there is. And so if you look at people who have affairs, there's a sex difference there. So that women tend to have affairs with one person, and become emotionally involved with that one person over time. Men who have affairs tend to have affairs with a larger number of affair partners. And so, which then by definition, can't be long lasting. You can't have long-term affairs with six different partners. - Unless he's juggling multiple phone accounts or something. - Right, right. And some men try to do that, but I think it could be very taxing. - Yeah, and in this day and age, it's easier to meet more people by virtue of online communications, but it's also easier to get caught, meaning it's harder to conceal interactions. Everything's in the cloud anyway. A good friend of mine who is former very high level in special operations, said anything that's not in your head and only in your head is available for others to find, should they want it, and I think that's largely true. - Yeah so, phone information, text messages, and people are very good at hacking into their partners' phones, computers. And then also there are video cameras everywhere. So sneaking off to this quiet restaurant, I mean, there are probably eight video cameras that can record you walking in and out of that restaurant. - Everything can be found. I'm certain of that. You mentioned emotional affairs and financial infidelity, as well. I had a girlfriend once who, as a early date discussion said, not that I get the impression that you are, but I want to be very clear. She said, that you are not emotionally, physically or financially tied to any other women. And I thought it was very interesting that now you bring up financial infidelity. She's quite happily partnered now and not with me, but, but it's interesting, it's the first time I heard anyone spell it out that way as a list, almost like specific aims in a grant. What is emotional infidelity? What is financial infidelity? - Yeah, yeah. Well, this is a very smart woman, she tapped into all three. So, and I assumed you gave honest responses to all of those three questions. - As I recall I did, but as we now know, you can ask her at some point. - Right, right. - And there is self deception in the service of deception that is another issue. So emotional infidelity is basically exactly what it sounds like. It's falling in love with someone else, becoming psychologically close to someone else, sharing intimate or private information with someone else. That's what I mean by emotional infidelity. And one of the hallmarks of this is a study done by a former student of mine, Barry Cooley, it was very clever I thought. He analyzed, there used to be this reality TV show called Cheaters, where they would hire detectives, and they would, when the detective would like, say follow someone to a hotel room, they'd call up the partner and say, your husband just walked into the hotel room with someone else. Would you like to come down to the hotel and confront him? And a certain percentage of people would confront, and what he analyzed, so he analyzed all these episodes of this show called Cheaters. And what he examined was the verbal interrogations when people confronted their partners. And when men confronted their partners, the first question they want to know is, did you fuck him? Women, their first question was, do you love her? And so this kind of captures that difference between sexual infidelity and emotional infidelity, and also kind of captures another sex difference when it comes to sexual jealousy, you know, where men tend to be more focused on the sexual components of the infidelity, because those are what compromise his paternity certainty, his certainty that he's actually the genetic father of whatever offspring ensue, whereas love is a cue to, do you love her? That's a cue that he's going to leave you, the woman, for another woman, as a cue that, to the long-term loss of that investment and commitment from that partner. And so the sexes seem to differ in which aspects of the infidelity, with women were attuned to or more upset by the emotional infidelity, men, more by the sexual infidelity. Now, financial infidelity has been explored much less, but in my new book, When Men Behave Badly, I have a section on financial infidelity, where I summarize all the research that has been done. And I was kind of flabbergasted by the percentage of people who do things like have credit cards that their spouse doesn't know about, keep secret bank accounts, have the credit card bills mailed to their office rather than their home, have basically resources and expenditures of pooled resources that they keep from their partner, and both sexes do it. And the percentages vary from study to study, but they range from like 30 to 60% of all people who are keeping financial information from their spouse in one way or another. It could be the woman's out buying designer purses, or designer handbags. It could be the guys out going to strip clubs or taking his affair partner to restaurants, and doesn't want those charges to show up on, you know, a jointly held credit card. So financial infidelity is critical. And then even things like diverting pooled resources to one set of genetic relatives versus another set is another thing that people tend to keep secret. So there are forms of financial infidelity, as well. So, yeah, infidelity, you're absolutely, it's a great question, because it shouldn't be confined to sexual infidelity, which is what most people think about, but also emotional and financial. Interestingly, if you ask people, what is infidelity in a marriage? Men tend to say, well, it's obvious as she has sex with someone else, that's infidelity. Whereas women are more likely to have a broader definition of infidelity. They will cite things like emotional infidelity, financial infidelity, as part of the definition. Whereas men have that more narrow definition. - Interesting. I have a good friend who's a couples counselor, a clinical psychologist, and she told me something interesting that relates to this, which is that in cases of infidelity, oftentimes some of the arguments between couples boil down to whether or not contraception was used or not. That becomes a key feature, and she always thought that that was, you know, homing in on a detail, which of course is an important detail as it relates to both paternity issues and pregnancy, but also disease, right. But as we're talking about all this, it makes me think that this may have deeper evolutionary roots in our, further down in the brain, as we say in neuroscience literature. - And yeah, using a condom versus not using a condom, not using is a more intimate act in a way, you were literally physically more intimate with someone else, than if you do use a condom. But whether evolutionary roots to this, I don't know, I mean condoms are probably relatively recent, or at least the widespread use of them are relatively recent in evolutionary time. So I doubt we have adaptation specifically for them. - No, and presumably before condoms, that one can only speculate because as we say, when it comes to behavior, there's rarely a fossil record, but sometimes there is, it would be the withdrawal method of contraception, which a good friend of mine who studies, whose laboratory works on reproductive biology, says the reason that's a poor choice of contraception is because it was designed not to work. So note to those trying to avoid unwanted pregnancy. So we talked a little bit about status in terms of what men and women are selecting for, for different types of relationships. Is there anything else about status that you find particularly interesting, and you know, what men are finding attractive besides these, you know, waist to hip ratios and quality of potential mothers and so forth. Are there any kind of a hidden gems in the literature around this that I might not have heard of? - Well, yeah. So you mean among, things like sex differences in what leads to high status? - For instance, or what, or perhaps things that are surprising in terms of what people are selecting for. Do people even know what they're selecting for? Or is this all subconscious? Any and all of those topics are of interest to me. - So we'll have to take them in reverse order. You know, I think a lot of it is conscious, but some of it is certainly unconscious, or there are elements which are totally unconscious. So I mentioned one earlier where a man looks at a woman, he's not, he's aware that he's attracted to her and attracted to her physical appearance, but he might not be aware of why. We didn't evolve to be aware of why, just like with food preferences, we find certain things delectable and other things nauseating, we don't understand the adaptive logic of why our food preferences exist and why we have them. And the same is true of mating, you know? And so men find women with a low waist-hip ratio attractive, but they might not, they almost rarely, rarely will they know, oh, low waist ratio is actually associated with higher fertility, lower endocrinological problems, lower age, et cetera. So, we're sometimes aware of what we want, but we are unaware of why we want it. So, there are unconscious elements that the whole topic of status and what leads to high status or low status, it's a topic I'm currently investigating, published a couple scientific articles on it. And so maybe we'll hold off on that for a future discussion, but it intersects, I'll mention one, it intersects with mating in interesting ways, in that higher status gives people the ability to choose from a wider pool of potential mates than they would if they have low status. And so one of the reasons that people strive for status is because they have access to more desirable mates. Conversely, having desirable mates endows you with higher status. And so if you have, if you're a male, you have a very attractive woman on your arm that leads to high status. And so there's a reciprocal link between status and mating in that way. And there've been studies where, say they pose a kind of an unattractive guy, older unattractive guy, and a stunningly beautiful woman as his girlfriend. And they say, well, what's this guy all about? And they say, oh, he must be very high in status. He must be very wealthy. He must have a lot going for him, whereas the reverse people don't make the same attributions. And so there is an interesting reciprocal link between status and mating success, where mating success leads to high status, and high status leads to more mating success. - Over and over again, there are these instances that you describe where the assessment of potential mates, sexual or long-term partnership, are being made in the contents of good statistical practices, looking at the choices of others as a readout of your own choices. This seems to be a theme that this is not being made in a very narrow context, but paying attention to what other people are paying attention to. It seems to come up again and again. Slightly off center from that, but still paying attention to what other people are paying attention to. What's known about jealousy in men versus women? And how frequent it is, how intense it is, and what people do with that jealousy. I mean, we hear, or I've heard at some point that a large fraction of homicides are the consequence of jealous lovers. That's the darkest angle of all this, but in evolutionary psychology context, what is jealousy? Does it relate to paternity issues only? What can you tell us about jealousy? Yeah, that's great set of questions, and when I first started studying jealousy, I reviewed all the prior publications on jealousy. And at that time, jealousy was regarded as a sign of immaturity, a sign of insecurity, a sign of a neurosis or pathology, or in some cases delusion. And what I argued is, and do argue, is that jealousy is an evolved emotion that serves several adaptive functions, okay? One of which you mentioned is a paternity certainty function. But to back up a second, basically, once you have the evolution of long-term mating, long-term pair bonds, you're talking about from a male perspective, investing a tremendous amount of resources in a woman and her children over years or decades, even with boomerang kids now, it may go more than two decades. - Boomerang kids? - Kids who leave home and then come back and live at home. - That happens? - Oh yeah, that happens. - I don't have children. - Okay yeah, no that's a big thing. - But if I do I'll just expect that they'll come back. - They'll come back because they can't find a job, or they find it cheaper to live at the parent's house, or whatever. - Oh, goodness. I can't think of anything worse. I mean, I love my parents. - I know, I can't imagine, but it happens and it's happening more and more, given the current economic situation. But, so once you have long-term mating, you need a defense to prevent or preserve the investment that you've made and are making in long-term mateship. And so jealousy serves this mate guarding function, if you will, or mate retention function. So in other words, one way of phrasing this, is that we know that they are affairs, we know that people break up, they get divorced, but people have adaptations to want to hold on to their mates, okay? And that's what jealousy's in part about. And so jealousy gets activated when there are threats to that romantic relationship. And there are other forms of jealousy, like sibling jealousy and so forth, but we're focusing on mating jealousy in this context. So now what's interesting is that the threats to an ongoing, valued romantic relationship come from many sources. So they could be, you detect cues to your partner's infidelity, or cues of a lack of an emotional distance between you and your partner. You say, I love you to your partner, and your partner says, I wonder how the hell the Knicks are doing this scoring season, or whatever. If you get an unreciprocated I love you is a bad cue. - Or a half, or some people are so tuned to this, if there's a half millisecond delay, they can detect delays in responses. - Yes, yeah. Delays in responses, but even things like, so that's one set of cues, but then there's another set of interested mate poachers. So, you know, if you're mated to someone who's desirable, which many people are, other people still desire them, and so sometimes try to poach them, or lure them away from you for a short term sexual encounter, or for a longer term relationship. And so we have to be, so jealousy motivates people to be attentive to potential mate poachers in their environment, but even more subtle things like mate value discrepancies can trigger jealousy. So even if there are no mate poachers and no accused infidelity, if a mate value discrepancy opens up in a relationship. So in the American system, like you're a six or an eight or a ten, and people generally pair off based on similarity and mate value. - So that tends to happen, sixes end up with sixes, sevens end up with sixes, plus or minus one. These are somewhat subjective scales. - Somewhat subjective, but there's still some consensus about these things. So even colloquially people, colloquially people say things like, he's not good enough for you, you know, or I think you could do better to people who implicitly have a notion of relative mate value and discrepancies therein, but discrepancies can open up where none previously existed. So you get fired from a job. All of a sudden, you know, and most people are very understanding and forgiving about that, if it's not too long, but you go six months, eight months, people start having problems, or if someone's career takes off. Let's say a woman becomes a famous singer or actress, or a man does, career takes off. All of a sudden there's a mate value discrepancy where you have access to a larger pool of potential mates and higher mate value potential mates. So, people are attentive to mate value discrepancies. And so jealousy can get activated, even if there are no immediate threats to a relationship, but the mate value discrepancy is a threat that looms on the horizon of the relationship, because we know statistically the higher mate value person is more likely to have an affair and is more likely to dump the other person and trade up in the mating market. - And when people find new partners for long-term relationships, do they tend to trade up? - On average yes, if the discrepancy is sufficiently large, so there are costs associated with breaking up, divorcing for example, I mean, it's emotionally, financially, it's a costly thing. And so if you have like a half a point mate value discrepancy, you're not going to see a lot of breakups, but you know, if you have larger mate value discrepancies, that's going to augur more for trading up in the mating market. So, then you get into, so what jealousy is, it's an emotion that gets activated by these circumstances. And then what people do about it depends on what their options are. And people do things that I, in my published scientific work, I say range from vigilance to violence. So this whole spectrum of things. In fact, I've identified 19 different tactics that people use to deal with problems once they get jealous, and one is increased vigilance, and the other extreme violence. - Vigilance for the behavior of the mate. - Yeah, vigilance for the behavior of the mate. And that can include stalking, following, hacking into iPhones or computers, monitoring the behavior of mate poachers, looking at eye contact between other men and your partner. There's a whole suite of things that you know, is involved in vigilance. And then at the other extreme, and we can talk about things in between, but the other extreme is violence. And so in my new book, When Men Behave Badly, I have a whole chapter on intimate partner violence. And this is what I argue, and this is really unfortunate, and I'm not endorsing it. It's illegal, it's bad, don't do it. But people will engage in intimate partner violence in America, something like 28 to 30% of all people who are married will experience intimate partner violence in their relationships, so it's not a trivial percentage. - And that violence is between the two partners. - Between the two partners, yes. There's also violence that gets directed to our potential mate poachers, but that's a somewhat separate issue. But one of the things that is functional about the violence is that it tends to reduce perceived mate value discrepancies. So in other words, guys tend to engage in the violence more than women do, although some argue that there's more equality in the violence, but at a minimum men tend to do more damage when they do the violence. - And when you're talking about violence, is this ever emotional violence? - Yeah, there there's that as well. And in fact, the two tend to be correlated. So in my studies of married couples, verbal violence is a good predictor of physical violence happening as well. So one of the things that'll happen, just to give a concrete example, guys will start insulting their partner's appearance. You're really looking ugly today. Your thighs are heavy or, you know, you're not looking very good, so they try to denigrate the woman's appearance, which is a key component of woman's mate value. - So they're trying to adjust more closely the mate value discrepancy. - Yeah, they're trying to reduce her perceived, self-perceived mate value. So if, let's say he's a six, she's an eight, and he can convince her that she's actually only a six, then she's going to be more likely to stay with him. - Very diabolical. - It's terribly diabolical. But the fact is women don't feel good about themselves when they get beaten up by their partner. In fact, in the cases where it leaves physical evidence, women wear sunglasses or turtlenecks or cover up, the bruises is it literally does lower the mate value of the woman by injuring her physical appearance. - And getting her to conceal herself, stay home, et cetera. Yeah, taking her out of the, the literally reducing her visibility. - Right, and that's actually one of the predictors of violence, is if he starts doing things other than violence, like cutting off her relationships with her friends and her family, trying to sequester her, and prevent her from getting exposed to potential other partners. And so it is a very diabolical, but I think important to understand, you know, the potential functionality of intimate partner violence. - What about, sorry to interrupt again, but I'm just so curious. So oftentimes my audience will say you interrupt too often, but I want to make sure that I don't miss an opportunity to ask you about the intimate partner violence in the other direction, female to male, where stereotypically speaking that the opportunity for physical violence is still there, but the idea in mind is that it would be more of a psychological nature. Although I think there is evidence that some women beat their husbands, but I'm guessing it's not as frequent or am I off? - Well, different studies, so it depends on whether you just simply count up acts, or whether you look at the damage it has done. And, as I mentioned, men tend to do more physical damage, so there are shelters for battered women all over the country. As far as I know, there's one for battered men. Now it may be, and this is partly true that men are more ashamed if they get beaten up by their partner, clocked with a frying pan, and it's possible, and there's evidence that police don't take it as seriously. So there's one case that I report in my book where a guy called the police, and his wife had clocked him with something, and police shows up and he says, if she so much as broke a fingernail in this altercation, they'll charge you and not her. And so there is a police bias, a potential police bias in this. And so there may be under-reporting of women beating up men as a consequence. But, the motivations are often different. So one is that male sexual jealousy will trigger him to attack his partner, and then she will use physical violence to defend herself. So she might pick up a frying pan, or a weapon of some sort to defend herself. and so the motivation is his sexual jealousy on his part, but self-defense on her part. And so that accounts for some unknown percentage of the cases, and in some cases, it is women who were outraged when they discover their partner's been having sex with someone else, an infidelity of a sexual, financial, or emotional nature. And so there is some female to male violence that absolutely occurs. But the reduction of a perceived mate value discrepancy is a key function from male perspective. Again, not that he thinks about this, he's just angry and wants to hurt her, okay? Okay, but here's one other thing that is really interesting about the intimate partner violence, and that's the specificity of it depending on circumstances, and namely, when the woman gets pregnant, she's more vulnerable to physical violence, and when the man suspects that he's not the father of that pregnancy, he's more likely to direct the violence toward blows to her abdomen. It's that specific. And so in that case the function is hypothesized function, is to terminate the pregnancy by a rival male, as opposed to deterring the woman from committing an infidelity, or from leaving the relationship entirely. So that's why one function of intimate partner violence, is just sequestering the woman and keeping her all to himself. So it's both to prevent infidelity and to prevent defection. - I have a friend whose wife told me that if he cheats I'll kill him, that's what she said, but it's actually just much easier to keep him very, very busy. And that statement now leaps to mind, because of what you're describing, that there are many tactics by which people can engage this effort to reduce the mate value discrepancy, not all of which are overtly violent, but all of which are designed to constrain their behavior. - Right, right. Yeah, so these would fall under what I would call mate retention tactics, and only one or two of which fall under the violence category. Yeah, they're even, yeah, within partner psychological manipulations about these things. So there are psychological manipulations about perceived mate value, no one else would want you, you're a loser there's denigration of partner within the relationship, even feigning anger to make the partner feel guilty about say, looking at someone else. So there's all kinds of inter nesting warfare that goes on within relationships to manipulate perceptions of these things. This is, I'm creating a much too jaded view of romance and love, I think. - Oh no, we will get to the happy endings. I mean, there are certainly many happy relationships out there. As a neuroscientist, I hear about this, and the immediacy of how people fall into a pattern or jealousy, or a pattern of cheating and, not always, it just speaks to a brain circuitry that's evolved to protect something. And I'm sure this statement is not exhaustive, but I think it's accurate to say that every species, but especially humans, wants to make more of itself and protect its young, but these issues of paternity and resource allocation, I think they're vital. Yeah, I look forward to a day where evolutionary psychology and neuroscience can merge at the level of underlying mechanism. But I don't think it's dark, I think it's just the way we're wired at some level. Speaking of dark, could you tell us about the dark triad? - Yeah, so the dark triad, so we've been talking about sex differences on average, but there are critical within-sex individual differences, and the dark triad is one of the most important ones. The dark triad consists of three personality characteristics, so narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. Hallmarks of narcissism are things like grandiosity, the person thinks that they're more intelligent, more attractive, more dazzling, more charming than they actually are. The think they're the greatest person since sliced bread. Importantly, with narcissism, you also get a sense of entitlement. So they feel entitled to a larger share of the pie, whether that be the financial pie, the status pie, or the sexual pie. Machiavellianism is high scorers tend to pursue an exploitative social strategy. So they might feign cooperation, but then cheat, you know, on subsequent moves. They view other people as pawns to be manipulated for their own instrumental gains. And then psychopathy, one of the hallmarks of psychopathy is a lack of empathy. So most people have a normal empathy circuit where if a child falls down and gets hurt, we feel compassion for the harm that that person is undergoing. Or if a puppy gets a hit by a car or whatever, we feel compassion, psychopaths don't. That is those high on this, it's a dimensional thing, it's not a categorical thing. So those high on psychopathy basically lack empathy. And so if you combine these qualities, narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism, you have well, some very bad dudes. And I say bad dudes 'cause men tend to score higher on these things than women, especially on the psychopathy dimension. So when you talk about clinical levels of psychopathy, it's estimated to be something like 1% of women and about 4% of men. So men are much higher on that. So why is this important? Well, it's important in the mating context, because those who are high on dark triad traits tend to be sexual deceivers for one. So they're very often very charming, very good at seducing women, and then abandoning them sometimes with, after fleecing them or draining their bank account. They're very good at the art of seduction, they also tend to be sexual harassers, serial sexual harassers, and sexual coercers. So when it comes to forms of sexual violence, high dark triad guys tend to be perpetrators of this. And so like most men I think, would be, find it ethically abhorrent to sexually harass a woman in the workplace, dark triad guys, in part maybe they feel entitled to it, and in part they do. I mean, in some cases that I report in the book, there are like literal descriptions where the guys are writing in these journals, I knew she was attracted to me. You know, that's why she met me in the Xerox room just when I was there, 'cause she wanted to admire my bulging biceps or whatever. - It's all about them. - Yeah, and they, and this gets into a bias that I talk about, which is the male sexual misperception bias, where a woman smiles at a man, man thinks, oh, she wants my body, she's attracted to me. And women are thinking, oh, I'm just being friendly, I'm being polite or professional. But these guys high dark triad guys are more susceptible to the sexual over-perception bias, and they literally believe that the woman is attracted to them and sending them signals, green lights to sexually approach. And so if you combine dark triad traits with the dispositional pursuit of a short-term mating strategy, that's an especially deadly combination. That's when you get sexual harassment, sexual coercion. So these are very bad dudes, also predictors of intimate partner violence. - What approximate frequency in the male population have all three of the dark triad traits. And I realize that they're on a continuum, sociopathy, narcissism. - That's why you can't say because they are on a continuum, and it's sort of arbitrary where you draw the line. But I think it's a minority of men. It's a subset of men who commit the vast majority of these acts of sexual violence. And that's why it's not like, if you look at victims of sexual violence, they're more numerous than the perpetrators of sexual violence, because the perpetrators tend to be serial offenders, so to speak. One guy in the workplace, harassing 15 different women, one guy sexually coercing, you know, multiple women. That's why you have like, in well-known cases in the news, like Harvey Weinstein, you know, probably over a hundred different women, Bill Cosby, Jeffrey Epstein, some of these more famous cases, these are a large number of victims, but pretty much [indistinct] the perpetrators. And there's no question that these guys like Harvey Weinstein and Jeffrey Epstein were definitely high on dark triad traits. - You mentioned stalking briefly. Maybe we could just talk about some of the less known features about stalking. I think I once heard you give a lecture where you said that one of the scariest things about stalking is that sometimes it works. - Yes, yeah. So, well stalking has multiple motivations, but one of the most frequent motivations is a mating motivation, where either there's a breakup and the woman dumps the guy and the guy doesn't want to get dumped, he wants to maintain a relationship with her. And I should say that, when it comes to criminal stalking, there's a huge sex difference. About 80% of the stalkers tend to be men, about 20% women. So there are women stalkers, but they're, about a fourth of the number compared to men. So the motivation of the guys tends to be either an attempt to get back together with the woman, either sexually or in a relationship or, and/or to interfere with her future mating prospects. And it works in some of the time in two senses. One is it does interfere with her attempts to remate. So in fact, it scares off some guys. So like you show up and pick up a woman at her apartment for a date and her ex is sitting out there glaring at you. - Or, I'm actually familiar with the circumstance where early in a relationship, somebody mentions that an ex has made veiled threats about surveillance, for instance. I've actually had that happen several times in my dating history where someone would say, you started opening up about previous relationships a little bit, as it's appropriate, and someone says, yeah, you know, he mentioned that he was going to, you know, send someone around to, you know, to surveil me, you know, that kind of thing, which is a very interesting factoid to pick up. But I heard it enough times, and people I know have reported hearing this enough times that I'm guessing that that's probably more frequent than people actually trailing people in cars and things of that sort. But planting that, it's like the psychological seed of surveillance is a form of harassment in some sense. - Yes, absolutely. I think that you're right, there's that planting the psychological seeds, but then also with surveillance, some surveilers remain hidden, so you don't know necessarily. - Yeah, I confess in this case, it did not act as a deterrent for continuing the relationship, but that's another story. So, how often do women respond? I have to put this in quotes for those that are listening, air quotes end quotes, positively to stalk. I mean, how often does it work to re-secure the partner after they've been broken up with. - So in our studies, it's a minority of cases that it works to reestablish. I think something like 15% of the time that it works, either to temporarily reestablish a sexual relationship, or lure the woman back in for a more permanent relationship. So most of the time it doesn't work. But one woman in our study said, the guy, every time she went out with another guy, he would threaten the other guy. And she said after about six months, there were no other guys. He basically scared off all the other guys. And so she went back to him because there were no other guys around. - Yeah, I experienced this when I was in college, I lived in a small town, very population dense. Isla Vista, UC Santa Barbara. And there was a couple where every time this woman would date someone, he'd basically beat up whoever the new suitor was. And pretty soon no one would go near them. They got a reputation as the kind of Sid and Nancy couple, and indeed it worked, it worked in the sense that no one dare go near her and they ended up together. So I've seen real life examples of this. - Yeah, so it happens, but it is in general, not a successful strategy. - Oh no, and that's not what I'm suggesting. I was just shocked to learn that, 'cause we hear stalking and we have this, there's one very extreme image of it. But the underlying motivations I think, reveal something about mating dynamics. - Yeah, and I think that the circumstances are often a mate value discrepancy where the guy realizes correctly that he will be unable to replace her with a mate of equivalent mate value, or in some cases any mate, you know, it's like, well she was with me once, maybe I can get her back with me again. So the psychology is very understandable, but it tends not to work because, and then the other thing we found, we did a study of 2,500 victims of stalking. This is with Josh Duntley, a former student of mine, who's now a professor in the criminology department. And what we found is there were large sex, large differences between the stalker and the victim of the stalker, where the stalker tends to be much lower in mate value than the victim. And so basically it's typically the woman who realizes she can do a lot better on the mating market, and the guy realizes I am never going to be able to replace her with a woman of equivalent mate value. And so I'm going to use this last ditch desperate measure to try to get her back, and occasionally it works. - I'm thinking more about this mate value thing, this number, this metric, the eight, ten, six, whatever it is. And mate value discrepancy playing such a strong role in all these dynamics. I should have asked this earlier, but what is the impact on mate value perceived or real of a woman having already had children? You know, for instance, there, friends of mine who are married and divorced who have children, will often post pictures of themselves with their children in their online profiles, because it shows a strong sense of paternal instinct. You know, there's the puppy thing. People with dogs or puppies demonstrating a capacity to care, and for caretaking. In women, the opposite is also true. Women with children show capacity, it demonstrates fertility, at least at one point, perhaps fertility that's still present. Does it positively, negatively, or neutrally impact a woman to already have children when seeking another mate, regardless of whether or not she was married or had the children out of wedlock? - As a general rule, it decreases for mate value, because kids with another mate are viewed as a cost, not a benefit. And there are costs on multiple dimensions, one of which they're going to be a cost to the guy, because he's going to have to invest resources, time, attention, so forth, but also a portion of her effort and resources are going to be devoted toward kids who are not genetically related to him. And which is one reason why step families, there's often a lot of conflict within step families, very explicable from an evolutionary perspective. So in general, it's a cost, not a benefit. Sometimes it can be a benefit though. So I know one case where a woman got divorced, she had two kids and she ended up successfully mating with a guy who was also divorced and had primary custody of his two kids. And so there was a compatibility there, but as a general rule, it will decrease a woman's and a man's mate value to have kids, especially kids who are financially, who are young and financially dependent. But, what happens is, let's say the woman would be an eight without kids, a guy who's a six might be able to attract her and might feel lucky to attract her, because there's no way he would've been able to attract her under other conditions. But that's why the display of effort, investing in her kids, is often a mating tactic. He's showing, okay, I'm willing to invest in kids. I'm willing to sacrifice. And so they in essence become equivalent in mate value as a result of that. But will she be able to attract on average, other eights, less likely, but the same is true of guys. And this is why the reason that it affects women more than men is because more custody tends to go with women. That is the kids, women tend to have greater custody, and women tend to invest more in the kids throughout their lives. Now, there are other things like alimony and child support payments, and so forth, but all the women I've talked to, I've talked one-on-one with many women about this. They view a guy with kids as a cost, not a benefit, unless the kids are old enough and they've left home, and are no longer a financially dependent. - And everything you just described is consistent with what you said earlier, which is that with subsequent marriages, or as men get older, the tendency is to seek mates that are progressively younger? - Right. - Because there's a higher, lower probability they'll already have children, if they're much younger. - Right, right. And if the guy's successful, if he has status and resources and has other qualities associated with higher mate value, then he will remain attractive to younger women. - I realize it's not your specific area of expertise, but these days there's a lot of discussion about how early childhood attachment to parents influences mate choice later on, this kind of general categorization of avoidant and anxious and anxious avoidant and all this kind of thing. And again, putting my hat on as a neuroscientist, I think, you know, it makes sense that the neural circuits for attachment in childhood would be somehow, partially or in whole, repurposed for other forms of attachment. We don't just tend to say, okay, that brain circuitry was from when I was a kid and now I'm an adult, and so I'll develop this new attachment circuitry. I'm guessing it evolves and whatnot, but is there anything interesting about that, about childhood attachment strategies vis-a-vis stability of long-term partner choice, or is that too big of a leap for us to make here? - Yeah well, I mean, I can offer some sort of informed speculation about it, and as you point, it's not my area of expertise, but I know a little bit about it, and I mean, I think that, you know, a secure attachment style, if both partners have a secure attachment style, that's conducive to a longterm mateship. Avoidant attachment styles, avoidant people tend to have more difficulty with intimacy and also higher probability of infidelity, and anxious attachment style, I don't know, can create problems of its own, you know, in the overly clingy dependent, you know, absorbing what I call high relationship load. So, you know, there's like mutation load, which we all have a certain number of mutations. There's parasite load. There's also what I call relationship loads. So what is the baggage that someone brings to the relationship? - Probably correlated with the frequency of demand of immediate text message responses. Well, I think that the frequency of demand, like the latent, the expected low latency of text message responses plays out consistently in relationships, you know, early on, there's a very low expectation of response. And then as people get attached, depending on their level of anxiety, if they don't hear back from somebody really quickly, where the mind goes is a very interesting aspect, you know, do you become suspicious? Do you become anxious? Can you stabilize your own internal milieu, or do you need to see the dot dot dot, that's coming back? I'd love to see a study on that at some point. - Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, that's a good one. And my intuition suggests that your prediction about that would pan out. It would be the insecure that would really be, you know, getting upset if there were, if there were not that immediate response to the texts. - I have a friend, a female friend who deliberately quote unquote using her language, trains her potential partners to be comfortable with a variable response latency. But then I asked her if she's comfortable with a variable response latency, and she said, absolutely not. So there's an asymmetry, at least in that case. This is almost certainly a more rare circumstance, but I'd be remiss if I didn't ask about unconventional relationships. These days, I don't think it's just by virtue of living in California, you hear more and more about monogamish, as opposed to monogamous, and various forms of polyamory that may or may not include the -amory part. You know, passes and permission, based on seasoned circumstance and prior infidelities, like, okay, somebody had a mishap early on, you know, you have one pass, so to speak, and you hear this kind of language getting thrown around. And it's intriguing to me because it seems like an effort to bypass some of the more, if you will, hardwired, or at least culturally hardwired aspects of mate choice and sexual partner choice. You know, acknowledging jealousy, but confronting it by allowing your partner to be with somebody else, for instance. I confess, I have friends who have unconventional relationships. I have friends with conventional relationships. Any thoughts on the polyamory. - Yeah, I do have a couple of thoughts on it. I haven't studied it extensively, but I think that the way I would phrase it is that there's an attempt to overcome certain evolved features of our mating psychology, but often in the service of other aspects of our mating psychology. So what I mean by that is this. So I talk about polyamory, first of all, there's a sex difference, on average, that is, men are more likely to want to initiate a polyamorous relationship than women. There are lots of exceptions. And I actually know of at least one exception, personally, friends of mine who were in a polyamorous relationship, but the motivation for men is that evolved desire for sexual variety. So it gives him access to a wider variety of sex partners, which is part of our evolved sexual psychology, especially for men. Women, one motivation, women also have a desire for sexual variety, on average tends not to be as great as that of men, but also have it. But some women agree to a polyamorous relationship as a mate retention tactic. That is, this guy in order to keep him, she has to agree to the relationship. And so, the motivations for engaging in polyamory are somewhat sex differentiated. - [Andrew] On average. - On average, on average, there are lots of exceptions. So now when it comes to sexual jealousy, there is this recognition that there, the way that I would frame it, there's this evolved emotion where it triggers sexual jealousy, seeing your partner having sex, or imagining your partner having sex, or falling in love with someone else. And, but interestingly, and there haven't been studies on this, but I know of this one polyamorous couple where they reported to me, both of them reported to me. She said she doesn't, it doesn't bother her at all if her husband, they're married, has sex with other women. They allow it. I think it's like every Thursday night or whatever, different couples that have different rules. But one time she saw him walking down the street, hand in hand affectionately with a former girlfriend and she got extremely jealous. So because it signaled an emotional connection. So the sexual didn't bother her, the emotional did. She happened to be bisexual. And her partner said that it really upset him when she slept with other men, but it was fine if she slept with other women. - I think that's a fairly common thing that among the men that I know that are in polyamorous relationships, that that's a fairly common statement. - Yeah, and so he kept trying these inter-nesting manipulations, trying to encourage her to sleep with other women, but not with men. And in her case, encouraging him not to get emotionally involved with other women, but the sex was okay. So I think that, you know, I think that in the modern environment, we have a very rich and complicated evolved mating psychology. And what we're doing in these novel forms or semi-novel, because these things have a pretty deep history themselves, that we're attempting to maximize some of our evolved desires while keeping quiescent other evolved aspects of our sexual psychology, like jealousy. So satisfying or desire for sexual variety, but keeping jealousy at bay, and different couples do it in different ways, so as you alluded to. So I know one couple live in Los Angeles and the woman, the woman said, she gives her husband permission to have an affair, sleep with other women, as long it's outside of the city limits of LA. And this other couple, it has to be Thursday night, you know, and so different people have different plans. - Putting constraints on, but the constraints are specific and somewhat arbitrary to the relationship. - Yeah, they're specific. And often in polyamorous relationships, people talk it out, and come to an agreement on what is acceptable and what's out of bounds. But in a way, I mean, it, in a way it's just, you know, we can't change our evolved sexual psychology, I don't think. What we can do is we can activate certain elements of it, and keep others quiescent and that's all good. And in a way we do in the modern environment. So even to take it outside of polyamory, pornography, okay, widely consumed internet pornography, what does that do? Well, there's a big sex difference there. Men tend to consume it a lot more than women. The forms of the pornography are different, but in a way, the pornography, what it does is it parasitized men's evolved desire for sexual variety. So they can, in some sense, psychologically experience sexual, a variety of different women sexually without actually doing it, by just looking at their computer screen. And so, in a way, another way of phrasing that, is that we create modern novel cultural inventions in ways that satisfy our evolved desires and our evolved sexual desires. - Yeah, it's interesting with the kind of explosion of online pornography. I have a colleague at Stanford in psychiatry, Anna Lembke, who studies the dopamine system, and she mentioned two things of interest. One is that not only is there a tremendous variety of experiences that are available to people to view in pornography, but the intensity is also quite high, so much so that at least for young people who are observing a lot of pornography, it's possible, and there are studies looking at this now, that their brain circuits become wired to observing sexual acts, as opposed to being engaged in them, which can be extremely problematic. So it's a sharp blade, so to speak this pornography thing. It isn't what it once was, and it's evolving quickly. Very interesting. So how should one frame all this? So I imagine the number of people listening are in relationships, or would hope to be in a relationship. In terms of understanding what we are selecting for, consciously or subconsciously, it seems like there are common themes. It's people want to feel attractive and attracted. People want to make sure that there's stability of the relationship. So when we hear about security, oftentimes I think of this kind of warm, oxytocin, serotonin like thing, but this mate value, it seems so powerful in all this, assessing mate value. So how objective are people about assessing their own value in terms of finding, securing, and over time, maintaining a relationship. Securing is dynamic, because people age at different rates. Is there an objective metric of this stuff? I guess you get a lot of statistics about somebody's image, and you come up with an average value based on the population, but how should people assess themselves? Because it seems like one of the features that would be very powerful for leading to happiness, of good partner selection, with that stable, where one doesn't have to resort to these Machiavellian, or diabolical, or any of these other strategies, would be to be very honest with oneself. And how does one do that? - Yeah, great questions. And, I don't think that the science all the answers, so a couple things. So one is that I think people are generally pretty good at self-assessing mate value. And even self-esteem has been hypothesized to be one internal monitoring device that tracks mate value. So when we get a promotion at work, or we get a rise in status, we feel an elevated sense of self-esteem. We get fired, we get rejected, we get ostracized, our self-esteem plummets. So, our self-evaluation, I think does track mate value to some extent. There are people who overestimate their mate value, people high on narcissism in particular, and some people underestimate their mate value. Another important element is that there's consensual mate value. So that is if you asked a group of a hundred people, there's a fair amount of consensus that this person's an eight, that person's a six. But there are also individual differences in mate value. So one example is I know a woman who's a professor and she places a high premium on guys who are deeply steeped in Russian literature, which she is, so that she can have in-depth conversations about Russian literature. - Note to young men, learn Russian literature. - Well, but this is high, and it's a dimension of mate value that's important for her, but probably not important for a lot of other people. And so, whereas other people let's say might be, let's say you're into football or some sport, and the other partner thinks sports are stupid, you know, then that's, you know, someone who's also into sports is going to be higher in mate value for you. So there are these individual differences in components of mate value, which is good, because that means if everyone were going after the same people, and there was total consensus on mate value, then there would be a lot of mateless people, and a lot of problems in the world, and a lot of dissatisfied people. So, both are important, the consensual aspects and the individually differentiated components of mate value. But in terms of accuracy of assessment, there are no good measures scientifically to do this, because it's sufficiently complicated. So I mentioned, you know, we've mentioned maybe half, maybe a dozen different components of mate value, physical attractiveness, kindness, emotional stability, health status, et cetera. And these aren't the only ones. So I teach a course on psychology of human mating. And I ask the people, it's a large course, a couple of hundred people, tell me, what do women want in a mate? And so I start it with the blackboard. This is back in the old days when there was a blackboard, a piece of chalk, and they say, I want a mate who has a good sense of humor. So I write sense of humor. Intelligent, kind. And so I go through this, and I go through five blackboards, and then I run out of space, over what women want. Now I do the same for men, and men kind of run out of space after about a blackboard and a half. But what that tells me is that these qualities are large in number and complicated in nature. So you say you want a guy who's nice and generous? And they say, yeah. So like a guy who at the end of every month takes his whole paycheck and gives it to the wino, a homeless person. Well no, not that generous, generous toward me, but not toward everyone else. Nice in general, but not so nice that they're getting exploited. So, or even, now there's something, you can't be too healthy. So if you put it, that's uni-dimensional, but you want a guy, women want a guy who's confident, but not too confident, because too confident will mean he's either arrogant, narcissistic, or not sufficiently manipulable. So anyway, my point is that because there are so many different components of mate value, and that they vary in amount. So it's not just listing the qualities and summing them up. They vary in amount. It's a very complicated endeavor to assess accurately, but I think people have a good intuitive sense of people's relative mate value, especially if you're in a group and you've been able to interact with them for a long time. And one indication is, again, that attention structure. How many other people will really want to mate with this person? That's a good cue that they're high in mate value. Nobody wants to mate with you, then cue that your low in mate value. - Reminds of the time when one is trying to decide who to ask to the prom. There's a complicated assessment based on who one would like to go with, whether or not you're already partnered, who would say yes, who would say no, because there's a risk in rejection too, because that if I'm guessing correctly, could lower one's own perceived mate value. - Getting rejected. - Right. Frequency of rejections probably doesn't lend itself well to increasing one's own view of their mate value. - Right, which is why many guys have what I call mating anxiety. That is, they don't approach women because they risk getting shot down. - They're trying to maintain that number, by reducing the amount of data. - [David] Right. - Very interesting. - But it backfires in the modern environment. So, there's a famous psychologist, Albert Ellis, who had mating anxiety and he assigned himself the task of asking, like, I can't remember what the number was, but let's say 50 women out on dates. He lived in New York City, so there was a lot of women. - He could just stand still and they would stream past him. - And he asked 50 women on a date, you know, every week. And he said, after two weeks his mating anxiety disappeared, because most of them said, buzz off creep, [indistinct] Actually getting rejected didn't cause my world to collapse. And it actually was okay. And so he kind of inured himself to this rejection. And so it ended up, he ended up doing quite well on his mating life. - Another point for cognitive behavioral desensitization. - [David] Exactly. - He ran the experiment. Just a couple more questions. Earlier, you mentioned self-deception-based deception, or something of that sort. Self-deception that people aren't always trying to convince somebody else of something that secretly they know isn't true, but that they deceive themselves. Could you embellish on that a little bit? - Well, this is actually, this hypothesis is the famous evolutionary biologist, Robert Trivers, first advanced this hypothesis in the preface, in 1976 to Dawkins' book, The Selfish Gene. And he's subsequently written more about it, both in scientific article and in a more popular book. But the idea is, the core idea is that successful deception is facilitated by self-deception. So if you really believe that in X, then you're going to be a more successful salesman to convince other people of X. So if you believe you're, let's say a 10 in mate value, you truly believe it, even if you're not, I'm going to have a more successful time convincing you that I am as well. And so the hypothesis is basically that people self-deceive in order to increase the effectiveness of actual deception. But I think that there are people who are so in one other dimension I'll mention too, is that as that animals often take each other at our own word for things. So if we're self-confident, people assume that we must have the goods to back up that self-confidence. If we're a quivering mass of insecurity, people believe, well, we don't have the goods to back up anything. And so people use other people's displays of their self-confidence as a cue to their goods. And it's in general, a pretty reliable cue, but then they are over overestimates and underestimates, as we've talked about, like with narcissism. - Yeah, we see this with the job candidates. You are taught to look very carefully at the application and consider all aspects, but ultimately you consider that also in light of, you know, how firmly someone believes in the vision of what they're trying to bring to the profession. And that's a, I think, largely a subconscious process, and being aware of it can be helpful, but yeah, when somebody is confident and you tend to think that they're going to get where they say they're going to go and it acts as a bit of a heuristic, for not needing, the impulses, that one then doesn't need to go vet all the information quite as carefully. But if, I guess if one is aware of it, then, you know, to dig deeper, because it seems like there's a lot of deception going on. - Yeah well, and something we talked about earlier, people high on psychopathy are very good at deception. I don't know whether they are good at self-deception, or whether they're just really good deceivers. But they can be very effective. Out in California, you live out in California, I'm sure you've seen your fair share of cases like that. - Oh yeah, I think, across today's discussion and various examples pop to mind of seeing these features in humans. It's so interesting. I find the work that you do incredibly interesting. I think this field of evolutionary psychology is fascinating. And, I hope, I said it before, but I'll say it again. I feel like neuroscience and evolutionary psychology are nudging towards one another. And it's only a matter of time before they merge in some formal way. I mean, there is the work for instance, on polygamous versus monogamous [indistinct], and levels of vasopressin, but it's a big leap to go from vasopressin in a [indistinct], no disrespect to that beautiful work, but to humans and say, oh, vasopressin inhaler are going to make you monogamous or something. I think that's probably got the direction of the effect wrong, but you get the point. - Yeah, no, I think you're absolutely right. And I think it will happen. I think it's starting to happen. And it will happen because getting at the neuroscience is getting at the underlying mechanisms that are driving the process. So, you know, what an evolutionary perspective brings to bear, is evolved function and ultimate explanation, the selective forces that created adaptations, the functions of those adaptations, and the neuroscience brings well, what is the underlying machinery that these mechanisms are instantiated in? - It'd be wonderful to collaborate someday. Maybe we'll do a brain imaging study on jealousy or something, and I don't know, you're the psychologist. You would come up with the beautiful experimental design. I'm certain that people are going to want to learn more about your work. Certainly we will give them links to your social media and other other sites. You've written a tremendous number of really interesting books. Tell us about your most recent book, and maybe some of the others, that if people are interested in these topics, and they want to learn more, that they could explore. - Sure. Okay so, well, my most recent book is called, When Men Behave Badly: The Hidden Roots of Sexual Deception, Harassment, and Assault, and that book deals with conflict between the sexes, sexual conflict. And so it deals with them both in what I call mating market conflicts. Some of the topics we've been talking about, deception in internet dating, and things like that. Second is conflict that occurs within mating relationships, of the sort that we've been talking about as well, financial infidelity, emotional infidelity, sexual infidelity, coping with conflict within a relationship. And I actually have some suggestions for strategies for coping with conflict within a relationship. Coping in dealing with the aftermath of breakups. So often there's an asymmetry. One person wants to break up, the other doesn't. So I talk about coping in the aftermath. And then I also talk in this book, When Men Behave Badly, about some of the darker sides of human mating, like intimate partner violence, stalking, sexual harassment, sexual coercion. So that's what that book's about. And I think it, it's gotten well-reviewed and people find it very useful in understanding what is otherwise a lot of baffling phenomena. Why do men and women seem at odds with each other in so many domains? Why does some of these recurrent forms of sexual conflict occur? So that's what that book's about. My previous book, so my first book, which I've had the good fortune to be able to revise a couple of times, deals more broadly with human mating strategies. It's called, The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. And it gives people a broad overview of what people want in a mate, tactics of attraction, tactics of mate retention, and so forth, throughout the whole mating process, serial mating, causes of divorce, and so forth. And then even more broadly, I have a textbook called, Evolutionary Psychology: The New Science of the Mind, which is in its sixth edition right now, and it's the most widely used textbook in evolutionary psychology around North America and Europe. And actually it's been translated even into Arabic and other countries. So that deals somewhat with mating, but also deals with survival problems, our evolved fears and phobias, issues about kin and family, extended family, friendships, social hierarchy, status hierarchies, warfare, and other topics. So the evolutionary psychology textbook is the broadest book. And then maybe the second broadest is The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. And then for those interested in conflict between the sexes, the latest book, When Men Behave Badly. - Fantastic. I love your work. I'm so grateful for the clarity and depth and rigor with which you do it, and you convey it to us. I know I speak for many people when I just want to say thank you. This is a tremendously informative conversation. - Thank you. Well, it's been a delight to talk with you and I hope we do engage in that research collaboration of merging neuroscience and evolutionary psychology. - Let's do it. - All right. - Great, thank you David. - Thank you. - Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Doctor David Buss. Be sure to check out the link to his website in the show caption, and be sure to check out his new book, When Men Behave Badly: The Hidden Roots of Sexual Deception, Harassment, and Assault. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please put any questions you have in the comment section on YouTube, and also in the comment section, you can make suggestions about future topics for the podcast, or future podcast guests that you would like us to host. Also check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's one of the best ways to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and/or Spotify. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review, and you can also provide us questions and feedback. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support this podcast at any level that you like. In many episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements might not be for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them, for things like sleep and focus and other aspects of human performance in daily life. One issue with supplements is that many of the supplement companies out there are subpar with respect to quality, and they are not precise about the specific amounts of the various supplement contents that they include. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are known to have the highest levels of stringency, in terms of the quality of the ingredients, and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients. In other words, what's listed on the label is what's actually in the bottle. If you want to see what supplements I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. There, you can see the supplements I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate further into the Thorne site, through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you once again, for joining me for my discussion with Doctor David Buss about human mate selection and strategy, and many other extremely interesting topics today, and last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [rock music]

========================================

--- Video 300 ---
Video ID: KVjfFN89qvQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KVjfFN89qvQ
Title: The Science of Gratitude & How to Build a Gratitude Practice
Published: 2021-11-22 13:00:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the science of gratitude, which has been shown in peer-reviewed studies to have tremendous positive effects on mental and physical health. I explain, however, that most commonly used gratitude practices are ineffective (such as gratitude lists). The key elements of highly effective gratitude practices are described, including the essential need for story (narrative), receiving or perceiving gratitude rather than giving it, and the role that theory of mind plays in this context. I also discuss why we can't simply make up feelings of gratitude and how reluctance undermines the process. I also explain the neural circuit mechanisms that underlie the reductions in fear and increases in motivation and lowering of inflammatory chemicals that effective narrative-based gratitude can trigger. Throughout the episode, I use the science of gratitude to design a brief but highly effective protocol. 

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Magic Spoon - https://www.magicspoon.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
https://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Neural Correlates of Gratitude (Damasio) - https://bit.ly/3oS8TNr
Reducing Inflammatory Cytokines & Fear With Gratitude - https://bit.ly/3oPsSwv

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction: Gratitude Science & Surprises
00:01:50 Controlling Heart Rate with Story
00:04:33 Sponsors: ROKA, InsideTracker, Magic Spoon
00:09:11 Major, Long-Lasting Benefits of Gratitude Practice
00:12:20 Prosocial vs. Defensive Thinking, Behaviors, & Neural Circuits 
00:17:50 Why We All Need an Effective Gratitude Practice
00:21:22 Neurochemistry & Neural Circuits of Gratitude
00:25:10 Prefrontal Cortex Set Context
00:30:10 Ineffective Gratitude Practices; Autonomic Variables
00:34:55 Key Features of Effective Gratitude Practices: Receiving Thanks & Story
00:42:30 Theory of Mind Is Key
00:45:50 Building Effective Gratitude Practices: Adopting Narratives, Duration
00:52:28 Narratives That Shift Brain-Body Circuits 
00:56:15 You Can’t Lie About Liking Something; Reluctance In Giving
00:59:55 How Gratitude Changes Your Brain: Reduces Anxiety, Increases Motivation
01:03:00 5 Minutes (Is More Than Enough), 3X Weekly, Timing Each Day 
01:05:44 Empathy & Anterior Cingulate Cortex
01:07:35 Reducing Inflammation & Fear with Gratitude
01:10:56 Serotonin, Kanna/Zembrin 
01:16:00 Neuroplasticity, Pharmacology, Brain Machine Interfaces
01:18:50 The Best Gratitude Practices: & How To, My Protocol
01:24:25 Subscribe & Feedback, Supporting Sponsors, Supplements (Thorne)

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking all about the science of gratitude. In part, we're doing this because of the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday, which of course, is all about giving thanks, gratitude, but also because there's no a wealth of data showing that having an effective gratitude practice can impact a huge number of health variables; both mental health and physical health in positive ways. Things like cardiovascular health, things like relationships, things like mental health, things like physical and cognitive performance. And these are not small effects. These are very large positive effects. However, in researching this episode, I was completely surprised as to what constitutes an effective gratitude practice. I, I think like many of you, would have thought that an effective gratitude practice simply involves writing down a few things or many things that we're grateful for, or thinking about those. Or really making an effort to somaticize or feel some of the elements of gratitude while writing out that list or thinking about that list. It turns out that an effective gratitude practice doesn't resemble that at all. The neuroimaging data, the physiological data, looking at things like inflammatory markers, other studies, purely looking at the psychology and the long and short-term effects of an effective gratitude practice, point to a completely different approach to using gratitude to positively impact health metrics. Fortunately, these are things that we can all do very easily. Some of them were actually fun. You can do them in a variety of contexts. So today we're going to talk about the science of effective gratitude practices, and we're going to describe what those are and how you can incorporate them into your life. Before we dive into today's topic, I just want to highlight a particularly interesting set of findings from the literature. This is a study that came out in the journal Cell Report, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. It's very relevant to today's topic. In fact, we're going to spend more time with this paper a little bit later in the episode. The study involved having subjects listen to a story. The subjects are all listening to the same story, but those subjects are not listening to it together. They're not rounded up in a circle or all in a room, they're in separate rooms or entirely separate locations on the planet, or they are actually brought into the laboratory on separate days. What this study found is that different subjects listening to the same story, undergo the same variation in heart rate. In other words, the gaps between their heartbeats start to resemble one another in response to the same story. Now, this is very interesting. This is a coordination of the physiology of the body in response to a narrative, a story in different people. And yet when they line up the heart rates of these different people who listen to the story at completely different times, they find that those heart rates map onto one another almost identically. It's really remarkable. We're going to talk about what this means in terms of coordination of neural circuits in the brain and neural circuits in the body, and the organs such as the heart, but also the lungs and other organs of the body, and what this means for changing one's overall state. A key theme that's going to come up today again and again is the distinction between traits, which are kind of pervasive aspects of who we are and how we tend to react to different types of circumstances, and states, which are more transient. They tend to, you know, you can invoke a state in somebody, a state of fear or a state of relaxation. But what this study really starts to point to is that there are specific approaches that any of us can take in order to really rewire our nervous system, such that we are calmer, if we want to be calmer in certain circumstances, that we are more responsive in certain circumstances, if that's our goal. So we'll return to how one would go about doing that. But I think these results are just beautiful in the sense that they really show that our brain and our body are highly coordinated because people are listening to the story and the heart rate is changing in response to the story, but that there is what we call a stereotypy; sort of stereotyped response to a given story. In my mind, there was no reason why the results had to be this way. Two people listen to the same story, why should their heart rates be almost identical to the same story? Very, very interesting and points to the power of narrative and story in coordinating our physiology. And this is something powerful that we can leverage. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. And keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that the visual system has a number of important features that allow you to see things with crystal clarity, no matter what environment you're in. So that means if you're in bright sunlight or you go into shadows, you should be able to see everything clearly. But many eyeglasses and sunglasses actually short circuit that feature of our visual system, and make it such that we have to take off our glasses, or if our screen dims, we feel like we can't see things quite right. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses have completely solved that problem. In addition, they're very lightweight, so you don't even remember that they're on your face. And if you get sweaty, they don't slip off. They were actually designed for cycling and running and things of that sort, but they have a terrific aesthetic. So I wear readers at night or out to dinner, or when I'm driving, I wear their sunglasses. And the aesthetics are really terrific, even though they're so-called performance glasses. 'Cause as many of you know, performance glasses often make people look like cyborgs. These sunglasses and eyeglasses have the kind of aesthetic that you can wear them anywhere; while cycling, running, but also doing anything else you might be doing. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Again, that's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done. For the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And now, with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also get insights into your genes and how those affect or should affect your immediate and long-term health choices. A big problem with a lot of blood tests and DNA tests out there, however, is that you get the data back and you don't know what to do with the data. Inside Tracker has solve that problem with a very easy to use dashboard, where you get your numbers back from your blood tests or your DNA tests, and then it points to specific lifestyle factors, nutritional factors, and so forth, that can allow you to bring the numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. And this is a huge advantage over other blood tests and DNA tests out there. Another feature that Inside Tracker has is their InnerAge test. The InnerAge test shows you what your biological age is, and you can compare that to your chronological age. And of course, your biological age is equally, if not more important than your chronological age. So this is an important number that you can get from Inside Tracker. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans. And if you're listening to this during the week of Thanksgiving, 2021, and you live in the United States, you can get a special offer for this week only. You can get $200 off their ultimate package, 25% off any other package, and you'll get the InnerAge test for free. Again, just go to insidetracker.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. Now, I'm not following a ketogenic nutrition plan. What works best for me is to fast until about 11:00 a.m. or noon most days, and then to eat a low carbohydrate lunch, a low carbohydrate snack in the afternoon, and in the evening is when I eat my starches. That's what allows me to be alert throughout the day for work, for exercise and so forth, and then to sleep really well at night. That's just what works for me. But it does require that throughout the day, I am eating fewer carbohydrates than I am at night. And oftentimes I want a snack, and the snack I want is usually Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, and only four net grams of carbohydrates in each serving. It's absolutely delicious. I particularly like the frosted flavor 'cause it tastes like donuts. And then I try not to eat donuts. No vendetta against donuts, but it's not really compatible with my eating plan. They also have flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut butter. They're really delicious. Any ideas you have about keto-friendly cereals and foods not being delicious, you have to try Magic Spoon, it'll change your mind. In fact I'm getting hungry just thinking about it right now. If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman to get a variety pack. Just use the promo code Huberman at checkout to get $5 off your order. Again, that's magicspoon.com/huberman, and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. Let's talk about gratitude. And to begin, I'd like to emphasize the various aspects of mental and physical health that have been shown to benefit from a regular gratitude practice. There are studies showing that performing a gratitude practice twice or three times, or even just once a week, can lead to a pervasive, a long lasting impact on subjective wellbeing. People report feeling happier, more meaning, joy, even awe for their life experience, simply in response to adding a gratitude practice. The key thing is it has to be the right gratitude practice. And we're going to talk about what the right gratitude practice looks like in just a little bit. But there are additional benefits of a gratitude practice. There are studies showing that a regular gratitude practice can provide resilience to trauma, in two ways; it can provide a reframing and resilience to prior traumatic experiences. So buffering people against the negative physiological effects and psychological effects of earlier trauma, but also inoculating them in many ways to any traumas that might arrive later in life. So that's a powerful thing. And today we will talk about how that's actually accomplished. It's actually accomplished by shifting the way that the fear and defense networks in the brain actually function. And we'll get right down into the details of that. The other thing that a gratitude practice does is it's been shown to benefit social relationships. But not just for the relationship in which you express gratitude, right? So on the face of it, you might think, okay, if I express gratitude for somebody over and over, over and over, over and over, then I'm going to feel better about that person. And indeed, that is one effect of a gratitude practice. That's called a pro-social or interstitial social gratitude practice. But there are now several studies, recent studies in good journals pointing to the fact that a regular gratitude practice can also enhance one's social relationships across the board; in the workplace, at school, at with family and romantic relationships, and even one's relationship to themselves, which is really what the subjective feelings of wellbeing are. So it's clear to me that ineffective gratitude practice has an outsized effect on many, many aspects of mental and physical health. And for those of you that are coming to this conversation thinking, gratitude practice, oh, that's kind of wishy-washy or woo, it's going to involve putting your hand on your heart and feeling into all the amazing things that you happen to have, even when things are really terrible, that's not where we're going at all. And equally important is to understand that the neurochemical, the anti-inflammatory and the neural circuit mechanisms that gratitude can invoke are equally on par with some of the effects of pharmacology, of things like high intensity interval training and exercise, and other things that we think of as kind of more potent forms of self intervention. So if you are of the mindset that a gratitude practice is kind of weak sauce, buckle up, because the data actually points to the fact that a gratitude practice is a very, very potent way in which you can steer your mental and physical health in positive directions, and that those effects are very long lasting. Before we dive into the tools and mechanisms and scientific studies around gratitude, I'd like to just set the framework for the discussion. Gratitude is what we call a pro-social behavior or a pro-social mindset. Now, you can be grateful for something without it involving anybody else. So the social part isn't meant to convey anything about interpersonal relations, although it can. And today we're going to talk a lot about how interpersonal relations can be incorporated into a gratitude practice in really powerful ways. But pro-social behaviors are basically any behavior or mode of thinking that allow us to be more effective in interactions with other people, including ourselves. Now pro-social is not just a name that we give these different tools and practices and mindsets. They're actually neural circuits in the brain that are specifically wired for pro-social thoughts and behaviors. And these are distinctly different from the circuits in the brain that are involved in defensive behaviors. So without getting into too much detail, just yet, we will later, we have circuits in the brain that are what we call appetitive. They are designed to bring us closer to things and to bring us into closer relation to the details of that sensory experience. Now that could be a delicious food that you're eating, it could be interacting with a loved one, it could be interacting with a friend or anyone that you happen to like, it could even be in your relation to yourself. These circuits that we're calling pro-social circuits light up in the brain in neuroimaging, meaning the neurons are firing more actively, more electrically robustly; sort of like turning up the volume on these neural circuits in the brain. And the neural circuits in the brain that are associated with aversive or defensive behaviors; things like backing up things, like covering up the vital organs of the body, things like a quaking of the voice, all of the things are associated with defensive behaviors are actually antagonized, meaning they are reduced when the pro-social circuits are more active. So the framework here that I'd like to set is that we have this kind of seesaw of neural circuits in the brain. One set that are pro-social and are designed to bring us closer to others, including ourselves, closer to certain sensory experiences, right? Because a lot of pro-social behaviors can also be geared towards things like pets or food, or anything that we find we want to be closer to and want more of. Whereas the defensive circuits involve areas of the brain, yes, such as areas that are involved in fear, but also areas of the brain and body that are literally associated with freezing or with backing up. So the way to think about gratitude is that falls under this category of pro-social behaviors, which are designed to bring us closer to different types of things, and to enhance the level of detail that we extract from those experiences. Now, the existence of these two neuro circuits that I've placed on this sort of a metaphorical seesaw, if you will, runs counter to a lot of the messaging or the ideas that were put forth in the last century about the psychology of happiness and gratitude, versus the psychology of depression and struggle and concern about the future. In fact, I'd like to read a quote from the great, and we really should call him the great Sigmund Freud, because despite having certain traits that people criticize him of, Freud was indeed a genius about many aspects of psychology. But I just want to read you Freud's stance on happiness. And this invokes elements of gratitude as well. And then you can gauge for yourself. "Our possibilities of happiness are already restricted by our constitution." So he's saying that we're basically wired to not have happiness easily. "Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience. We are threatened with suffering from three directions; one from our own body, which is doomed to decay and disillusion, and which cannot even do without pain and anxiety as warning signals. Two, from the external world, which may rage against us with overwhelming and merciless forces of destruction. And three and finally, from our relations with others, the suffering of which from this last source is perhaps more painful to us than any other." That's Sigmund Freud. And not all of his writings were pessimistic, if you will. What Freud is referring to there are those defensive circuits. And of course, he talks about psychological defensives. And in full disclosure, I am a huge fan of much of the psychological literature and psychoanalysis of Sigmund Freud and his descendants, like Young and others. I think there are strong elements of truth there. But he gives you a sense of the kind of mindset of psychology early in the last century. And then of course, was the emergence of the positive psychology movement, which was really about invoking the understanding and eventually the elucidation of the neural circuits for things like happiness and awe and affiliation and things that we are calling pro-social circuits. So the field of psychology as a dark and light, if you will, and the field of neuroscience has a dark and light. We have these what we call parallel pathways in the brain. And we have parallel pathways in the mind that set us up for feeling good about things or for feeling less good about things. I think what's really salient from the quote from Freud is that what he's saying is our default is to be concerned about the future, to be wrapped in our defenses, and to some extent that's true. And the reason we can say that's true is because most of us need a gratitude practice. We need to do certain things in order to feel good and to feel happy. We actually have to put work into it. It is quite possible that there's an asymmetry in the way that these pro-social versus defensive circuits are set up, such that because defensive circuits are designed to keep us safe, psychologically and physically safe, that they have more robustness, or they can actually drive our behavior more easily. I'll give you an analogy in the system that I'm most familiar with as a neuroscientist, which is the visual system. In the visual system, we have parallel pathways. We have neurons in our eye that respond when things in our environment get brighter. Literally when the lights go up, these neurons start firing like crazy. And we have neurons in our eye that respond when things get darker, when things start dimming or go from white to black. The circuits for detecting darkening are much more robust and much more numerous than are the circuits for brightness. And that is probably related, probably, to the fact that dark objects or experiencing looming, meaning incoming objects and being able to perceive them is something that's vital to our survival. Whereas being able to perceive the brightening of things might be important to survival in certain contexts; a car lights coming at you at night or something of that sort, but not as often in a kind of a evolutionary or ecological context as the darkening of things. So, I think Freud's quote and the field of psychology now point to the fact that indeed we have the capacity for happiness and we have the capacity for great worry and concern and depression and unhappiness. And the neural circuit literature also supports that. The key thing for today's discussion is that gratitude turns out to be one of the most potent wedges by which we can insert our thinking, and as you also see, the physiology of our body, between these two circuits, and give a little more levity, if you will, to the side of the seesaw that's associated with positive pro-social feelings. And if you keep imagining this seesaw imagery, what's really beautiful about gratitude practices is that if they're performed repeatedly, and not even that often, but repeatedly, then one can actually shift their neural circuits such that the seesaw that I'm calling pro-social versus defensive behaviors, can actually start to tilt. And the little hinge, if you will, on the seesaw in the middle can be adjusted in a little tighter when the side for gratitude and for wellbeing and for feelings of happiness is a little bit higher. What this means is that, whether or not Freud was right or wrong, whether or not the neuroscientists in one camp or another were right or wrong, we now know with certainty that a regular gratitude practice can shift the pro-social circuit so that they dominate our physiology and our mindset in ways that can enhance many, many aspects of our physical and mental health by default. So we don't always have to constantly be in practice trying to be happy. So the succinct way of saying all this is, yes, indeed, we might be wired or in such that we have a greater propensity for unhappiness than happiness. But gratitude practices provided they are the effective ones and they're performed regularly, can shift those circuits, such that we are happier on average, even when we are not performing those practices. Now I'd like to talk about some of the neurochemistry and neural circuits associated with gratitude and pro-social behaviors. Numerous times on this podcast, I've talked about so-called neuromodulators. For those of you that might've forgotten or have never heard of neuromodulators before, neuromodulators are chemicals that are released in the brain and body that change the activity of other neural circuits. They make certain brain areas more likely to be active and other brain areas less likely to be active. These neuromodulators have names like dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, epinephrin, and so on. The main neuromodulators associated with gratitude and pro-social behaviors tends to be serotonin. Serotonin is released from a very small collection of neurons in the brainstem called the raphe, R-A-P-H-E, the raphe nucleus, and a few other places in the brain. And the raphe neuron send these little wires that we call axons out to numerous places in the brain. And they tend to increase the activity of particular neurocircuits that lend themselves to more approach to particular types of experiences. That makes total sense if you think about it. Have a chemical that under certain circumstances is released in the brain, that triggers the activity of neural circuits, that makes the organism, you, more likely to stay in an interaction with something, or even lean in and seek a more detailed interaction with that person, place or thing. Beautiful work from a cognitive neuropsychologist. His name is Antonio Demasio. He's a world-class neuroscientists. Has been in the game a very long time. Has explored the so-called neural correlates of gratitude. And two main brain areas are activated by these serotonergic systems. And when people experience something that makes them feel gratitude, even if it's shallow gratitude or deep, and if it's all the way to deep gratitude, they see activation of these particular brain circuits I'll mention in a moment. And the amount of activation scales with how intensely the person experience the feeling of gratitude. And those two areas have particular names. You don't need to know the names, but for those of you that want to know, they are the anterior cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex. And of course, these brain areas are connected to a number of other networks in the brain. In fact, that's how they get you or others to lean into certain experiences. Because when these areas are active, certain thought processes get invoked. Those thought processes probably resemble something like, hmm, I'd like to experience more of this, or hmm, this feels really good. And then they literally feed onto your muscles via the neurons, making you happy to stay stationary, if you're experiencing something you like, or to move closer to something that you find attractive to you literally. So these are powerful circuits. Of these two brain areas, the one I'd like to focus on the most is the medial prefrontal cortex. Many of you have probably heard of the medial prefrontal cortex, because this is the area of the brain that is involved in planning and in deep thinking and evaluation of different types of experiences, past, present, or future. It seems actually that pretty much every study of human anything seems to involve the medial prefrontal cortex, or at least one could get that impression just by looking at scientific abstracts and papers these days. So I think it's worth us taking a step back and asking, what is the medial prefrontal cortex really do, right? How could this one piece of neural real estate that we all have right behind our forehead, how could that be involved in so many different things? And the reason it can be involved in so many different things, and the reason it's especially important for gratitude is that medial prefrontal cortex sets context, okay? It sets context and it literally defines the meaning of your experience. Now this is not at all an abstract phenomenon. I'm going to give a very physiological example of this, and then we're going to translate to gratitude. But I really want everyone to understand, how is it that medial prefrontal cortex sets the context of everything in your life? Well, it does it the following way. You have a number of circuits deeper in your brain that simply create some sensations or they allow you, I should say, to perceive certain sensations. Let's use the example of cold exposure, something that we'd sometimes talk about in this podcast, for other reasons. If you were to deliberately place yourself into an ice bath, it would be uncomfortable, even if you're adapted to cold and so forth. The discomfort is non-negotiable. However, if you are doing it because you want to, or because you have knowledge that there are particular health benefits, the medial prefrontal cortex can then control areas of your deeper brain, like the hypothalamus, to positively impact the neurochemicals that are released into your system. You'll still get a lot of adrenaline by getting into the ice bath. But the fact that you are doing this deliberately, and your knowledge that you are making the choice, that it's you that's deciding to put yourself through this discomfort, has been shown to create a very different and positive effect on things like dopamine, on things like anti-inflammatory markers, in your immune system, et cetera, compared to if someone pushes you into an ice bath, or if you are doing it because someone insists that you do it and you really, really don't want to. So there's a very subtle distinction here. It's just the distinction of motivation and desire, or lack of motivation and being forced into something. And there are a number of other effects of this that have been described. In the episode with Robert Sapolsky that I did earlier this last year, he talked about a study in animals, which has also been shown in humans. If you take a mouse for instance, and it runs on a running wheel, which mice really like to do, there are many positive effects on reducing blood pressure, improvements in neurochemistry, et cetera, in that mouse. However, if there's a mouse in the cage right next to it that's trapped in the running wheel and it has to run every time the other mouse runs 'cause the wheels are linked, well, then the second mouse that's forced to do the exact same running experiences negative shifts in their overall health metrics. Blood pressure goes up, stress hormones go up, et cetera, because it's not actually making the choice. Medial prefrontal cortex is the knob, or the switch rather, that can take one experience and allow us to frame it such that it creates positive health effects. And the exact same experience framed as something we don't want to do, or that we are forced to do can create negative health effects. Now how exactly the neurons and medial prefrontal cortex do that is rather complicated, and frankly not completely understood. But it's somehow able to adjust the activity of other neural circuits that are purely reflexive. As we say, neuroscience, like really dumb neural circuits, they're just like switches, and place a context onto it. So, gratitude is a mindset that activates prefrontal cortex, and in doing so sets the context of your experience such that you can derive tremendous health benefits. Which leads us to the question; what kind of gratitude practice is going to accomplish this, right? Because it is not simply the case that I could take a knife, don't please, don't do this experiment, and cut my hand and say, oh, you know, I'm going to enjoy this. I'm doing this 'cause this is good for me and it won't hurt. Of course it'll hurt, just like the ice bath is cold, no matter what. But I can't lie to myself, right? If I have some knowledge that cutting myself is bad for me, that's very hard to override. And so, the medial prefrontal cortex has a tremendous capacity to set context. And it does that beautifully with respect to gratitude. But you can't simply lie to yourself. You can't simply say, oh, well, every experience is a learning experience, or a terrible thing happens, oh, good, I'm just going to say good, and that your body will react as if it's good for you. That's a myth. And frankly, it's a myth that's fairly pervasive in the self-help and self-actualization literature. We have the opportunity to reframe and set context on our experiences. But that requires a very specific set of practices. We can't simply lie to ourselves or quote unquote, fake it until we make it. Neural circuitry is very powerful and very plastic. It can be modified and it's very context-dependent, but it's not stupid. And when you lie to yourself about whether or not an experience is actually good for you or not, your brain knows. So what does an effective gratitude practice look like? Well, let's examine what an ineffective, what a poor gratitude practice looks like. Because therein lies some really important information, including the fact that I, and I think millions of other people out there are doing it wrong. Most gratitude practices that you see online and that people talk about in various talks and so forth involves something like writing down or reciting, or thinking about five or 10 or three or 20 things that you're especially grateful for. And then really trying to feel into some of those, really try and think deeply about the emotions, the sensations, the perceptions that are associated with those particular people, places and things on your list. Most studies actually point to the fact that that style of gratitude practice is not particularly effective in shifting your neural circuitry, your neural chemistry, or your somatic circuitry, the circuits in your body, 'cause you literally have organs and neural circuits that are connected, the circuits of your brain and body toward enhanced activation of prefrontal cortex, enhanced activation of these pro-social neural networks that we were talking about earlier. Now that may come as a surprise to many of you, and certainly came as a surprise to me. There is some evidence that if there's a shift in so-called autonomic arousal during these gratitude practices, these ones that I'm calling ineffective, that they can be made slightly more effective. So what do I mean by a shift in autonomic arousal? Well, very briefly we have a aspect to our nervous system, both within our brain and body that we call the autonomic nervous system. It's a little bit of a misnomer because autonomic means automatic. And in fact, we can take control of the autonomic nervous system. It has one branch, meaning one set of connections and circuits that are associated with making us more alert, the so-called sympathetic nervous system, or I should say sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, but that's really a mouthful. It's really associated with enhanced alertness of any kind for excitement or fear, and it has nothing to do with sympathy. It's just about enhanced alertness. And then the other arm of the autonomic nervous system is the so-called parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. But that's also a mouthful. So let's just say it's the calming aspect of the autonomic nervous system. So it's associated with decreased heart rate, decreased breathing rate, et cetera. So we have these two aspects, our autonomic nervous system, and it has been shown that if people are brought into a state of heightened sympathetic tone, meaning more alertness, then the intensity of the emotions that they experience in their gratitude practice is enhanced, and the effectiveness of that gratitude practice can be enhanced. This is seen nowadays somewhat commonly as having people, for instance, cyclic hyperventilated breathing, as we call it in my laboratory. Breathing that's very intense so that, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale very deeply for 25 or 30 breaths. Then people will sit in a meditative stance, or they'll focus on their notepad and paper. And they'll write out the things that they're grateful for. And then they'll really try and feel into those things, or they'll think about those things. And it makes perfect sense as to why enhancing autonomic arousal toward more alertness would create more robust feelings or more robust impact of the gratitude practices, because in that state, you are more alert and therefore you are able to bring more detail, more richness to the perception and the understanding of what those things on your list happened to be. And I should say that there are numerous other approaches to this. Sort of self-help type stuff and self actualization seminars. People will do things like cold baths, or they'll do chanting, or they'll have any number of different experiences all of which are mainly geared towards increased autonomic arousal. There even practices out there using pharmacology to create increased autonomic arousal and then drop into gratitude. Across the board, those increase the potency of the gratitude practice of listing things out on paper or in one's mind or saying them out loud. But somewhat surprisingly, at least to me, that form of just expressing thanks, expressing gratitude is not the most effective way to shift these pro-social circuits in positive ways for one's physiology and anatomy and psychology. It turns out that the most potent form of gratitude practice is not a gratitude practice where you give gratitude or express gratitude, but rather where you receive gratitude, where you receive thanks. And this to me was very surprising. There are a number of studies about this now. One in particular that I think is interesting is called Prefrontal activation while listening to a letter of gratitude read aloud by a coworker face-to-face: A NIRS study. N-I-R-S. I'll explain what all this means. You now know what the prefrontal activation part is. This is activation in the prefrontal cortex. The NIRS, N-I-R-S study, that's just a technical term. It's a form of imaging brain activity. It's noninvasive. So it's kind of a skullcap. It looks like a hoodie with a bunch of wires coming out of it basically, that can measure neural activity without having to remove any parts of the skull or put a person into one of these two black fMRI machines, which is very invasive. It's also a wonderful tool because it allows human subjects in the laboratory to move around and to engage with one another. So in this particular experiment, what they did is they had co-workers write a letter of gratitude, of thanks to another coworker, unbeknownst to the other coworker. And then they sat down together and then they imaged brain activity as this letter was being read and as the letter was being heard, received. And it showed very robust effects on these prefrontal networks; that pointed to the fact that receiving gratitude is actually much more potent, in terms of the positive shifts that that can create than giving gratitude. So this raises a couple of important points. First of all, if you are somebody who is prone to write letters of gratitude, ideally I think it's requisite that these be genuine letters of gratitude, or saying things that are genuine expressions of gratitude. This could be by text or in-person or by phone. You have within you a very potent form of shifting somebody else's neurology. Now, that's wonderful, and I think there are many people like that out there. But for many people who want to experience the positive effects of gratitude, it's probably not the most advantageous approach to just sit around waiting, hoping that someone's going to deliver all these letters or words of gratitude. How is it that you can create that sense of receiving gratitude for yourself and thereby derive the effects of gratitude as outlined in this particular study? And there we go back to the important work of the great Antonio Damasio who explored these neural correlates of gratitude, to define the areas of the brain that are associated with pro-social behaviors like the prefrontal cortex. And what's really interesting about the work that Demasio and colleagues did is first of all, they used functional magnetic resonance imaging. So this is a very high resolution approach to exploring what areas of the brain are active. And has very high, what we call temporal resolution, meaning you can see things in time at very fine scales. So a lot of mechanistic detail, it can emerge from these sorts of studies. What they did was interesting. Rather than have people express gratitude, they had the subjects go into the scanner, so their brains are being imaged, and they watched narratives, stories about other people experiencing positive things in their life. And in this case, these were powerful stories. These were stories about survivors of genocide. So that's what they're watching. The subjects were subjects that were not survivors of genocide. So they were watching these videotapes of people that had genocide, and had people help them along the way as part of their story of survival, either psychological and/or... Obviously they survive long enough to make the video. So, or physical survival. So within these stories, there was a conveyance of a lot of struggle. These people talked about the horrible situations they were in, but also small, but highly significant features of their history that had led to their own feelings of gratitude. So for instance, it says a woman at the... This is literally from the scientific paper. Somebody had been sick for weeks. So the woman's describing how she'd been sick for weeks. And then another prisoner who was a doctor finds a particular medicine somehow, it doesn't describe how, and literally saves her life. Or an ally who was also in a stricken circumstance gave this person a pair of glasses when their eyesight started to falter. So these sorts of stories. Now just hearing this in the context of nothing but a scientific paper and discussion, these probably aren't that impactful. What's really important about this study and is really important for all of us to know is that these stories of other people receiving things that were powerful for them in their life trajectory is embedded in story. And the human brain especially is so oriented towards story. We have neural circuits that like to link together past, present future, have different characters, protagonists and antagonists. From the time we're very young until the time we're very old, story is one of the major ways that we organize information in the brain. There does seem to be storytelling and story listening circuits in the brain. So what's important is not simply that these people survived genocide. That's obviously important and wonderful. But it's not just that they were helped along the way, it's that the description of their help is embedded in a larger story. So the human subject in this scientific study is watching these powerful stories. And the neural circuits associated with pro-social behaviors and with gratitude become robustly active when they start to feel some affiliation with the person telling the story. They start to feel some resonance. We might call that empathy, but it doesn't necessarily have to be empathy. Empathy is a somewhat complicated thing to define because it involves literally a setting aside of one's own emotions and really focusing almost entirely, or experiencing almost entirely the emotions of another. It could be sympathy, it could be empathy. What we do know is that the stories themselves were able to shift the physiology of the subjects in this study and activate these, what we're calling gratitude circuitry that involves the prefrontal cortex. So if you think about the earlier study that receiving gratitude is the most powerful way to activate these circuits for gratitude, the subjects in this study in many ways are receiving a sense of gratitude, but through the narrative of one of these other subjects. Which I find fascinating. I would have thought a great gratitude practice is when you sit down and list out all the things you're grateful for. That just seems so logical to me. But it turns out that these neurocircuits don't work that way. That to really activate these circuits for gratitude in the serotonin and that probably the oxytocin system as well, and its prefrontal networks, one has to powerfully associate with the idea of receiving help, okay? The subjects are associating or experiencing empathy or sympathy for somebody else who received help. In the other study we described a few minutes ago, the person hearing the letter was receiving gratitude, and that would amplify the activity of these circuits. And that takes us to a larger theme of, what are these pro-social circuits? And an important concept to emerge from this is one that's most often associated with the autism literature, frankly, which is this idea of theory of mind. So just very briefly, theory of mind is the ability to attribute or to understand the experience of another without actually experiencing the thing that they're experiencing. Again, it kind of sounds like empathy, but this was actually a term that's now been demonstrated in the psychology and neuroscience, that's been linked to some very robust findings associated with brain areas and so forth, that was looking at autistic kids and non-autistic kids. The person largely responsible for developing theory of mind is Simon Baron-Cohen. I believe he's either the brother or the cousin. I can't remember recall which, to the comedian Sasha Baron-Cohen. Simon Baron-Cohen is a professor at Oxford University, or at least he was the last time I checked. And the theory of mind test can be done on adults or on children. And we can sort of do that experiment right now, if you like, and you can think about how you would behave if you were a subject in a theory of mind test. Theory of mind test involves you or a child or some other adults, sitting down and watching a video of a child going into a room or a person going into a room, opening up a desk or a dresser, a drawer for instance, or a desk drawer and placing something in it, like a pen or a toy, and then leaving. And then another person walking into the room and clearly looking for something in the room, and one presumes it's the toy or the pen, depending on the context. People who have strong theory of mind make the obvious conclusion that the person looking around for the pen or the toy is confused, or they're perplexed. They don't know where the toy is, they're looking for the toy. Someone who is fairly far to one side of the autism or Asperger's spectrum will simply focus on the location of the object, on the location of the pen or the toy. And this is especially true in children. They will say, well, it's in the second drawer, it's in the second drawer. And they'll say, well, how does the person who comes into the room feel? And they'll say, well, it's in the drawer. So they tend to focus on the specific factual elements of the scenario rather than place their mind into the mind of the other person. So-called theory of mind. Now that doesn't mean that people with autism and Asperger's don't have empathy. In some cases they can. It sort of depends on where they are in the spectrum and so forth. But theory of mind has very strong basis in these prefrontal cortex neural circuits that we were talking about. Because, as you now know, the prefrontal cortex sets context on what we see and experience. And the theory of mind task that I just described very briefly is a pure example of context setting, right? It's not about just the factual elements about the location of the objects, it's about the context. Someone is looking for something that someone else put someplace that makes it such that that object is hidden. So basically theory of mind is your ability to put yourself into the mindset of another. And in order to get activation of these gratitude circuits, one needs to put themselves into the mindset of another or to directly receive gratitude. So let's just take a moment and start to think about how we are going to build out the ultimate gratitude practice; meaning the most effective gratitude practice for us to do because of all the many positive effects that an effective gratitude practice can have, if it's the proper one. It's very clear that receiving gratitude is powerful, but it's also very clear that waiting around to receive that gratitude is an impractical approach. Now, there are methods that have been developed by my colleague at Stanford, Kelly McGonigal and others that actually have developed things for the workplace, for school, for coworkers and students to write out particular worksheets related to what they're thankful for from others and exchange them. And so those are very useful practices. I don't want to take anything away from the important work that Kelly and others have done. But in the absence of having other people to do these practices with, what we know for sure is that there has to be a real experience of somebody else's experience. And that the best way to do that is story. So, in thinking about how to build out an effective gratitude practice, it's very worthwhile, I believe, to find someone's narrative that's powerful for you. And many ways to think about this is, it's got to be a story that inspires you because of the, for lack of a better phrase, the beauty of the human spirit, or the ability of humans to help other humans. And I find this remarkable because what this really means is that the circuits for gratitude are such that we can exchange gratitude. We can actually observe someone else getting help, someone else giving help. And that observation of our species doing that for one another, allows us to experience the feeling of a genuine chemical and neural circuit activation lift, if you will. Very, very different than simply writing out the things that you're thankful for, right? And so, how would you do this? Well, people digest story in a number of different ways. People watch movies, people listen to podcasts, people read books. There are a tremendous number of stories out there. It's clear that an effective gratitude practice has to be repeated from time to time. So what I would not suggest is that we build a protocol in which you're constantly foraging for inspirational stories over and over again. Social media and the internet are replete with those. That's not going to be a very potent protocol or tool, because the most potent protocol or tool for gratitude is going to be one that you repeat over and over again. Rather, the most effective protocol or tool is going to be either to think into, and you could write this out if you like, but think into when somebody was thankful for something that you did, and really start to think about how you felt in receiving that gratitude, and/or I should say, imagining or thinking about deeply the emotional experience of somebody else receiving help. Now, what narrative you select is going to be very dependent on you and your taste. It's going to be very dependent on what resonates with you. But again, I want to emphasize that the story that you select does not have to have any semblance to your own life experience, is just about what happens to move you. And so, the way that one could do this, and actually I've started this practice for myself on the basis of the learnings I've had in the last few weeks around preparing for this episode, is to find a story that's particularly meaningful for you. And then to just take some short notes, bullet point notes about maybe list out for instance, on just a small sheet of paper or in your phone, if that's your preference, just list out for instance, you know, what the struggle was, what the help was, and something about how that impacts you emotionally, okay? This is something just for you. You don't have to share it with anybody. That kind of shorthand list of bullet point notes serves as your shorthand for getting into this mode that we're calling gratitude. And actually closely mimics a lot of what was done in these various studies. Because even though the studies I've talked about up until now, were really focused on what we call acute imaging studies, where someone watched a story or received gratitude while the experiment was done, and then that's it one and done. There are other studies looking at gratitude in this context over many weeks, up to six weeks. And what one observes is that there's so-called neuroplasticity of these circuits. Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. And that these neural circuits start developing a familiarity with the narrative. So that, for instance, let's say you sit down the first time you've found a story that you find particularly compelling. You've written down a few notes about what that story is just to remind you. And then you read those out and you think into the richness of that experience, that receiving of gratitude, or if you prefer you're doing the protocol where you're thinking about when someone was deeply grateful or was genuinely grateful to you, that you're thinking about that. The neural circuits become activated more easily with each subsequent repeat of the practice. Now this can be done literally for one minute or two minutes or three minutes. This is not an extensively long practice. And that's another beauty of gratitude practices, is that they have these out-sized positive effects on so many aspects of our physiology, but these are very short practices. They're the kind of thing that you can do walking to your car. The kind of thing you can just sit down for a minute and set a timer and do, because they are really about changing your state of mind and body. And if you have an experience of receiving gratitude or a story that's very potent for you, it becomes a sort of shortcut into the gratitude network, these pro-social networks. Meaning the activation of these circuits becomes almost instantaneous. And that's very different than a lot of other practices out there. I'm not aware of any meditation practices for instance, that you can do only a few times, and then within a week or so, you just have to do them for one minute. You immediately drop into the kind of optimal state that that meditation practice is designed to create. There are some shorter meditation practices that are very potent and very effective like that. But gratitude and the circuits associated with it appear to be especially plastic; meaning, especially prone to being able to be triggered, in the good sense of the word triggered, just by simply reminding yourself of this particular narrative. Now there's another very clear and positive effect of using this narrative or story-based approach to a gratitude practice. And that's what story does for our physiology. Now, earlier in the episode, I mentioned this really incredible study in which listening to a story coordinated the heart rates of different individuals, and literally changed the way that their heart was beating. The title of the study is conscious processing of narrative stimulate synchronizes heart rate between individuals. The first author is Perez, again, published in Cell Reports, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. And it's a really elegant study. They looked at instantaneous heart rate. They use electrocardiogram to do that, which is simply a way to look at heart beats with very fine precision. They also looked at the breathing of subjects as they listened to the stories. Some of you may know that breathing and heart rate are actually linked to one another in a really interesting way. The simple way to put it is that when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up a little bit, and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down. And this is because of the movement of the diaphragm in your thoracic cavity. And the physicians and medical types call this respiratory sinus arrhythmia. There's a mechanism there we could get into, but I don't want to distract us from the main theme here. So just remember when you inhale, your heart rate speeds up, and when you exhale, your heart rate slows down. They looked at breathing, they looked at heart rates in different individuals. And listening to a story produced very consistent gaps between the heart rates of the people who are listening, different individuals in the study who were not located in the same place when they listened to the story, listening to the story on different times, different days entirely had very similar heartbeat patterns listening to the story. What this means for your gratitude practice is that having a story that you can return to over and over again, even if it's not the entire story, you're just using the shorthand bullet point version of your story, will create a perceptible and real shift in your heartbeat and in your breathing. And actually that's been demonstrated over and over now that an effective gratitude practice is one that can rapidly shift, not just the activation of these circuits in your brain for pro-social behaviors, but also activation of particular circuits in your heart and in your lungs and the other organs of your body, such that you can get into a reproducible state of gratitude each time. So an important component here is that, there be some element of story, again, you don't have to listen to or read or think about the entire story, start to finish in order to extract these benefits, and that it be the same story over and over. And as a consequence, that's going to shift your physiology into presumably a more relaxed state, because typically that's the one that's associated with gratitude. Although activation of these gratitude circuits has also been shown to create sense of awe or sense of joy. There are few studies looking at and kind of parsing the difference between gratitude and joy. I was able to find a few studies about that. But in general, the neural circuits that are activated tend to overlap quite a lot with those that create a sense of gratitude. So we don't want to split hairs on necessarily there. The key thing is that you want to use the same story, even if it's your own experience or somebody else's, and keep coming back to it over and over again. That makes it a very potent tool that you can get a tremendous amount of benefit from with even as short as 60 seconds of practice. Earlier, I talked about how you can't lie to yourself and say, you know, I'm so grateful for this thing that I actually hate. And in a moment, I'm going to tell you about some scientific data that proves the statement I made is true, and that you can't just lie to yourself and derive the benefits of a gratitude practice. The data are also going to point to the fact that, if you are giving gratitude, not just receiving it, but giving gratitude, that too has to be genuine. There's a really interesting studies published in scientific reports, which is a nature research journal. The title of it is Neural Responses to Intention and Benefit Appraisal are Critical in Distinguishing Gratitude and Joy. It's a somewhat complicated study, so I'm just going to hit on some of the high points. But basically what they did is they use functional magnetic resonance imaging. So they could look at brain circuitry activation with very high precision. And they had people receiving money in the context of this experiment. And they had some knowledge as to whether or not the money that they were receiving was given to them wholeheartedly or reluctantly. And there were a number of different variables in the study, including how much money was given. So in some cases it was very little, in other cases, it was modest, in other cases, it was a lot more. And they also varied the extent to which the giver of the money, called the benefactor, was doing it wholeheartedly or seem to be doing it somewhat reluctantly. And they looked at whether or not the sense of gratitude scaled with the amount of money received and/or the intention of the benefactor. Whether or not the person giving the money was doing it wholeheartedly or reluctantly. And what's remarkable is that while the amount of money given was a strong component in whether or not somebody felt that they had received gratitude, which makes sense, you know, the amount of money is some metric of whether or not somebody feels thanked. The stronger variable, the bigger impact came from whether or not the person giving the money was giving it with a wholehearted intention and not a reluctant intention. And of course, there was an interaction where the best circumstance of course, is where the person received a lot of money from somebody who wholeheartedly wanted to give them a lot of money. And they did every derivation of this. But this is of important. This tells us many things that extend way beyond gratitude practices, which is that, genuine thanks are what count. Okay? We could probably presume that. But receiving genuine thanks is also a strong variable in determining whether or not we experience real gratitude, or whether or not it's empty, regardless of the size of a gift. So this constrains our gratitude practices somewhat, but I think in an interesting and important way, you can't make this stuff up. You can't tell yourself that an experience was great or that I got a lot of money and therefore it justified it, even though I think that they give it to me reluctantly, or my boss hates me, but they gave me a raise. That stuff stings for all the right reasons, because there are circuits in our brain and body that are oriented towards these pro-social interactions. And in some sense, what we are looking for as a species, what these circuits want, if you will, is to receive things from people that are giving them wholeheartedly. And that tells us that if we are the giver, that we better be giving wholeheartedly, or we are undermining the sense of gratitude that someone is going to receive from us. So we are gradually building up the ultimate gratitude practice based on the variety of scientific literature that's out there. And I know that many people are probably interested in developing a gratitude practice that has long lasting, maybe even permanent positive effects on their neural circuitry. So with that in mind, I want to turn our attention to a really interesting study. It's entitled effects of gratitude meditation on neural network functional connectivity and brain heart coupling. And to make a long story short and a lot simpler than that title, repeated gratitude practice changes the way that your brain circuits work. And it also changes the way in which your heart and your brain interact. You're familiar with the fact that your brain controls your heart because you could be stressed about something that's perceived with your brain, and then your heart rate will speed up. You're probably also familiar with the fact that if your heart rate speeds up for some reason or no reason, you're probably thinking, well, what's making my heart rate speed up? And that's because the brain and the heart are reciprocally innervated, as we say. They're talking to one another in both directions. It's a two way highway. This study looked at changes in so-called functional connectivity within the brain and between the brain and the heart, in response to gratitude practices. And as a control they used, what I think is very interesting, a resentment intervention. I think resentment is an apt control and quite different than gratitude. To make a long story short, what they found is that a repeated gratitude practice could change the resting state functional connectivity in emotion and motivation-related brain regions. If I haven't mentioned a strong enough incentive for doing a regular gratitude practice until now, this is definitely the one to pay attention to. Because what they found was a regular gratitude practice could shift the functional conductivity of emotion pathways in ways that made anxiety and fear circuits less likely to be active, and circuits for feelings of wellbeing, but also motivation to be much more active. I find that remarkable and important because a number of people struggle with issues of motivation. A lot of people who are highly motivated also have issues with anxiety and fear. And so this study really points to the fact that it's a twofer. If you have a good gratitude practice and you repeat it regularly, you reduce the fear, anxiety circuits, you increase the efficacy of the positive emotion, feel good circuits, and the circuits associated with motivation and pursuit are actually enhanced as well. So that's very strong incentive to have a gratitude practice and one that you use regularly. We'll talk about how regularly in just a moment. I don't want to go into too many details of the study, although we will put a reference to it if you like. It includes a lot of fMRI data, imaging data of different brain areas, many, many tables and examples of matrices of before and after gratitude, after resentment, et cetera, you do indeed have circuits in your brain for resentment, whether you like it or not, we all do. And some people, just those circuits are more robust than others. But the remarkable thing is one can shift these circuits in the direction that I think most people would like; which is more sense of wellbeing and motivation and less resentment and fear literally. And what's really cool about this study also is that the interventions are only five minutes long. It's incredible, five minutes long. And so, as we start to build out our ideal gratitude practice, we know that it has to have certain features. First of all, it has to be grounded in a story, probably a story that you've heard in its entirety at least once. But then you can have a shorthand version, the so-called bullet points that I talked about before that allow you to drop into that story or the emotional associations with that story. So you don't have to listen to the whole story each time. And that story should be one in which you are genuinely being thanked for something and it made you feel good, or it could be a story about someone else genuinely expressing thanks, okay? Based on the description of the gratitude practices that we talked about earlier. Your gratitude practice can be very brief. I mean, it be as brief as one minute, 60 seconds, or five minutes, which still seems very brief to me. Although in these studies, they were getting these really major effects just from five minutes of gratitude practice. Some of these papers involve people doing some focusing on their breathing and calming themselves as they go into the gratitude practice, but that's within the five minute block. So if you decide that you're going to do a gratitude practice that involves first doing some calming breathing, exhale emphasized breathing, for instance, or physiological size, things I've talked about before on this podcast that can help calm me down 'cause they have a lot of exhales, which you now know, slows your heart rate down, and then doing your gratitude practice, that's fine. It's actually not necessary, but a lot of these studies used that. I think once a narrative has been set, you've heard the story and it has meaning for you, or you have a recollection of a story where you are genuinely thanked, then I think just 60 seconds or maybe 120 seconds should be sufficient. Then the question becomes, how often to repeat this gratitude practice. That's not exactly clear from the existing literature. I can't point to any one study that says five times a week or four times a week. So I'm going to throw out a number which is three times a week, and then people will ask, well, when should I do that gratitude practice? And I'll tell you what I tell everybody about almost every practice with a few exceptions, which is the best time of day to do this practice is when you first wake up in the morning, or before you go to sleep at night, or any time of day. So we've talked about some of the neurocircuitry changes associated with a regular gratitude practice. And I should mention that there's an additional neurocircuitry shift that occurs. It relates to a structure that I mentioned just briefly earlier, which is the so-called ACC or anterior cingulate cortex. This is an area of the brain that has several functions, but more and more data are pointing to the fact that the ACC is actually involved in empathy and is involved in understanding the emotional states of others in general, even if it doesn't evoke a sense of empathy. And there are several studies that point to the fact that in humans who have a regular gratitude practice, the ACC becomes more robustly engaged, even with these very brief gratitude practices. We actually have a project in our lab. This is actually done in animal models, where animals observe other animals experiencing certain emotional states. And one of the brain areas that we've identified as important for this; it's kind of a primordial form of empathy 'cause we really don't know what these mice are thinking. We work on humans, in the case where we work on humans, of course we ask them and they tell us what they think they're thinking. With the mice, we ask them, but they don't tell us much of anything interesting. Instead we measure a number of physiological signals. But the important point is that the ACC, the anterior cingulate cortex seems to be an important hub for the generation and execution of empathy as it relates to feelings and empathic behaviors; altruistic behaviors of animals helping animals and humans helping other humans. We see this in the animal models, we see this in humans. So, if you want to be a more empathic person, a gratitude practice is also going to be very effective for that, it appears, especially using this narrative type approach where you are using someone else's narrative of receiving gratitude as a way to tap into your own sense of gratitude. Thus far, we've mainly talked about the effects of gratitude on neural circuit activation, and changes a little bit about some of the changes that are happening in terms of the body, heart rate and breathing and so forth. But we haven't talked a lot yet about the changes in health metrics, in things like inflammation or reductions in inflammation and immunity and things of that sort. So with that in mind, I'd like to describe the results of a really interesting recent study that was published in the journal Brain Behavior and Immunity. This was published 2021. The title of the study is, Exploring Neural Mechanisms of the Health Benefits of Gratitude in Women: A Randomized Control Trial. The first author is Hazlitt. And basically, what this paper showed was that women who had a regular gratitude practice of the sort that we've been talking about up until now, showed reductions in amygdala activity; a brain area associated with threat detection, a intimate part of the fear network in the brain. So reductions in amygdala activation, and large reductions in the production of something called TNF-alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and IL-6, interleukin six. Now, if you happen to have listened to the episode that I did on activating your immune system and immune function, you heard about TNF-alpha and IL-6. TNF-alpha and IL six are inflammatory cytokines. These are chemicals that exist in your body, and that are released from cells when there is damage or kind of a systemic stress; when your system is in duress. And in the short-term, they can be beneficial. They can call in signals for wound healing and repair of cells, et cetera, but you don't want TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels to be too high, and you don't want those levels to be up for too long. And so, this study is really nice because they showed significant effects in reducing TNF-alpha and IL-6 in response to a gratitude practice. And because they also observed reductions in amygdala activation, this area associated with threat detection and fear, it's likely, and I should emphasize likely, 'cause I don't know, that the direction of the effect is that there are neural circuit changes, which in turn shift the degree to which these inflammatory cytokines are released in the body. Although for all I know, it could be the other way too. It could be that having a gratitude practice shifts something about heart rate and breathing, which in turn lowers the amount of TNF-alpha and IL-6, and that in turn reduces activation of the amygdala. We don't really know the direction of the effect, excuse me, but if I had to speculate, I would speculate that it was a shift in neural circuitry that led to a change in the circuits of the body. And another interesting aspect of this study is that the reductions in amygdala activation and the reductions in TNF-alpha and IL-6 were very rapid. They occurred almost immediately after the gratitude practice was completed. And even though that study was performed exclusively on female subjects, based on the biology and circuitry of the amygdala and the biology of TNF-alpha and IL-6 performing this inflammatory role in both men and women, I don't see any reason why the results of that study wouldn't pertain to both men and women. So what about the chemistry associated with gratitude? Are there certain chemicals in our brain or that we could enhance in our brain that would enhance our gratitude practice? Indeed, there are. And earlier I mentioned the chemical, the neuromodulator serotonin as having a powerful influence on the activation of neural circuits associated pro-social behaviors and gratitude, and other sort of feel good behaviors. To make a long story short, neuromodulators like dopamine and epinephrine and norepinephrine tend to place us into a state of external perception, meaning a state of observing things and focusing on things outside the immediate reach of our body and confines of our skin. They tend to put us in pursuit, or in thinking about things out in the future or out away from our physical body. Whereas the neuromodulators serotonin and some of the associated pathways like oxytocin and other neurochemicals tend to, I want to emphasize, tend to be associated with states that are about contentment with what we have within the confines of our body and our immediate experience. So they're not so much about pursuit, but about gratitude and about appreciation for what we already have. I'd be remiss if I didn't therefore point out that if one were to shift their chemistry toward having higher levels of serotonin, you would, by all logic, experience heightened levels of gratitude. And indeed some people do this. They will take compounds that increase serotonin. There are a number of compounds out there, as you know. I'm certainly not suggesting people do that. A couple of the supplement based legal, over-the-counter approaches to this are things like 5-HTP, which is a precursor to serotonin. Some people will take 5-HTP to try and enhance their sleep. I'm not a fan of doing that, personally. I've talked about this in the sleep episodes. But the state that we call sleep has a very complex and important architecture as it relates to neurochemicals. And by taking serotonin by supplement or by stimulating serotonin release by supplement with 5-HTP or with tryptophan, which is an amino acid precursor to serotonin, one can run into the problem of disrupting the normal architecture of sleep cycles throughout the night. I experienced that as, if I've taken 5-HTP or tryptophan, I fall asleep very deeply, but then I wake up three hours later and I can't fall asleep at all. And actually it sometimes even messes up my sleep the subsequent night. Some people are not so sensitive to 5-HTP in tryptophan and they actually really like it. So again, you have to talk to your doctor, decide what's right for you. You're responsible for your health, not me. And you have to determine what works for you. Everyone's slightly individual. But one could imagine enhancing their amount of serotonin in their brain and body by taking 5-HTP or tryptophan before a gratitude practice, that seems a little bit extreme given that the gratitude practice is only about a minute to five minutes long on a regular basis, but there may be instances in which you're really trying to amplify the circuitry in the brain and body that are associated with gratitude, and therefore that might be something that you want to explore. There's a new compound that's out there. A legal over-the-counter compound. At least it's legal in the United States, I don't know about overseas. And that's a compound called Kanna, K-A-N-N-A. It's an interesting compound. It goes by another name as well, which is, and I'm going to mispronounce this and I apologize, this is Sceletium tortuosum. Please see our timestamps if you want to see the spelling of that. But I'll just call it Kanna, by its other name for short. It's an herb that is traditionally chewed prior to stressing endeavors, is how it's described on an examine.com. But I looked at some of the studies on this. It's kind of interesting. It very likely increases the amount of serotonin in the body and pretty potently. It is generally taken in dosages of anywhere from 25 to 50 milligrams. And it creates a kind of a pro-social gratitude enhancing, or I should say gratitude circuitry pro-social neurocircuitry enhancing effect because of the ways that it interacts with the certain urgent pathways of the brain. So it also has another name, it's sometimes called Zembrin, Z-E-M-B-R-I-N. Again, I'm not suggesting that people run out and take this stuff. But there is an emerging practice of people using Zembrine, Sceletium tortuosum, also called Kanna, K-A-N-N-A, in order to enhance the states that are about comfort and pleasure with what one has in their immediate sphere of experience. And so one could imagine if it's safe for you and right for you and legal where you live in enhancing serotonin by taking Kanna and then doing your gratitude practice. What's the logic behind that? Well, oftentimes we hear about supplements and pharmacology for "increasing plasticity" or "opening plasticity." You know, if I had a dollar for every time someone said, I hear that such and such opens plasticity. Well, indeed there are molecules associated with the thing that we call neuroplasticity. But neuroplasticity is not an event, it's a process; meaning it has many, many steps. It occurs during wakefulness, it's consolidated during sleep and so forth. Taking a substance that increases a neurochemical in your brain will likely, provided it's the right substance and it's the right practice, will likely enhance the amplitude or the intensity of that practice and make it a more potent form of inducing neuroplasticity. Meaning it will create longer lasting or more robust brain changes than if one hadn't increased their chemistry in this way, this way of taking something. But that doesn't necessarily mean that you couldn't get to the very same place without it, by simply doing a slightly longer attitude practice or putting a little bit more mental effort into it. That said, I think the future of neuroplasticity really resides in not just one approach, not just neurochemistry and taking substances to increase neuroplasticity, not just behavioral practices to try and increase neuro-plasticity, not just brain machine interfaces or devices to increase neuro-plasticity, but rather the convergence of multiple tools. So you could imagine enhancing serotonergic transmission, as we say in the brain using something like Kanna, combined with a gratitude practice. In the not-too-distant future, this will probably also be combined with some sort of noninvasive device to stimulate the prefrontal cortex at the same time. Please don't do that recreationally. Those devices are for clinical use only currently. But I think you start to get the idea. So for those of you that are a little bit more exploratory and you want to go in and do some reading on this, I thought you might find Kanna interesting. I certainly did. There are a number of studies that will pop up on PubMed. I recommend using examine.com as your jumping off point. There are some decent studies that they described in their so-called human effect matrix. So those are studies done on humans. And the main effects that have been documented in the scientific literature are minor, but significant increases in cognition, executive function. Executive function is something that's also associated with prefrontal cortex, and reductions in anxiety. And that seems to be a common theme that we're seeing again and again. You saw this in the study, the trial where we saw reductions in TNF-alpha and reductions amygdala activation. Which would ostensibly lead to reductions in anxiety. You're seeing increases in activity in brain networks that are associated with feelings of wellbeing. So again, back to that kind of push-pull of defensive anxiety and fear-like circuitry in the brain being antagonistic, as we say, to the circuits that are associated with pro-social, feeling good, receiving good feelings, type circuitry and events in life. So as you now know, there is a lot of science about how gratitude can positively impact neural circuits in the brain. Anti-inflammatory markers in the body, brain-heart breathing coordination, and on and on and on. I'd like to just highlight the key elements of the most effective, at least to my knowledge, gratitude practice. And when I say the most effective, what I'm doing is I'm gleaning from the scientific studies I was able to find and combining the various findings of those studies into what I think is a very practical, and what should certainly be a very effective gratitude practice for all the positive effects that we described. First of all, that gratitude practice has to be grounded in a narrative, meaning a story. You don't have to recite or hear that story every single time you do the gratitude practice, but you have to know what that story was and what the gratitude practice references back to. Second of all, that story can be one of you receiving genuine thanks. And the key elements there are that you are the one receiving the thanks, the gratitude, and that it's being given to you genuinely, wholeheartedly. Or it can be a story of you observing someone else receiving thanks or expressing thanks. And that has to be a genuine interaction as well, both between the giver and the receiver. So, those are the first three elements. What I recommend would be after you've established the story that you want to use for your gratitude practice, that you write down three or four simple bullet points that can serve as salient reminders of that story for you, it will serve as kind of a cue for that story without having to listen to, or talk out the entire story. I would recommend writing down something about the state that you or the other person were in before they received the gratitude, the state that you were in or that the person was in after they received the gratitude, and any other elements that lend some sort of emotional weight or tone to the story. This could be three pages of text, if you like, or it could just be a couple of bullet points. I don't think it really matters. The important thing is that it's embedded in your memory and that it's really associated with this genuine exchange of thanks, and the receival of things. I think those are the key elements. And then it's very simple: The entire practice involves reading off these bullet points as a cue to your nervous system of the sense of gratitude. And then for about one minute, which is a trivial amount of time if you really think about it, or maybe two minutes, or if you're really ambitious up to five minutes of just really feeling into that genuine experience of having received gratitude or observed someone else receiving gratitude. And then in terms of frequency, I think a good rule of thumb would be to do that about three times a week. And the time of day doesn't really matter. I can't see why there would be any so-called circadian effects of this. I know some people like to do a gratitude practice before they go to sleep at night. I don't see any problem with doing this before you go to sleep at night. I also don't see any problem with you doing this on your lunch break or mid-morning or first thing in the morning. I can't see any logic for placing it at any one time of day and not another. So I think the most important thing is that you do it at least three times a week. And as mentioned before, it's very, very brief. So there are very few barriers to entry for doing this. So if we just take a step back from this protocol and compare it to what's typically out there in the literature, which is, make a list of all the things you're thankful for, recite in your mind all the things you're thankful for, count your blessings. So I think everybody should be counting their blessings all the time. There's always something to be thankful for. But in terms of a scientifically grounded gratitude practice that has also scientifically demonstrated to shift your physiology at the level of your immune system and your look neurocircuitry, reducing anxiety, increasing motivation, all these wonderful things that so many of us are chasing all the time as goals, I think a gratitude practice reveals itself to be an immensely powerful tool for any and all of us to use. And that should come as no surprise because these pro-social circuits for gratitude are not a recent phenomenon. Discussions about gratitude date back hundreds, if not thousands of years. What we've done today is to take the modern science right up until 2021, and to really distill from that the neuroimaging data, the neurochemistry, the various aspects of brain-body connectivity, look at the protocols, take various subject groups. Some were done in women, some were done between two individuals, some were done with brain imaging, all the various changes on a theme that allow us to point to a simple, but very effective protocol that certainly we could all use around Thanksgiving. But Thanksgiving is just, but one day throughout the entire year, of course. I personally have been using a gratitude protocol for the last several years. But that protocol was based on my ignorance, really, about the scientific literature, and was mainly based on what I'd heard out there in the internet, which is that I should list out or think about, or verbally recite the things that I'm grateful for. The sort of protocol that we arrived at today based on the scientific literature is distinctly different from that. And as a consequence, I've started to script out a protocol identical to the one I just described, and I intend to use that going forward. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us a comment and up to a five star review. Also, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this episode, that's the best way to support this podcast. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support this podcast at any level that you like. During today's episode, and in many previous episodes, I mentioned supplements. Supplements aren't for everybody. But if you are going to use supplements, it's imperative that the supplements be of the very highest quality. For that reason we've partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency, in terms of the quality of the ingredients they include and the precision of the amounts of the ingredients they include in their products. They've partnered with every major sports team, as well as the Mayo Clinic, so we're delighted to be partnered with them as well. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman, and there you can see all the supplements that I take, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. Or if you navigate into the site through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you for your time and attention today, learning about the science of gratitude. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 301 ---
Video ID: 8IWDAqodDas
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8IWDAqodDas
Title: Time Perception & Entrainment by Dopamine, Serotonin & Hormones
Published: 2021-11-15 13:00:14 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss how our brain and body track time and the role that neurochemicals, in particular dopamine and serotonin, but also hormones such as melatonin, allow us to orient ourselves in time. I review the three types of time perception: of the past, of the present, and the future, and how dopamine and serotonin adjust both our perception of the speed of the passage of time and our memory of how long previous experiences lasted. I also discuss circannual entrainment, which is the process by which our brain and body are matched to the seasons, and circadian (24 hours) entrainment, both of which subconsciously adjust our perceived measurement of time. I explain the mechanisms of that subconscious control. And I cover the ultradian (90 minutes) rhythms that govern our ability to focus, including how to track when these 90-minute rhythms begin and end for the sake of work and productivity. I include ten tools based on the science of time perception that you can apply to enhance productivity, creativity, and relationships in various contexts. 

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code "huberman"
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Time Perception, Note on Fasting & Supplements
00:05:12 Sponsors: ROKA, Athletic Greens, InsideTracker
00:09:25 Entrainment, Circannual Entrainment, Melatonin
00:13:20 Seasonal Oscillations in Testosterone & Estrogen, Tool 1
00:16:06 Circadian Timing, Tools 1, 2, 3 (for Circadian Entrainment)
00:21:13 Tool 4: Timing Physical Activity; Tool 5: Timing Eating Window
00:23:00 When Circadian Entrainment is Disrupted, Time Perception Suffers
00:25:00 Tool 6: Ultradian (90min) Cycles & Focus
00:31:42 Our Sense of the Passage of Time: Present, Prospective, Retrospective
00:34:40 Dopamine (& Nor/epinephrine) Lead to Time Overestimation; Frame Rate 
00:37:18 Serotonin & Time Underestimation; Decreased Frame Rate
00:39:10 Dopamine vs. Serotonin Across the Day; Tool 7: When to Do Rigid vs. Creative Work
00:42:38 Example of Tool 7
00:43:38 How Sleep Deprivation Degrades Performance
00:44:38 Trauma, “Over-clocking” & Memories; Adjusting Rates of Experience
00:50:04 Why Trauma Involves Dopamine & Epinephrine, Arousal
00:51:03 Dopamine, Spontaneous Blinking & Time Perception; Tool 8
00:53:38 Deliberate Cold Exposure, Dopamine, Tool 9: Adjusting Frame Rate in Discomfort
00:56:30 Fun “Feels Fast” BUT Is Remembered as Slow; Boring Stuff “Feels Slow,” Recall As Fast
01:00:54 Retrospective Time, Context Variation & Enhanced Bonding with Places & People
01:03:00 Dopamine Release Resets the Start of Each Time Bin on Our Experience
01:07:40 Habits & Time Perception; Tool 10 (Setting Functional Units of Each Day)
01:11:58 Synthesis & Book Suggestion (Your Brain Is a Time Machine by D. Buonomano)
01:12:27 Supporting the HLP: Subscribe, Instagram, Patreon, Thorne Supplements

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright guitar music] I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are talking about time perception. Our perception of time is perhaps the most important factor in how we gauge our life, that is whether or not we think we are being successful, whether or not we are failing, whether or not we live in fear, whether or not we live in relation to things in a way that's positive, and the reason for that is that our perception of time is directly linked to the neurochemical states that control mood, stress, happiness, excitement, and of course it frames the way in which we evaluate our past, so whether or not we think of our past as successful or unsuccessful. It frames our present, whether or not we think we are on track or off track. And it frames our sense of the future, whether or not we think we have a bright future, a dim future, or whether or not the future is very uncertain or not. Today, we're going to talk about the science of time perception and we are going to talk about tools and protocols that you can use that can enhance your ability to dilate and contract time. What do we mean by dilate and contract time? We can control the speed at which we experience life. We can slow things down or we can speed our experience of life up. And we can do that in a very direct and dynamic way. It's actually not that hard once you understand how time perception works. So that's where we're headed. I think you're going to come away from today's episode with a lot of new knowledge and certainly with many tools that you can try in your daily life, whether or not that's work, sport, relational, emotional, and so on. Before we begin our discussion about time perception, I'd like to answer some questions that I received related to the episode on fasting and time-restricted feeding. If you haven't seen that episode, this information should still be of use to you. Time-restricted feeding involves eating for a particular period of time in each 24-hour cycle that's fairly regular. So this would be an eight-hour most often or a 10-hour block. Some people do shorter feeding windows, but regardless, that feeding window is supposed to fall at more or less the same period within each 24-hour day. This has a number of positive effects on gene expression that regulate a number of positive effects on the different tissues of the body, and for some people, not all, but for some people makes weight loss easier because of the way that they are not eating for large periods of each 24-hour cycle. In any event, one of the major questions I got after that episode was do supplements break a fast? And during that episode, I talked about what breaks a fast is highly contextual. It basically boils down to whether or not something you ingest, whether it be liquid or food, increases your resting blood glucose, how much it increases that resting blood glucose, and how long that increase lasts. So you can check out the episode for more about what breaks a fast, but to address this issue about supplements and whether or not supplements in particular break a fast, many of the questions were about Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a sponsor of this podcast. It is also a terrific supplement that I'd been taking for more than a decade before this podcast launched. And many people have been using and continue to use Athletic Greens. Does Athletic Greens break a fast? Well, that will somewhat depend on whether or not your resting blood glucose tends to run high or low, but for most people, including me, because I've measured it, ingesting Athletic Greens does not break a fast and if it happens to break a fast, it would be a very transient break in fast. So without knowing your resting blood glucose levels on an individual basis, there's no way I can say for sure that it doesn't break a fast, but chances are it does not because it doesn't contain much carbohydrate or sugar and it doesn't tend to therefore pull you out of the molecular mill you associated with low blood glucose states. The other question I get is whether or not things like fish oil break a fast, and once again, this will be contextual, but because fish oil is a fat, an essential fat, mainly essential fatty acids, in particular EPA and DHA, those don't tend to raise blood glucose very much. In my case, having measured using a continuous glucose monitor my resting blood glucose, fish oil does not in any way change my resting blood glucose. Chances are it won't do that for most people as well. So does fish oil break a fast? Chances are it does not. And of course people wanted to know about pill-type supplements, you know, caffeine and things that raise dopamine and their vitamins and minerals. In general, if something doesn't contain sugar or much carbohydrate of any kind, it's not going to raise blood glucose very much. Now, of course, protein can raise blood glucose and fat can too as well, although to a lesser extent. So again, this is all contextual, but at least by the logic that I just spelled out, Athletic Greens, fish oil, and most forms of supplements, provided they don't have any sugar or protein content, should not quote unquote break a fast. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and one of the key things about our visual system is that it's designed so that when you move into areas where it's sunny or where there are shadows, you can still see things with crystal clarity. Many sunglasses out there have the problem that you have to keep taking them off and putting them back on depending on the overall so-called ambient environment that you're in. ROKA sunglasses have solved this problem and their eyeglasses also have super clarity regardless of overall ambient lighting, as we say. In other words, you see everything very clearly no matter where you are. They also come in a number of different styles. The aesthetics are really terrific. So unlike a lot of performance glasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, you can wear them anywhere. You can wear them to dinner. You can wear them to school or work or in social engagements and you can wear them running and cycling and out doing your various activities. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to ROKA that's R-O-K-A, .com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens way back in 2012 and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason that I started using Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice every day is that it covers all of my foundational needs for vitamins, minerals, and probiotics. In fact, when people ask me what supplements they should take, if I were going to recommend just one supplement, it would be Athletic Greens because of the enormous number of biological factors that it impacts in a positive way. It has, as I mentioned, vitamins and minerals. The probiotics are really important for the gut microbiome and gut health which is important for the immune system and for brain health and for mood and a number of other important factors including hormones and so on. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim their special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs which make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road or in the car. And they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 and K2 have been shown to be really important for a number of important aspects of your immediate and long-term health including blood lipid profiles and a number of other things. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs, and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test and it's for that reason that I get my blood work done once every four to six months. Might seem like a lot, but it has been vital in order to keep my health where I want it and to ensure that my health trajectory is heading in the direction that I'd like it to go with each passing year. The other thing about InsideTracker is they have DNA tests which can tell you about the specific makeup of your genes that can impact your particular nutrition, lifestyle, and supplementation regimes. They can also help you steer your immediate and long-term health in the direction that you want to go. They make the whole thing very, very easy. You can have the blood test taken at home or you can go to a local clinic. Then the results come back and the wonderful thing is the platform, the dashboard that they use walks you through your data and points to specific things related to nutrition. Maybe you should be eating more of certain things, eating less of others, supplementing in certain ways or not. And lifestyle factors like exercise in order to bring the numbers into the ranges that are right for your immediate and long-term health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. So let's talk about time perception and the most fundamental aspect of time perception is something called entrainment. Entrainment is the way in which your internal processes, your biology and your psychology, are linked to some external thing. And the most basic form of entrainment that we are all a slave to all year round for our entire life are so-called circannual rhythms. We have neurons, nerve cells in our eye, in our brain, and in our body that are marking off the passage of time throughout the year, literally a calendar system in your brain and body. And the way this works is beautifully simple. Light seen by your eyes inhibits, meaning it reduces, the amount of a hormone released in your brain called melatonin. Melatonin has two major functions. One function is to make you sleepy at night and the other is to regulate some of the other hormones of the body, in particular testosterone and estrogen. When we view light, we reduce the amount of melatonin released. In fact, if you wake up in the middle of the night, when melatonin typically is pretty high in your brain and body and you flip on a bright light in the bathroom, your melatonin levels crash down to almost zero and stay there. Light is a very powerful modulator of melatonin and light inhibits melatonin. Throughout the year, depending on where you live, day length varies, and as a consequence, the amount of light from the sun that is available to you varies. So when days are long, the amount of melatonin in your brain and body that's released tends to be less. There's less of it and it's released for shorter amounts of time, okay? Because light inhibits melatonin. When days are very short, the amount of melatonin that's released and the duration that that melatonin exists in your brain and body tends to be much longer. So melatonin correlates with day length. And if we are viewing more light, we have less melatonin. We view less light, we have more melatonin. You see different amounts of light each day but we have a process in our brain and body that averages the amount of light that you're seeing both from artificial sources and from sunlight and measures that off, and it's so exquisitely precise that for a given, say, eight-hour day in the spring, 'cause spring in the Northern Hemisphere or elsewhere, you know, days are getting longer, that means that the amount of melatonin is getting progressively less and less and that signal is conveyed to all the systems of your brain and body. And this is why most people, not all, but most people feel like they have more energy in the spring. Conversely, when you have an eight-hour day in the winter, the amount of melatonin that corresponds to that eight-hour day is getting progressively greater and greater because why? Days are getting shorter so melatonin is increasing from day to day to day. Every cell and system of your body pays attention to this, and as a consequence, most people, not all, but most people feel they have a little less or sometimes a lot less energy and a slightly lower mood in the winter months. Now, there are exceptions to this, of course, but the melatonin signal is the way in which your internal state, your mood, your sense of energy, even your appetite is entrained, is matched to some external event. In this case, the event is the rotation of the Earth around the sun. There are other forms of entrainment, meaning the matching of your brain and body to things that are happening in your external environment. One particularly interesting example of this was published last year by Parikh et al. in "Cell Reports," Cell Press journal, excellent journal, showing that across the calendar year, the amount of testosterone and estrogen that human beings make varies such that in longer days, they tend to make more testosterone and estrogen than in shorter days. And this was correlated with things like desire to seek out romantic partners or have romantic interactions with their existing partners, even aggression, although not violent aggression, but sense of kind of willingness to argue and to get into kind of combative states and overall energy and mood. This is something that had been hypothesized for a long time but it had never really been cleanly demonstrated. And what they showed was that it's actually the skin that's taking information about the amount of light and converting it into these increases in testosterone and estrogen. Light exposure to the skin, turns out about two hours a day, this was sunlight, in this case, to the upper body, these people weren't naked, they were wearing clothes but their arms were exposed, their upper back and neck and face were exposed, they were not wearing hats, resulted in large increases, significant increases in testosterone and estrogen. Now you could probably export a tool from that if you liked. That's not really what this podcast is about but it's very clear that because the skin is acting as an endocrine orman, organ, excuse me, as kind of a hormone-influencing organ, that getting light on the skin, not just to the eyes, can influence our sense of wellbeing by these hormone pathways, and the threshold there again seemed to be about two hours a day. It doesn't have to be very bright outside. There can be cloud cover and so on. Many people will probably ask will sunscreen inhibit this effect? And it doesn't appear that it does. Obviously prioritize skin health and avoiding skin cancer. Sunscreen is kind of a controversial topic nowadays, maybe the topic for another podcast episode at some point, but nonetheless, what the Parikh et al. study shows and that's most relevant to today's podcast is that we are entrained, we are matched to the external light-dark cycle and as the day length changes, our hormones change. And we can override that with exposure to bright lights. You know, people go sit on tanning beds. That's not a practice I particularly myself engage in, but, you know, there are a number of different ways that people can override these processes. But the point is very simple. The point is that our perception of time is both conscious, you know, it's waiting, watching the clock tick down, and there are these slower, what we call oscillatory, meaning up and down repeatedly, slower oscillatory events related to day length that are influencing our hormones like melatonin, testosterone, and estrogen, and therefore our mood, our outlook, and even our behavior. The next level of time or bin of time, as we say, that we are all entrained or matched to is the so-called circadian time cycle, which is 24-hour rhythm. This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm that we all contain and that none of us can escape from. We all have this circadian clock that resides over the roof of our mouth. The cells in that circadian clock fire, meaning they release chemicals into our brain and body on a very regular rhythm. So across the 24-hour cycle, they will be very active at some periods and less active at others. Not surprisingly, there are periods of every 24-hour cycle when we are very active and we tend to be alert and others when we are asleep. Now, I've talked a lot about circadian rhythms and sleep on this podcast previously and so I don't want to repeat too much of that information in detail, but I'm just going to give a summary of how circadian entrainment works because I haven't really covered that in the context of time perception. We have the circadian clock. It oscillates. It goes up and down once every 24 hours and then repeats. Every cell of our body has a 24-hour oscillation in the expression of various genes. How that works is actually really simple, elegant, and interesting. DNA, genes, make RNA. RNA is converted into proteins. Every cell in our body has this beautiful 24-hour timer where a gene is expressed. And the important thing to understand about a given gene in this context is that that gene is inhibited, meaning it's reduced, by a particular protein, by a little biological molecule in that cell. So the gene gets expressed when there's very little of that other molecule around. DNA then becomes RNA. RNA is translated into a protein and that protein goes way, way up and the gene shuts down. But as that protein gets used up and its levels eventually drop low, low, low, low, low to zero, the gene cycle kicks in again and the gene gets expressed. The RNA gets expressed in the protein again. This all happens on a 24-hour cycle. So it's a little built-in timer in each and every one of our cells. And I didn't list off the genes, but for the aficionados out there, they go by names like PER for period, BMAL, CLOCK, and all these different things. We call them the clock genes and those clock genes regulate a number of different functions. So every cell in our body has a 24-hour cycle of gene and protein expression and the Earth rotates once every 24 hours and the processes that are happening in every cell of our body are linked. They are entrained, as we say, to the outside light-dark cycle because morning sunlight, evening sunlight, and the lack of light in the middle of the night make sure that the changes, these oscillations that are occurring within the cells of our brain and body are matched to the outside light-dark cycle. Don't want to go into all the details of how that happens but there's some very simple tools that one can use to ensure that your entrainment, your circadian entrainment, is precise. And I cannot emphasize enough how important it is that your circadian entrainment be precise, why? Because disruptions in circadian entrainment cause huge health problems. They increase cancer risk. They increase obesity. They increase mental health issues. They decrease wound healing. They decrease physical and mental performance. They disrupt hormones. You want your cells to be linked to the circadian cycle that's outside you and the circadian cycle outside you mainly consists of when there's sunlight and when there is not. And that's why the simple protocols to fall out of this whole discussion about circadian entrainment are the following. View 10 to 30 minutes of bright light, ideally sunlight, within an hour of waking assuming that you're waking early in the day especially. You wake up early in the day, get outside, see sunlight. Do that again in the afternoon or around evening, 10 to 30 minutes, depending on how bright it is outside. Artificial lights throughout the day, or if you want to be awake and you wake up early and there's no sunlight outside, you can of course turn on artificial lights if you want to be awake but basically you want as much bright light, ideally from sunlight, coming in through your eyes throughout the day. And then in the evening, you want as little bright light coming in through your eyes. I've said this over and over and over again on this podcast. There's always a lot of negotiations, but I want to make a few things clear. Try not to wear sunglasses if you can do it safely. Fine to wear eye glasses or contacts. That's not going be a problem. The light viewing that you do and the avoidance of light at night set the fundamental layer of your time perception. One of the best ways to disrupt your perception of time in the ways that we're going to talk about in the subsequent portions of the podcast is to disrupt your circadian clock and that is not a good thing for a number of different reasons. There are other ways to so-called entrain your circadian clock. One of the best ways to do that is to engage in physical activity at fairly regular times of day. You don't have to do it every day but if you're going to exercise, try and exercise at a fairly consistent time of day. Probably better to exercise than to not exercise, even if you have to move that time of day, but light activity and, we'll talk about the third in a minute, food, are the major ways that you entrain your internal perception of time to the external events of the world, meaning the turning of the Earth and therefore the exposure to sunlight or not. So in addition to sunlight viewing in the morning and throughout the day and avoiding bright light at night of any kind, not just blue light, trying to get your activity, your exercise at fairly regular, within plus or minus two hours, from each day to the next is going to have a very positive effect on so-called circadian entrainment, and also eating at fairly regular times. However, this is exciting. The data mainly point to the fact that you need to eat within more or less the same time window each day, not that you always need to eat your meals at exactly the same time. So you don't necessarily have to eat lunch at noon and a snack at four and dinner at eight in order to keep your circadian entrainment aligned or sharp. You could for instance have a small snack at noon and then eat at two and then have dinner at six and then a small snack at eight. It doesn't so much matter when the exact meals fall so much as that they fall more or less within a consistent period or phase of each 24-hour cycle. What happens when this circadian clock starts getting disrupted? I mean, this is after all an episode about time perception. It's not an episode about circadian rhythms and entrainment. Well, there's a classic study by Aschoff done in 1985 that's now been repeated many times where they had people go into environments where they didn't have clocks and they didn't have windows and they didn't have watches and they were sometimes even in constant dark or constant light, and they evaluated how well people perceive the passage of time on shorter timescales and what they found was really interesting. What they found is that people underestimate how long they were in these isolated environments. So after 42 days or so, they'd ask people how long do you think you've been in here? And people would say 28 days or 36 days. They generally underestimated how long they had been in this very odd environment with no clocks or watches or exposure to sunlight or regular rhythms of artificial light. In addition, they found that their perception of shorter time intervals was also really disrupted. So if they ask them to measure off two minutes, normally people are pretty good at measuring off two minutes. People come within, you know, 5 to 15 seconds at most. If you'd kind of have to sit there and just wait, you have a pretty good idea of when two minutes is up. You say two minutes is up. Well, when people's circadian clocks or circadian entrainment, I should say, was disrupted, their perception of time measurement on shorter timescales of minutes or even seconds was greatly disrupted. And as we'll see in a couple of minutes, that actually causes great problems for how you contend with work, how you contend with challenges of different kinds. You want your circadian entrainment to be pretty locked in or pretty entrained to the outside light-dark cycle so that your perception of time on shorter time intervals can be precise because the ability to perceive time accurately for the given task or given thing that you're involved in turns out to be one of the most fundamental ways that predicts how well or poorly you perform that thing or task. So we've talked about circannual entrainment, the matching of the cells and tissues and organs of our body to the 365-day journey that the Earth takes around the sun each year and we talked about circadian entrainment, the way that the 24-hour genetic and protein clocks of each and every one of our cells is matched to the rotation of the Earth on its axis and the exposure or lack of exposure to the sun because of that rotation on its axis. Next I'd like to talk about so-called ultradian entrainment. Ultradian rhythms are rhythms of about 90 minutes or so and all of our existence is broken up into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. When you go to sleep at night, whether or not you sleep six hours or four hours or eight hours or 10 hours, that entire period of sleep is broken up into these 90-minute ultradian cycles. Early in the night, you tend to have more slow-wave sleep. Later in the night, you tend to have more REM sleep. But nonetheless, your sleep is broken up into these 90-minute cycles. However, when you wake up in the morning, many of the things that you do are governed by these ultradian rhythms. For instance, if you were to work, meaning do math or try and learn a language or do physical work of any kind or work out, the 90-minute time block seems to be the one in which the brain can enter a state of focus and alertness and do hard work and focus, focus, focus and then at about 90 minutes, there's a significant drop in your ability to engage in this mental or physical work. Now, everybody from, you know, the self-help literature to the business literature to the pop psychology literature has tried to leverage these ultradian cycles by saying if you're going to do something hard and you want to focus on it, limit it to 90 minutes or less. And I am one of those people who's also joined that conversation and indeed I use 90-minute work cycles, and I think they are extremely powerful. One should never expect that you're going to drop immediately into a state of high focus at the beginning and then remain there for 90 minutes. We all struggle to varying degrees to achieve focus and motivation and drive within those 90-minute cycles. But it is true, meaning there is ample literature to support the idea that after about 90 minutes, we tend to go into a state of less ability to focus. So while this isn't time perception per se, it is again an example of entrainment. What are we entraining to, right? Just because we can focus for 90 minutes and then not so well at 100 minutes or 120 minutes, what are we entraining to? Well, what you're entraining to is the release of particular neurochemicals, in this case, acetylcholine and dopamine that allow your brain to focus for particular periods of time, 90 minutes or so, and after about 90 minutes or so, the amount of those chemicals that can be released tends to drop very low, which is why your ability to focus becomes diminished. If one would like to explore more about the kind of backbone and basis of these ultradian rhythms, it goes by a different name. This was originally called the basic rest-activity cycle. This was proposed many years ago by Nathaniel Kleitman. It was established to be true within sleep states as I mentioned before. Then it was debated for a long time whether or not these 90-minute cycles also control our ability to focus and perform work in wakeful states and it turns out that they do. Now there's a lot of literature to support that. I always get the question how do you know when the 90 minute cycle begins? In other words, let's say you wake up at 8 AM and you just finished a 90-minute sleep cycle. Does that mean that your next 90-minute cycle where you could do work begins right at 8:01? No, the interesting thing about these basic rest-activity cycles, these ultradian rhythms, is that you can initiate them whenever you want. This is not like a circadian rhythm which is a hardwired unerring signal of 24 hours. The ultradian rhythms that occur during sleep are hardwired, unerring. You don't get the option of making your sleep cycles 120 minutes or five minutes. You don't get that option. But if you decide that you want to apply ultradian rhythms to work and performance, you can set a clock and decide, okay, now the focus begins. Now the work begins and this 90-minute cycle is the period in which I'm going to do work. And I actually do this, you know, mid morning and sometimes twice a day, I do a 90-minute cycle where I limit all distraction as much as possible, put away my phone, often turn off the internet as well. I talked about this in an episode on kind of an optimal workday, at least for me, just to give an example of how this might work. But I want to emphasize again that these ultradian rhythms are ones that you set. So you decide I'm going to work for 90 minutes. What you can't negotiate, however, is that at about 100 minutes or 120 minutes, no matter who you are, you're going to see a diminishment in performance. You're not going to focus as well. And that's again because of the way that these 90-minute cycles are linked to the ability of the neurons that release acetylcholine and dopamine and to some extent norepinephrine, the things that give us narrow focus, motivation, and drive, the way that these 90-minute cycles are involved in those circuits. After about 90 minutes, those circuits are far less willing to engage and therefore it's much harder to continue to focus to a high degree. Some people like to do multiple 90-minute cycles per day of focus. In that case, you need to separate them out. You can't do one 90-minute cycle, then go right into another 90-minute cycle, then another 90-minutes cycle. You can't cheat these circuits related to acetylcholine and dopamine and norepinephrine unfortunately. I suggest that people do no more than three and ideally it would be two or just one of these 90-minute cycles. Why did I say ideally? Well, they are very taxing. You are in a very narrow tunnel of focus. So for me, I can do one mid morning. I can probably do another one in the afternoon. This is not the kind of work that's like checking email or text messaging or social media. This is very focused hard work, working on hard problems of various kinds, and this will be different for everybody. So I recommend that they be spaced by at least two to four hours and most people probably won't be able to handle more than two per day. There are probably some mutants out there that could do three or four, but that's exceedingly rare. I think even one a day is going to feel like a significant mental investment, and afterwards you're going to feel pretty taxed. So now we've talked about circannual, circadian, and ultradian rhythms, but we haven't really talked about time perception per se. We've mainly talked about the subconscious slow oscillatory ways in which we are entrained or matched to the year or to the day and these ultradian cycles that we can impose on our work and that we can leverage toward more focus if we like. But what about the actual perception of time? What actually controls how fast or how slowly we perceive time going by? There are basically three forms of time perception that we should all be aware of. One is our perception of the passage of time in the present, how quickly or slowly things seem to be happening for us. This is kind of like an interval timer ticking off time. Tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. It's either fine-slicing like that, or tick, tick, tick. We have interval timers. I'll discuss the basis of those interval timers. We also engage in what's called prospective timing which is like a stopwatch measuring off things as they go forward. That might sound a little bit like what I just described but it's actually a little bit different. For instance, if I told you to start measuring off a two-minute time interval into the future, you could do that pretty well. But if I told you you had to measure a five-minute time interval into the future and you couldn't use any clocks or watches or your phone or anything like that, you would have to set the tick marks. You'd have to decide how many times you were going to count off during that five-minute time block. There's also retrospective time which is how you measure off time in the past. So if I say, you know, last week, I know you went to the park, you did some things with friends, you know, you went out in the evening. How long was it between lunch and when you went to dinner with friends? You'd probably think, okay, well, I remember I went to dinner at seven and we had lunch right around two. You're using memory to reconstruct certain sets of events in the past and get a sense of their relative positioning within time, okay? So we have retrospective, current time interval measurements, and then prospective time measurement into the future. The beauty of time perception in the human nervous system is that it boils down to a couple of simple molecules that govern whether or not we are fine-slicing time or whether or not we are batching time in larger bins. Those molecules go by names that maybe you've heard, things like dopamine and norepinephrine, neuromodulators, called neuromodulators because they modulate, they change the way that other neural circuits work. Also things like serotonin. Serotonin is released from a different site in the brain than dopamine or epinephrin is and has a different effect on time perception. So just to give you an example of how things like dopamine and serotonin can modulate our perception of time, want to focus on a little bit of literature that now has been done fortunately in animals and humans and which essentially shows that the more dopamine that's released into our brain, the more we tend to overestimate the amount of time that has just passed. Let me repeat that. The more dopamine that is released into our brain, the more we tend to overestimate how much time has passed. These experiments are very straight, straightforward, excuse me, and they're very objective, which is really nice, which is you can give people or an animal a drug that increases the amount of dopamine and then ask them to measure off without any measurement device like a watch or a clock when one minute has passed. As dopamine levels rise in the brain, people tend to think that the minute is up before a minute. So they, at the 38-second mark, they'll say, okay, I think a minute is up. So they've overestimated how much time has passed, okay? The higher the level of dopamine, the more people tend to overestimate. Now, it's also true that norepinephrine, also called noradrenaline, plays a role and its role is very similar to that of dopamine and that's because norepinephrine and dopamine are close cousins, as some of you may recall that they are actually manufactured from one another, okay? So dopamine can actually make epinephrin and norepinephrine biochemically. There's a cascade in which dopamine can be made into norepinephrine and epinephrin, which is remarkable. How does having elevated levels of dopamine and norepinephrine cause one to overestimate how much time has passed? Well, it does it because of the way that it causes fine-slicing of your time bins. So fine-slicing of time bins is like increasing the frame rate on your camera, right? Slow motion is achieved in movies and elsewhere by increasing the frame rate. So if you take a movie at 30 frames per second and watch it, it will appear to have a certain speed, right? 'Cause those are just snapshots, 30 frames per second. In contrast, if you took that same movie at 4,000 frames per second, you are fine-slicing and you're going to see every little detail and as you play each one of those frames, it's going to look like it moved slower, okay? Whatever, so the kind of jump shot in basketball that's done slowly, any slow motion is the consequence of higher frame rate. So dopamine and norepinephrine increase frame rate, and as a consequence, they tend to lead us to overestimate the amount of time that's passed. Conversely, the neuromodulator serotonin causes people to underestimate the amount of time that's passed. So they've done these experiments. They actually have done these experiments using, in humans, with drugs that increase serotonin. They've also done them with cannabis which increases serotonin among other things including the cannabinoid receptor activation. And when people have elevated levels of 5-HT or whether or not they've ingested cannabis, they tend to underestimate how much time has passed. You do the equivalent experiment. You tell people that they have to guess or tell you when five minutes, for instance, has passed. Just use five minutes as an example this time. And generally they will miss the five-minute mark. They will think, they'll let six minutes pass and they'll think it was five minutes when they've underestimated how much time has passed. And that's because serotonin and some of the related molecules in the brain tend to lead to slower frame rates, right? They take the frame rate in the example I used before from 4,000 frames per second down to, say, 20 frames per second. So this is very interesting. It's interesting in terms of how pharmacology can be used to adjust time perception but it's also interesting in the context of that circadian rhythm. There's some emerging evidence that throughout the 24-hour cycle, there are robust changes in the amount of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin that are present in the brain and bloodstream and body depending on time of day within the circadian cycle. Now, I'm not talking about during sleep. During sleep, there are definitely variations in things like dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. I talked about that in the episodes on sleep. Here I'm just talking about the role of these molecules in time perception during wakefulness. So much of the evidence points to the fact that in the first half of the day, approximate first half of the day, dopamine and norepinephrine are elevated in the brain, body, and bloodstream much more than is serotonin and that in the second half of the day and in particular towards evening and nighttime, serotonin levels are going up. I think that's fairly well-established now. What that means based on what we just discussed about the role of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin in setting the frame rate of time perception is that our perception of the passage of time will be very different in the early part of the day and in the latter half of the day. And there's starting to be some evidence to support this, that early in the day, people tend to overestimate how much time has passed and later in the day, they tend to underestimate how much time has passed. And this is independent of taking any kind of substance that would increase or decrease dopamine or serotonin. Now, this is important in terms of how one thinks about structuring their day, because I know many people are thinking about the various tasks that they need to do throughout their day. Many, or I should say all of the literature, at least that I can find on productivity and things of that sort point to the idea that we should be doing the hardest task, the thing that we want to do the least or the most important task early in the day as a kind of a psychological tool for getting it done and feeling as if we accomplished something and I think that's an excellent protocol, frankly, but I'm not sure it's an excellent protocol because of the way that we sense accomplishment or at least it's not only an excellent protocol because of the way that we sense accomplishment. Another reason to move something that's very hard into the early part of the day is that if indeed the dopaminergic and noradrenergic circuits are more active at that time, we are actually in a better position cognitively to parse that hard problem because of the way that we are able to fine-slice our perception of time and fine-slice all the perceptual events outside us. So what I'm really saying is that early in the day, you are a much more high resolution camera, so to speak, than you are later in the day. Now, different types of tasks and different types of things require different frame rates or different ways of perceiving time, and indeed, this also lends itself to a tool whereby for activities that involve more kind of creative thinking that aren't as constrained by particular answers or outcomes and in which we need to kind of blend different aspects of our memory, different aspects of task utilization, in other words, for creative works, for brainstorming, for things that are a bit more fluid, so to speak, the more serotonergic second half of the day, and because of the way the serotonergic second half of the day lends itself to our time perception, may actually be more beneficial for those sorts of tasks. And I'll put a reference to a couple of the studies that point to this idea that in these higher dopaminergic states, we are better at doing certain sorts of tasks and in these more serotonergic states, we're better at doing other sorts of tasks and how the dopamine tends to be earlier in the day and the serotonin later in the day, so to speak. These are broad, I'm painting with broad strokes here, but I think these lend themselves to some really excellent tools because I think we all understand the value of doing something that's hard or challenging early in the day, but we should ask ourselves hard or challenging how? What does that task actually really require in terms of time perception? Some people might appreciate some examples of how this might work. Basically what I'm saying is if you are doing work that involves adhering to some rigid rules, so math or a recipe or execution of musical scales or physical skills or accounting or something that requires a lot of precision where there's a right and wrong answer and it's hard, I would suggest that you do that in the early part of the day because of the way that dopamine and norepinephrine impact time perception. You are literally better at slicing up time, you are a higher resolution brain during those times, and so that's going to lend itself better to events and demands that require high resolution, whereas in the afternoon in this more what I'm calling serotonergic state, that's when you're going to be better at brainstorming and creative works where there's some flexibility in terms of how you're batching time and perceiving time and there isn't so much rigid oversight of a right or wrong answer. And as an aside to support what I said but also to take us back to this critical role of the circadian rhythm, there is a lot of evidence that when one's sleep is disrupted, when sleep is either too short or is fragmented or is not of high enough quality for enough days, one of the first things to happen is that there is a dysregulation of these dopaminergic, noradrenergic, and serotonergic states throughout the day. They get kind of mish-mashed up. It's not that they're a total mess but they aren't as cleanly defined. And I think this is one of the reasons why when we haven't slept well or we haven't slept enough, we tend to feel a little off, like we can't concentrate. Part of that lack of concentration is due to other things but part of that concentration could be due to the fact that our sense of the passage of time is disrupted. So there seems to be some value in keeping the dopaminergic noradrenergic state kind of limited to the early part of the day and this serotonergic state, as we're calling it, kind of pushed towards the second half of the day. Now, there is a version of how dopamine and norepinephrine can impact our perception of the passage of time in ways that can be very disruptive or even maladaptive and the best example that I'm aware of is trauma. Many people who have been in car accidents or who have experienced some other form of major trauma do what's called overclocking. Overclocking is when levels of dopamine and norepinephrine increase so much during a particular event, our level of alertness is increased so much during a given event that we fine-slice. In other words, the frame rate is increased so much so that we perceive things as happening in ultra slow motion. Now, that might not seem like a bad thing overall but the problem with overclocking is the way in which that information gets stamped down into the memory system. So the memory system, which involves areas of the brain like the hippocampus but also the neocortex, is basically a space-time recorder. What do I mean by space-time recorder? Well, your nervous system, of course, is housed in the darkness of your skull. It doesn't have a whole lot of information about the outside world except light coming in through the eyes and whatever happens to hit our ears in terms of sound waves and skin and so forth so it has to take all those neural signals and it has to create a record of what happened. Now, it doesn't create a record of everything that happened but car accidents and trauma and things of that sort oftentimes are stamped down into our record of what happened. And what gets stamped down, what we actually mean by the phrase stamped down is that the precise firing of the sequence of neurons that reflected some events, so let's say I'm in a car accident, certain neurons are firing because of the flipping of the car or their screams or there's blood, or, you know, things of that sort, all of that neural activity gets repeated in the hippocampus and then the sequence of the firing of those neurons is also remembered. So it's not just that neuron one, two, three, four fired in that sequence. It's also that neuron one, two, three, four fired at a particular rate. So it would be one, two, three, four during the actual event and then the memory is stored as firing of those neurons as one, two, three, four, right? If during the event, it was one, two, three, four at that rate, the storage of the memory is not going to be one, two, three, four, okay? In other words, there's both a space code, as we say, meaning the particular neurons that fire is important, and there's a rate code, how quickly those neurons fire or the relative firing, the timing of the firing of those neurons is also part of the memory. This affords our memory system tremendous flexibility. What it means is that you can take the same set of neurons in the hippocampus and stamp down many, many more memories because all you have to do is use a match of the different rates of the different neurons that were firing in order to set that code, right? Otherwise, if you needed a different set of neurons for every memory, you'd need an enormous hippocampus. You'd need an enormous head. So I think you get the basic idea. Overclocking is a case in which the frame rate is so high that a memory gets stamped down and people have a very hard time shaking that memory and the emotions associated with that memory. And it's not the topic of today's conversation but we will cover trauma in a future episode in detail, but many of the treatments for trauma, EMDR, nowadays there's a lot of excitement also about ketamine therapies, exposure therapies, you know, like cognitive behavioral therapies involve not just trying to reduce the amount of emotion associated with a memory, but also a deliberate speeding up or slowing down of that memory. In other words, trying to allow the person who experienced the trauma to take control of the rate of the experience in their memory, not just whether or not the memory happened at all. In fact, you know, one of the first things that trauma victims learn is that they aren't going to forget what happened. What's eventually going to happen ideally with good treatment is that the emotional weight of the experience will eventually be divorced from the memory of the experience. And that's done again by trying to reduce the amount of emotional activation during the recall of that experience and one of the best ways to do that is to alter the rate of the memory playback. In other words, taking that firing of neurons that might've been one, two, three, four, again, it would be much more complicated, but one, two, three, four for the car crash and getting the memory to play back at a rate of one, two, three, four, or even one, two, three, four, one, two, three, four. In other words, allowing the person or instructing the person to take control of the rate of the playback, and in that way, there seems to be still yet unknown mechanism by which people can uncouple some of the emotional weight that's associated with that memory. So overclocking is a kind of extreme example of where the dopaminergic and the neurogenetic system is ramped up so high that people have this, unfortunately, what seems like indelible mark in their brain of a particular event. But again, trauma treatment is designed to uncouple the emotional load of that event. Some of you are probably saying why dopamine during trauma? I thought dopamine was the feel-good molecule. Well, in reality, dopamine is not necessarily a molecule of reward. It's a molecule of motivation, pursuit, and drive. And because of the close relationship between dopamine and norepinephrine, oftentimes they are co-released. So whether or not dopamine is released during car crashes or other forms of trauma, we don't know but what we do know is that both the dopamine system and noradrenergic system, when we say noradrenergic, we mean norepinephrine, those systems are greatly increased anytime there's a heightened state of arousal. And arousal can have negative valence, like meaning associated with an event that we really hate, that we would prefer not to be involved in, or can positive valence, but dopamine and norepinephrine are kind of the common hallmark of all things of elevated arousal. And so that's why we see evidence for dopamine being associated with these changes in time perception both for positive events and for negative events. There's a very interesting relationship between arousal, dopamine, time perception, and blinking, and this is all supported by a really interesting paper, first author, Terhune is the last name, T-E-R-H-U-N-E. It's published in "Current Biology." Cell Press journal. Excellent journal. The title of the paper is "Time Dilates After Spontaneous Blinking." So heightened states of arousal are associated with heightened levels of dopamine. You now know that dopamine leads to a kind of fine-slicing of time and one of the ways that we fine-slice time is by blinking. You know, we think of blinking as just a thing to lubricate our eyes or to limit the amount of light coming into our eyes, but it's a shutter on our experience. So much of the information coming into the brain through our eyes impacts our attention. I've said it before on this podcast, that cognitive attention follows visual attention, at least for sighted individuals. Well, it turns out that dopamine and increases in dopamine are associated with increases in spontaneous blink rate. So the more aroused we are, the more awake we are, there are a number of effects. Pupils dilate, heart rate increases, et cetera, but also blink rate increases. And every time we blink, this study cleanly shows, we shift our perception of time, leading to, as I mentioned before, overestimations of time. So it seems as though in some way, blink rate is actually related to frame rate. So this is very, very interesting and the way that you could think about leveraging this would be if you wanted to actually slow down your perception of time, you would blink less. And if you want to speed up your perception of time, you would blink more. Now, you'd have to think of a scenario in which that would be useful to you. Obviously if you're going to blink, you're going to miss things as well. But I think it's a very interesting parameter of our visual attention as it relates to time perception, because what it really speaks to is that these neuromodulators like dopamine or serotonin that adjust frame rate, they're not doing it through some magical mechanism. In fact, there's no single brain area that we can say controls time perception. I haven't said today, oh, you know, it's the striatum. Well, it involves the striatum but I'm not going to say, for instance, oh, it's the cerebellum. The cerebellum is definitely involved in timing of movement, something for a future podcast, but time perception is what we call a distributed phenomenon. It's a network of areas in the brain working together. But dopamine and the way that it relates to the shuttering of your eyes seems to be controlling the frame rate on your experience. Numerous times on this podcast, I've talked about cold exposure and nowadays there's a lot of interest in things like cold showers, ice baths, immersion in cold water tanks and lakes and oceans and things of that sort. There are a lot of different positive effects of cold exposure provided it's done properly. It can lead to increases in metabolism, brown fat stores, which are the good fat stores that you want. They're sort of like a furnace that allow you to heat yourself up, stay warm in cold environments, to reduce inflammation, to increase resilience and so forth. There's a study published in the "European Journal of Physiology" showing that cold exposure can increase our baseline levels of dopamine robustly, 2.5x, and it's a long-lasting increase in dopamine and appears to be a healthy one, meaning it doesn't seem to be addictive. I'm sure there are some people out there addicted to ice baths, but, you know, when you think about the range of dopamine-inducing behaviors that are addictive, it seems to be more on the health-promoting side. What's interesting is that because cold water exposure increases dopamine, it will also change your perception of time and if you've ever done one of these cold water exposures, you've experienced this. You've experienced getting in and feeling like, wow, making it three minutes is a really, really long time, and you are fine-slicing time. Your frame rate is going up. Part of that, just at a kind of a coarse level is you're thinking, this is painful. I don't like this. I want to get out, right? But part of it is also that your dopamine levels are going up very quickly and therefore your perception of that discomfort is also being fine-sliced. And so you could leverage a tool, for instance, where you try and entrain your thinking to something other than your immediate experience, right? This is a kind of a controversy, if you will, in the cold exposure world. The question is do you try and lean into the experience and really feel it, or do you try and distract yourself, you know, sing a song or count off, you know, from one to a hundred. Just know that whatever tactic you use to get through the cold exposure that the dopamine level that's now increased in your system is going to cause you to fine-slice or experience that at slow motion. So a minute is going to seem like a lot longer than a minute in reality. So you could, for instance, decide to pay attention to some external cue. Maybe it's a metronome that ticks once every 10 seconds. You could decide to think about something else. You could decide to sing a song in your head or sing a song out loud. All of that will divorce you from the sensation that you experience somewhat, but more so it will divorce you from the perception of your experience as governed by that dopamine increase in frame rate. If that isn't clear, just know this. When you're in the ice bath, your dopamine levels are high. When your dopamine levels are high, your experience of the discomfort of that ice bath is at higher resolution. Now, up until now, I've been talking about how dopamine, and to some extent, serotonin can differentially impact your perception of how fast or how slowly things are happening in the moment. But remember, we have prospective time, we have our experience of time in the moment, and we have retrospective time and there are beautiful studies that have showed that the dopaminergic state changes the way not just that we experience things now, but that it changes the way in which we remember things in the past and the rate at which those things occurred. And those are in opposite direction. So to make this very simple, if something that you experience is fun or varied, meaning it has a lot of different components in it and is, in other words, is associated with an increase in dopamine in your brain, you will experience that as going by very fast. Now, this is different than the ice bath which I just said you experienced as going by very slowly, but here I'm talking about something that's fun and varied that you really like and you feel like it goes by very, very fast. Imagine an amazing day for a kid at an amusement park. They can do a ton of things. It's all new. They're very excited and they'll feel like it goes by very fast, but later they will remember that experience as being very long, that it was a long day full of many, many events. And so there's this paradoxical relationship between how we perceive fun, exciting, varied events in the present and how we remember them in the past. For those of you who've gone on vacation, if you've had an amazing day on vacation, it'll seem like, or an amazing vacation overall, it will seem like it goes by very fast. The last day of vacation, you sort of go, whoa, it went by so fast 'cause there's so much happening. But in memory six to eight months later, you remember, wow, that just went, you know, that was a long, long thing. We had this. Then we had that. Then we did this. Then we had that. It tends to spool out in a longer memory than the actual experience. Conversely, if you are bored with something or it's something you really don't like, it's going to seem like it takes a long time to go through that experience in the moment, but retroactively, looking back, it will seem like that moment was very short. So the other day I was waiting in the waiting room for the dentist, it was pretty boring. I was just kind of sitting there. There wasn't much going on. And it did seem like it was going on an awfully long time, but indeed, looking back, it just seems like, okay, I sat in that room, not much happened. And so it seems like a very short time bin. This seems to be an efficiency of how the brain stores information, dopamine being associated, of course, with fun and varied experiences and low dopamine being associated with kind of empty, boring, or what at the time seem like long experiences. And this whole thing has been stamped down into the scientific literature by those earlier experiments where they take human beings and isolate them in certain environments. You know, take away all their clocks and watches and cues and about what time of day it is and what time of night it is and allow people to have a life where they can either read and work and do things or where they have very little to do. When people are isolated in very boring environments and they don't have access to time cues, time dilates. They tend to assume that time has gone on very, very long. And so the reason I bring this up is we aren't just driven by these circadian clocks and these circannual clocks and these ultradian clocks. We are driven by these timers that vary depending on our level of excitement and they vary depending on our level of excitement because of these neuromodulators, dopamine and serotonin. So the way I like to think about it is that you have two clocks, two stopwatches. One is a dopaminergic stopwatch that fine-slices really closely. It's like, counts off milliseconds and it's grabbing a movie of your experience at very high resolution. And in the other hand, you have a stopwatch that's gathering big time bins, big ticks along the, you know, the hand is moving at bigger intervals, you know, marking off time. And depending on whether or not you're excited or whether or not you're bored, you're using different stopwatches on time and therefore you're perceiving your experience differently. One very interesting aspect to the way that neuromodulators like dopamine and novelty interact with time perception and memory is how we perceive our relationship to places and people. So really interesting literature showing that the more novel experiences we have in a place, the more we feel we know that place, obviously, but the longer we feel we've been there. So here's the kind of gedanken or thought experiment that illustrates what's in the literature. Let's say I were to move to New York City. I happen to really like New York City. I've never lived there, but let's say I lived there. I lived in a given apartment for a year and I would have a number of different experiences in this mental experiment. Let's say I had 100 different exciting and new experiences. I would at the end of that year feel as if I lived there a certain period of time, one year. I would actually know I lived there one year. If however I lived in three different places in New York City and I met three times as many people and I had three times as many novel experiences, I would actually feel as if I had been there much longer than had I only lived in one location. This is also true for social interactions. When we move to multiple or several novel environments with somebody else, we tend to feel as if we know that person much better and that they know us much better. Now, of course, we get the opportunity to interact with those people in different contexts and so indeed we do get the opportunity to see them, for instance, at the coffee shop, how they order coffee. You maybe go to a sports event, how they act there. Maybe how they interact with your family. You're getting a sense of them in different contexts. That's certainly playing a role, but it seems as if the more novelty you experience with somebody, not only the more familiar they are to you, but the more time you feel you've spent with them, even though the total amount of time can be exactly the same. And so that's a very interesting aspect of how our perception of time and these neuromodulators and novelty can shape the way not just that we perceive a given event in our world, but how we relate to a place or relate to a person. So we've talked a lot about the different neurochemicals and how those neurochemicals can influence our perception of time. We haven't talked a lot about the neural circuits and the various areas of the brain that underlie this. I do want to touch on that by highlighting a really wonderful study. This was a study published in "Neuron," also a Cell Press journal, excellent journal. The title of the paper is "Behavioral, Physiological, and Neural Signatures of Surprise During Naturalistic Sports Viewing." This experiment is really cool. They did brain imaging on individuals who are watching basketball games. These were basketball games that actually took place that were recorded and the subjects watching these basketball games in some cases, not all, had some interest in who would win or lose, and in some cases, not all, the subjects in these studies had some prior knowledge of which team they thought was better, which team was likely to win or not likely to win. The basic findings of the study were that they could measure surprise by the release of dopamine in two areas of the brain, part of what are called, is called, excuse me, the mesolimbic reward pathway. So the two areas of the brain that are important here are the nucleus accumbens and the VTA, the ventral tegmental area. These are areas that release dopamine as kind of a token of reward any time something is surprising or a positive expectation is met, okay? So if I predict that my team dribbling down court is going to score on this drive and they get the ball in the basket, a little bit of dopamine is released. These two brain areas light up in the functional imaging so-called FSRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging that they used in this study. What's really interesting about this study is not just that dopamine was released any time that something the subject wanted to see happened, right, any time they wanted to see their team score, they scored, but also during surprise. So if they thought for instance, and they would hit a button to predict that their team was going to score in this particular drive and they didn't, well, then dopamine could also be released in response to that surprise. So this speaks again to dopamine being something that's important not just for positive events, but for unexpected events. Now, that's all very interesting and speaks to the fact that dopamine is a kind of flexible currency in the brain. It's doled out, if you will, or released when something that one hopes will happen happens and it's released when there's a surprise, even if it's a kind of a negative surprise. It's not something that the subject wanted to happen. But the more interesting thing is how that relates to time perception. What they found was regardless of what caused the dopamine release, the frequency of dopamine release predicted how the subjects parsed the time bins of the game they were watching. What do I mean by that? Well, when you watch a basketball game or you watch anything, children playing or talking to your spouse or whatever, you're batching time. How are you batching time? Well, you could batch a meal by the, I don't know, the appetizer, the main course, and the dessert, but it turns out that's not what you're doing. You're batching time according to the frequency of dopamine pulses, the frequency of dopamine release. And that's what they saw in this study. If they evaluated people's perceptions of the passage of time, what they found is that that matched not whether or not the, you know, it was a particular time point in the game, not whether or not their team was going down court or running back up court to play defense, but the dopamine released served as markers which would predict the frame rate of their perception of the experience. And if that sounds complicated, what I mean is how often and when you release dopamine is actually setting the frame rate on the entire perception of everything, not just for positive events or negative events. So what this means is as you're going through life, dopamine and the release of dopamine is saying that's over and now you're in a new phase of your life even if it's very short, right? So if I get up in the morning and I really need a cup of coffee, as you probably all know, I wait 90 minutes to 120 minutes before I drink my coffee, but then I get my coffee and surely there's a dopamine hit there, I promise you, I actually am starting to carve up my day according to dopamine hits. Consciously or subconsciously, I'm actually carving up my experience according to when I'm getting dopamine throughout my day. This governance over our perception of time that dopamine has points to a very clear, very actionable, and very powerful tool. And that is a tool that many people have talked about before which are habits. People have discussed habits in a variety of contexts but in the context of dopamine reward and time perception, what this means is that placing specific habitual routines at particular intervals throughout your day is a very, not just convenient, but a very good way to incorporate the dopamine system so that you divide your day into a series of what I would call functional units. What would this look like? It would mean waking up and having one specific habit that you always engage in that causes a release of dopamine. You can say, well, great. That'll make me feel good. And I would agree. Dopamine released generally makes us feel motivated But it would have an additional effect of marking that time of day as the beginning of a particular time bin. Then inserting another habit, perhaps the beginning of, I don't know, your breakfast or something, but recognizing that that's a habit and being fairly habitual, you don't have to be, you know, obsessively precise about the timing, but that regular sequencing of things is going to lead not just to dopamine release as it relates to reward and motivation and feeling good, but it actually becomes the way in which we carve up our entire experience of our day. And this is almost a circular argument. You could say, well, of course, you know, I do one thing, then I do the next, then I do the next, and that's how I perceive my day. That's my day. It's my list. It's my to-do list, et cetera. But what I'm saying is that on the basis of this study, I should mention the first author, his last name is Antony. It was Antony et al. It was published in 2020. The study on basketball viewing, what it points to is that by engaging in specific habits that we know we can perform well, we are actually setting the frame rate on our day. And so I think there will soon come a time where human beings are not just thinking of, okay, my morning routine and my afternoon routine, I think that can be useful, and in fact, I used or mentioned a structure of that sort earlier in the episode, but rather thinking about what's actually going on at the level of our biology, which is that dopamine is marking time. Habits are a very clear way in which we can invoke dopamine release and therefore provide time markers, and what this means is that, for instance, during your morning, you might insert habit one and habit two at, say, I don't know, 8 AM and 10 AM, and in doing that, that marks an epoch, a little batch of time in your morning routine that's distinct from the second half of your morning. In other words, habits serve as flankers or markers for the passage of your day. Now, if that seems kind of hyper-neurotic or why would I want to structure my life like that, I would say that many people would do well to structure their life like that and to utilize habits not just for the sake of what you do during the habit, but because of the fact that the habits serve as a marker because of the way they can evoke dopamine release. And in doing that, you are able to segment your day into a bunch of smaller, if you want them to be smaller, or larger functional units. If anyone wants to experiment with this, the Huberman Lab Podcast puts out a newsletter. It's called the Neural Network Newsletter. You can sign up for it at hubermanlab.com. We put it out each month. You can see the previous newsletters. There's zero cost. We have our privacy statement there. We don't share your email or anything. And there you'll find the, you know, 12 steps to improving sleep was the first one. There's another, the second newsletter was all about neuroplasticity and using scientific literature to improve learning and teaching, and in the next newsletter I intend to include an example protocol of how one could use habits and the relationship between habits and dopamine, dopamine and time perception, to structure your day according to performance of particular types of tasks. Today we covered a lot about time perception. We certainly didn't cover everything about time perception but we covered things like entrainment, the role of dopamine, habits and various routines that can adjust your sense of time for sake of particular goals. If you're interested in learning more about time perception, I'd like to point you to a really excellent book called "Your Brain Is a Time Machine: "The Neuroscience and Physics of Time." The book was written by Professor Dr. Dean Buonomano who's a professor at UCLA and a world expert in the neuroscience and physics of time. I do hope to get Dean on the podcast in the not too distant future. If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our podcast channel on YouTube. It's simply Huberman Lab on YouTube. And there you can also leave us suggestions for future guests and topics and questions about the podcast episodes in the comments section on YouTube. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and/or Spotify, and on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. You can also follow us on Instagram. On Instagram I do short neuroscience tutorials and tools and protocols. I cover recent papers, many of which are not included on the podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Not so much today but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements, and while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive great benefit from supplements for sleep, for focus, and so forth. One issue with supplements, however, is that what's listed on the bottle of various supplements isn't always what's included in the bottle and the quality of ingredients varies tremendously across different supplement manufacturers. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency of any supplement company out there that we are aware of. They work with all the major sports teams. They work with the Mayo Clinic. And so we're delighted that we partnered with them. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E, .com slash the letter U slash Huberman to see the supplements that I take and you can get 20% off any of those supplements. If you enter the Thorne site through that portal, you can also get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. Thank you for your time and attention today, and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [bright guitar music]

========================================

--- Video 302 ---
Video ID: iMvtHqLmEkI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iMvtHqLmEkI
Title: Dr. Duncan French: How to Exercise for Strength Gains & Hormone Optimization
Published: 2021-11-08 13:00:21 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I talk to Dr. Duncan French, Ph.D., the Vice President of Performance at the UFC Performance Institute and a world-class performance specialist. We discuss specific resistance (weight) training regimens for increasing testosterone in men and women and how to vary mechanical loads and rest between sets and workouts to optimize hormone output and training results. We also discuss how stress-induced "catecholamines" can increase testosterone or decrease it, depending on duration and mindset. And we discuss specific cold- and heat- therapies for increasing resilience, reducing inflammation, heat shock proteins and more. We discuss nutrition for training and how to match nutrition to training goals and metabolic flexibility. We discuss mental focus and how long to train for skill development. Finally, we discuss how mixed martial arts and the UFC Performance Institute are a template for exploring human performance more generally. This episode is intended for anyone interested in athletic and mental performance: athletes, students, and recreational exercisers and includes both science and many practical tools people can apply in their own training. 

#UFC #UFC268 #HubermanLab

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://roka.com -- code "huberman"
Helix Sleep - https://helixsleep.com/huberman
Headspace - https://headspace.com/specialoffer 

Dr. Duncan French:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/dr_duncan_french
LinkedIn - https://www.linkedin.com/in/duncan-french-phd-a41bb9122

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Dr. Duncan French 
00:02:27 Roka, Helix Sleep, Headspace
00:05:44 Duncan’s Background in Exercise Science
00:11:45 How Certain Exercises Increase Testosterone
00:16:22 What Kind of Training Increases Testosterone & Growth Hormone?
00:20:19 Intensity: Mechanical Load; Volume: Metabolic Load; Inter-set Rest Periods
00:25:25 Training Frequency & Combining Workout Goals  
00:29:35 How Stress Can Increase or Decrease Testosterone 
00:36:55 Using Cold Exposure for Mindset, Anti-Inflammation, Muscle-Growth
00:46:55 Skill Development
00:50:05 Why Hard Exercise Creates Brain Fog: Role of Nutrition 
00:53:55 Low-Carbohydrate Versus All-Macronutrient Diets on Performance
00:56:15 Ketones & Brain Energy, Offsetting Brain Injury; Spiking Glucose During Ketosis
00:59:13 Metabolic Efficiency, Matching Nutrition to Training, “Needs Based Eating”
01:05:00 Duncan’s Work with Olympic Athletes, NCAA, UFC (Ultimate Fighting Championship)
01:08:00 Why UFC & MMA (Mixed-Martial Arts) Are So Valuable for Advancing Performance
01:12:40 Voluntarily Switching Between Different States of Arousal
01:14:30 Heat, Getting Better at Sweating, Heat Shock Proteins, Sauna
01:20:12 Using Rotating 12-Week Training Programs; Logging Objective & Subjective Data
01:24:07 Surprising & Unknown Aspects of The UFC and UFC Performance Institute
01:27:45 Conclusions, Zero-Cost Support, Sponsors, Supplements, Instagram

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com
Audio Engineering: Joel Hatstat at High Jump Media

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Duncan French as my guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Dr. French is the Vice President of Performance at the UFC Performance Institute, and he has over 20 years of experience working with elite, professional, and Olympic athletes. Prior to joining the UFC, French was the Director of Performance Science at the University of Notre Dame, and he has many, many quality peer-reviewed studies to his name, exploring, for instance, how the particular order of exercise, whether or not one performs endurance exercise prior to resistance training or vice versa, how that impacts performance of various movements and endurance training protocols, as well as the impact on hormones, such as testosterone, estrogen, and some of the stress hormones such as cortisol. He's also done fascinating work exploring how neurotransmitters, things like dopamine and epinephrin, also called adrenaline, can impact hormones, and how hormones can impact neurotransmitter release. What's particularly unique about Dr. French's work is that he's figured out specific training protocols that can maximize, for instance, testosterone output or reduce stress hormone output in order to maximize the effects of training in the short-term and in the longterm. So, today, you're going to learn a lot of protocols. Whether or not you're into resistance training or endurance training, you will learn, for instance, how to regulate the duration of your training and the type of training that you do in order to get the maximum benefit from that training over time. So whether or not you are somebody who just exercises recreationally for your health, whether or not you're an amateur or professional athlete, or whether or not you're just trying to maximize your health through the use of endurance and/or resistance training, today's discussion will have a wealth of takeaways for you. There are only a handful of people working at the intersection of elite performance, mechanistic science, and that can do so in a way that leads to direct, immediately applicable protocols that anybody can benefit from. Dr. French also provides some incredibly important insights about the direction that sport and exercise are taking in the world today, and their applications towards performance and health. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I have spent my career working on the visual system, and I can tell you that everything about the way that ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed was with performance in mind. First of all, they're extremely lightweight so you actually forget that you're wearing them most of the time. Second of all, even if you get sweaty, if you're running or biking or it's a hot day or you're running around and just happen to be perspiring quite a lot, they don't slip off your face, which is terrific. They also have a great aesthetic and they have a lot of different styles to choose from. The clarity of the lenses is superb. I don't think there's a match for the clarity of ROKA glasses out there. And if there is, I'm not aware of it. They are absolutely crystal clear. And that's true in any environment, whether or not you're working in a dim environment or a bright environment, the clarity is unmatched. If you'd like to try ROKA eyeglasses or sunglasses, you can go to roka.com. That's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code "Huberman" to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are uniquely tailored to your sleep needs. All of us have unique sleep needs, and we should be sleeping on a mattress that's ideal for us. If you go to the Helix site, they have a quick two minute quiz, ask you a number of questions about whether or not you sleep on your side, your back, your stomach. Do you tend to run hot or cold, et cetera? Maybe you don't have the answers to those questions, which is fine. They'll match you to the mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. I took that quiz and about 10 months ago I started sleeping on the Dusk Helix mattress. That's D-U-S-K. That's the mattress that's ideal for me, and I'm sleeping better than I ever have before. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/Huberman, take their two minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders and two free pillows. That's helixsleep.com/Huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published studies. By now I think most people have heard about or experienced the benefits of meditation; improved focus, better sleep, reduced stress, more creativity and insight. There are just so many studies out there that support those claims. The challenge, however, is sticking to a meditation practice. And over the years, I confess there have been times when I've meditated regularly and then I stopped meditating, even though it always provides benefits for me the first time I do it and every time I do it. With the Headspace app, it makes it very easy to meditate consistently because they have different types of meditations to select from, and they come in different durations. So sometimes I only have three or four minutes to meditate. They have those sorts of meditations. They also have longer meditations of 20 minutes or more. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations that you can use in any situation. This is the best deal offered by Headspace right now. So, again, if you're interested, go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And now, my conversation with Dr. Duncan French. Duncan French, great to see you again. - Likewise, likewise, thank you. I don't often have many Stanford professors in the Performance Institute, so I'm really excited. - Oh, well, this place is amazing, and you have a huge role in making it what it is. The reason I'm so excited to talk with you is that you're one of these rare beasts that you have been involved in human performance and athletic performance at the collegiate level. You are obviously very involved in MMA now, in the UFC Performance Institute. And you also had the fortunate experience, I like to think, of doing a PhD in... What exactly was the PhD in? - It was exercise physiology. - Exercise physiology. So, you're familiar also with designing studies, control groups, all the sorts of things that in my opinion, anyway, are kind of lacking from the internet social media version of exercise science, which is that people throw out all sorts of ideas about how people should be training, what they should be doing and eating and not eating and doing. And certainly, science doesn't have all the answers, but I just think it's so rare to find somebody that's at the convergence of all those different fields. And so, I have a lot of questions for you today that I'm sure the audience are going to be really interested in. - Well, listen, I mean, I appreciate that. It's very humbling, and yeah, I've worked hard to get to where I am, but I've always tried to be authentic. And I think authenticity comes alongside academic rigor, and objectivity, and insight and knowledge base, right? At the end of the day, it's about having confidence, having expertise and being able to deliver that expertise to, in my world, to athletes. And I think, and that's what I've always tried to do. I've tried to have many strings to my bow so that I can talk with many different hats on. You know, one day I'm talking to a coach, the next day I'm talking to an athlete, the next day I'm talking to a CEO, the next day I'm talking to an academic professor. And so, I think being able to wear those different hats is certainly a skillset that I've tried to build throughout my career. And like you said, I've been blessed to work with, I think it was 36 different professional or Olympic sports last time I counted. - Amazing. - So, yeah, it's been a wild ride. It's been great. - Which of those sports was the most unusual? - I've worked with crown green bowling. - Wait, what? - Which I don't know, as an American guy, I don't know- - I've never heard of it. - How well you'd know that, but basically imagine a 20 foot by 20 foot square of turf with a small raise in the middle, i.e. the crown. So, it slopes to the edges. - Okay. - And then, you throw out a white jack, a smaller ball, and then you roll out larger balls to try and get closest to the jack. It's a very European thing, let's say. - Interesting. - But yeah, sports performance in crown green bowling, and there you go. - All right. [Duncan laughing] Wow, and then to mixed martial arts, fighters- - Absolutely, there you go. - And everything in between. So, along those lines, can you give us a little bit about your background? Where'd you start out? Where are you from originally? - Yeah, I'm from the northeast of England. So I'm from a town called Harrogate, which is in Yorkshire, which is a northern kind of area of the UK- - Nice sunny weather all year long? - Yeah, you can imagine. Yeah, with the two weeks of summer that we get, you know? [Duncan laughs] But yeah, I mean, I did my undergraduate studies there in sports science. I did teacher training to be a physical education teacher after that. Like most people I then worked as a high school physical education teacher. You know, great experience working with kids, developing athletic qualities. But something in the back of my mind always, I wanted more, I wanted to be at the higher end of elite sport. I was a failed athlete like many people. I represented my country in different sports and things, but I never made it professionally. So, that little seed was sown and as much as I then started to reach out to different areas to do a PhD, whether it was in the UK or also, chance my arm, took a punt, see if I could get over to the states. I mean, all my buddies were going on gap years after they finish university or whatever, and going to Bali and hanging out or whatever, traveling through Thailand. And I figured, well, I've always loved the states and can I go and kill two birds with one stone and do something academic, continue my studies, but also do it in a different environment and get some life experience. And many, many rejections, as I'm sure you kind of aware from different professors, whether it was Roger Noecker or William Kramer- - So you wrote to these folks? - I just cold called and send out information and saying, "Yeah, so have you got any opportunities?" Pushed back from them all, but dogged and kept asking, and yeah, Dr. William Kramer, who was at Ball State University in Indiana at the time, a muscle neuroendocrinologist and researcher in muscle physiology using resistance training, he basically said, listen, I can guarantee your funding for the first year of your studies, but not the next three. - Sounds like a typical academic response. - Yeah. - I can take care of you, but not that well necessarily. - Right. - Right, yeah. - Yeah, so, I spoke to my parents and said, "Hey, can we take a punt?" And they were great in supporting me. And yeah, long story short, came out to begin my PhD at Ball State. After a year, Dr. Kramer transferred to UConn, Connecticut, in Storrs, in the Northeast there. And I transferred with him and yeah, four great years with my PhD and getting my PhD with a really prolific research group that looked at neuroendocrinology, hormonal work, but using a resistance training primarily as an exercise stressor as a major mechanism, and then looking at all the different physiologies off the back of resistance training. - Yeah, you guys were enormously productive. I found dozens of papers on how weight training impacts hormones and your name is on all of 'em. And it's remarkable. I have a question about this. I'll just inject a question about weight training and hormones. You hear this all the time that doing these big, heavy compound movements or resistance training increases androgens, things like testosterone, DHT, DHEA, and so forth. Does anyone know how that actually happens? Like what is it about engaging motor neurons under heavy loads sends a signal to the endocrine system, "Hey, release testosterone." I've never actually been able to find that in a textbook. - [Duncan] Yeah, well, I mean- - And how can I do more of that? [both laughing] - Yeah, as much as I know, and again, I'm digging out into the annals of Duncan French's kind of brain now, but yeah. I mean, I think it's a stress response, right? It's mechanical stress and it's metabolic stress. And these are the downstream regulation of testosterone release at the gonads comes from many different areas. My work primarily looked at catecholamines and sympathetic arousal. - So things like epinephrin, adrenaline? - Correct, yeah, epinephrin, adrenaline, and noradrenaline, how they were signaling; the signaling cascade using the HPA axis, releasing cortisol, and then looking at how that also influenced the adrenal medulla to release androgens and then signaling that at the gonads. - That raises an interesting question. So, in presumably weight training in women, people who don't have testes also it increases testosterone. - Yes, yeah. - And is that purely through the adrenals? When women lift weights, their adrenal glands release testosterone? - Absolutely. I mean, that is the only area of testosterone release for females. And yes, it's the same downstream cascade. Obviously the extent to which it happens is significantly less in females, but there's good data out there that shows females can increase their anabolic environment, their internal anabolic milieu using resistance training as a stressor. And then they get the consequent muscle tissue growth, whether it's tendon, ligament, adaptations, the beneficial consequences of resistance training, which is driven by anabolic stimuli. - Yeah, I have two questions about that. The first one is something that you mentioned, which is that the androgens, the testosterone comes from the adrenals under resistance loads in women. Is the same true in men? I mean, we hear that the testes produce testosterone when we weight train for men that have testes, but do we know whether or not it's the adrenals or the testes in men that are increasing testosterone more or both- - Yeah I think that- - A little bit from each? - The field is divided presently in as much as understanding the acute adrenergic response in terms of anabolic response to exercise in an acute phase and the exposure to a stimulus that is stress driven, which might be partly from the adrenal glands, partly from the gonads, versus a longitudinal exposure to anabolic environments, which is primarily driven by obviously the gonads and the endocrine environment from testosterone release at the gonads. So, the field is split in terms of how exercise is promoting hypertrophy, muscle tissue growth. And whether that is very much an adrenal stimuli, or if that's significant enough in these acute responses versus the longitudinal exposure to just elevated basal levels of anabolic testosterone habitual level. - So, it sounds like with most things, it's probably both. It's probably the adrenals- - Absolutely, yeah. - And the gonads. And then you mentioned that testosterone can have enhancing effects or growth effects on tendon and ligament also. You don't often hear about that. People always think, testosterone, muscle. But testosterone has a lot of effects on other tissues that are important for performance it sounds like? - Yeah. - Yeah what's the story there? - Yeah, absolutely, I think the testosterone hormone is... I mean, listen, there's androgen receptors on neural tissue on neural axons. - Pretty much everywhere. Yeah. - Exactly, so, the binding capacity of testosterone and influence in different tissues within the body, I touched on muscle tissue, but the ligaments, the tendons, even bone to some extent, testosterone has potential to influence that in terms of removing osteopenic kind of characteristics, et cetera. So, yeah, it's a magic hormone let's say, and with many end impacts in terms of adaptation. - I definitely want to get back to your trajectory, but as long as we're on the interactions between androgens, testosterone and its derivatives and different tissues, from the work that you did as a PhD student and throughout your career, could you say that there are some general principles of training that favor testosterone production, in terms of that somebody who's not an elite athlete could use? Somebody who's already adapted to weight training somewhat, like they know the difference between a dumbbell and a barbell, and they know the various movements, they're not going to damage themselves. But once they're doing that, I mean, I've heard shorter sessions are better than longer sessions, but in rep loads, weight... Now, there's a lot of parameter space. But if you were going to throw out some of the parameters that you think are most important to pay attention to for the typical person who's trying to use weight training to build or maintain muscle. - Yeah. - Lose body fat, so body recomposition and/or stay strong and healthy for sport of a different kind. - Yeah, so the work that we obviously, I was exposed to back in my PhD, it was a double-edged sword. And as much as testosterone is really stimulated by an intensity factor and also a volume factor. Now, growth hormone is a little bit different. That's largely driven by an intensity factor alone. - Oh, really? - Correct. - I always thought the growth hormone was driven my volume, which just goes to show you. - Maybe I've got that wrong. - No, no, no, no. I think you're probably right which just goes to show you that most of what's out there on the internet- - Right, right. - Is completely... Not only is it wrong, it's usually backwards. So, no trust- - I trust my instinct. - No, trust your instinct because I think people just make this stuff up. - Right. - Because it's very hard to measure growth hormone and testosterone. And I can't imagine most of the stuff that I see out there they're taking drips and measuring free versus bound and all this kind of stuff, but that's what you do in laboratories. - Right, yeah. - Yeah. - You look at total composition and you look at how much of that is free circulating- - Yeah. - In the system, how much is bound, and therefore biologically active bound to receptor, creating an adaptation. - Right. - But yeah, coming back to testosterone in terms of the training strategies, it's largely driven by both an intensity and a volume factor. So if you look at many of the exercise interventions that we use to try and investigate and interrogate testosterone, it was usually a six by 10 protocol. So, you're touching at about- - Six by 10 meaning? - Yeah, six sets of 10 repetitions, which is quite a large... 60 repetitions is quite a large volume for a single exercise. And that was usually pitched at about 80% intense of one repetition max intensity. - Okay, so 80% of the one rep max, six sets of 10 reps, separated by rest of like- - Two minutes. - Two minutes, which is actually pretty fast. - Yeah. - At least to me. Anytime you see these two to three minutes, when you're actually watching the clock, those two minute rest periods go by pretty fast. - By the third, fourth set you're dying for more, yeah. - Yeah. - And I think we formulated that kind of exercise protocol to really target the release of testosterone and try and drive up these anabolic environments to study the endocrine consequences. But I think that's the type of protocol that is most advantageous for driving anabolic environment. - And that was it for the workout? That was it? - Yeah, I mean, we would do that in a back squat. So, a multi-joint, challenging exercise, multi-muscle, multi-joint, 80% load of your one repetition max. And then, six by 10. We did play around with your classic German Volume Type, 10 by 10 kind of protocols, but they were just unsustainable at that 80%. The key to what we also did was we always adjusted the loads to make sure that it was 10 repetitions that were sustained. So if the load was too high and an athlete or participant had to drop the weights on the sixth repetition, we would unload the bar and make sure they completed the 10 repetitions. - I see. - Bringing me back to the point of it's an intensity and a volume derivative that is going to be most advantageous for testosterone release. - That's really interesting. And one thing that you mentioned there is especially interesting to me, which is you said when you go from six sets of 10 repetitions to 10 sets of 10 repetitions, it's not as beneficial and might even be counterproductive. But to me, the difference between six and 10 sets is only four sets. It doesn't even sound that much. So that sort of hints at the possibility that the thresholds for going from a workout that increases testosterone to a workout that diminishes testosterone is actually a pretty narrow margin. - Yeah and I think it comes back to that intensity factor then. What we saw were that 10 by 10 protocol really sees pretty significant drop-offs in the load. And again, we're trying to stimulate with intensity, with mechanical strain through intensity, as well as metabolic strain through volume. And I think that's the paradigm that you've got to look at is that the mechanical load has to come from the actual weight on the bar, and the volume is the metabolic stimulus. How much are we driving lactate? How much you were driving glycogenolysis in terms of that type of energy system for executing a 10 by 10 protocol? And what we often saw was just a significant reduction in the intensity capabilities of an athlete to sustain that. So we shortened the volume to try and maintain the intensity. - Interesting. And you could imagine just taking very long rest, keeping the session, being a big, lazy bear in training. - Right. - I sometimes do this. I tell myself I'm going to work out for 45 minutes and then two hours later, I'm done, but not because I was huffing and puffing the whole time, but because I was training really slowly. - Right. - Is there any evidence that training slowly can offset some of the negative effects of doing a lot of volume? - Well, it's an old adage of... Two responses to your question. I mean, the first one, I would say there's a difference between 10 sets of six and six sets of 10. And I think that comes back to the volume conversation. Six sets of 10 is driving up metabolic stimulus. If you're doing 10 sets of six, you can probably take it to a higher intensity, but you're not going to get the same metabolic load. You're not going to get the same internal metabolic environment that drives the lactate release, that they will then signal further anabolic testosterone release because of the lactate in your body. That's a key consideration. The rest is often the consideration that's overlooked out there in general population, and in many sporting environments. That the rest is as important a program and variable as the load and the intensity of the load, the volume, et cetera. And yes, if you extend the volume, if you extend the duration of your rest periods, what you're ultimately doing is influencing that metabolic stimulus again. You're allowing the flushing of the body, the removal of waste products, lactate to be removed from the body, and then the metabolic environment is reduced. - So, if I understand correctly, you want to create a metabolic stress. - Absolutely. - So, the way that I've been training, slow and lazy, is not necessarily the best way to go? I could, in theory, do a 45 or 60 minute session where I pack in more work per unit time. I'm not going to be able to quote unquote perform as well. I won't be able to lift as much. - Yep. - I might have to unweight the bar between sets or maybe even during sets if I have someone who could do that, but it sounds like that's the way to go. So, the old adage of high intensity, short duration is probably the way to go. - Correct. And in layman's terms, if the same objective, the same training goal is just muscle tissue growth, and we're not talking about maximal strength or any of those type of parameters, we're just talking about growing muscle. If there's an athlete A and they do six sets of 10 with two minutes rest, and there's athlete B that does six sets of 10 with three minute rest, athlete A will likely see the highest muscle gains. - Hm. - Muscle hypertrophy gains because of the metabolic stimulus that they're driving with the shorter rest periods. - Interesting. And for all the years that I've spent exploring exercise science and trying to get this information from the internet and various places that this is the first time it's ever been told to me clearly. So, basically I need to put my ego aside and I need to not focus so much on getting as many reps with a given weight and keep the rest restricted to about two minutes. - Yeah. - Get the work in, and then I'll derive the benefits. - I mean, you've absolutely nailed it to be honest. And again, if you think about human nature and how we approach, we're inherently lazy, right? As humans, we want to take that rest. We want to take the time out to recover and feel refreshed, but we're trying to create a training stimulus. We're trying to create a very specific stimulus internal to the body, and that is often driven by the metabolic environment at that moment in time. Now, if we allow the metabolic environment to change by extending the rest periods, we're not going to see as beneficial gains at the end of it. - Very interesting. - So, it is very much a motivational and ego thing rather than saying, "Okay, I'm going to push my loads as high as I can, and really challenge maximal strength, do fewer repetitions, take longer periods of time." It's a completely different approach to training. It's a different end goal. - Interesting. And you mentioned lactate, so it seems still a bit controversial as to what actually triggers hypertrophy. You hear about lactate buildup or people, the common language is the muscle gets torn and then repairs, but I don't know, does the muscle actually tear? - I mean microtrauma. - Okay, microtrauma. - Yeah, disruption within the muscle tissue for sure. - Interesting. And we're talking now about non-drug assisted people- - Correct, yeah. - Whose, let's just say, let's define our terms here. That whose testosterone levels are within the range of somewhere between 300 and 1,500 or whatever, 1,200, because it does seem that athletes who take high levels of exogenous androgens can do more work and just get protein synthesis from just doing work. - Yeah. - I've seen these guys in the gym, right? The telltale signs are not that hard to spot where they're just doing a ton of volume, not necessarily moving that much weight, they're just bringing blood into the tissue. And then they're loading up on, they're eating a ton of protein, presumably 'cause they're basically in puberty part 15. - Right. - Right, they're on their 15th round of puberty where during puberty, you are a protein synthesis machine. I mean, to me, that's pretty clear about puberty. Interesting. So, and then, in terms of, because I know the audience likes to try protocols, so you described a protocol very nicely. What about day-to-day recovery? I mean, the workout that you described is intense, but short, how many days a week can the typical person do that and sustain progress? - Yeah, I mean, I think that comes back to your training age and your training history. Obviously there's a resilience and a robustness with an incremental training age. So, that's not a protocol that I would advise anyone to go out and start tomorrow. - They'll be mopping them off the gym floor. - Right, but at the same time, it's also relative, right? So 80% of your maximum at a young training age is still 80% versus I've been training 10 years, it's still 80%. But yes, the mechanical load is going to be significant, it's just more tonnage, right? But yeah, I think a protocol like that, we would look at two times a week, something that's pretty intensive like that, because again, it comes back to the point you make is that you really need to be, for want of a better term, suffering a little bit through that type of protocol, both in terms of the challenge of the load, but also being able to tolerate the metabolic stress that you're exposed to. It's a bit of a sicko feeling because of the lactate that you're driving up. So, I wouldn't promote an athlete doing that type of modality multiple, multiple times unless you are from the realms of bodybuilding. And then, you really, that's the sole purpose of what you're trying to achieve. Most athletes in most sports have diverse requirements in terms of outcomes that they're trying to achieve. They're not just targeting muscle growth. Muscle growth is a conduit to increased strength, increased power, increased speed, obviously. So, yes, trying to get a bigger cross-sectional area of a muscle means that we can produce more force into the ground or wherever it may be, if we're a locomotive athlete. But usually, sports, men and women, are not just purely seeking muscle growth. They look for different facets of muscle endurance or maximal muscle power, muscle strength. So, then you've got to be very creative in how you build the workout. If it's a bodybuilder, absolutely they're chasing muscle growth and they're going to do so with these types of protocols, which sees high intensities and high volumes of workload on a pretty regular basis. If it's just somebody, a weekend warrior that wants to keep in shape and look good, I would say, two times a week for a really challenging workout like that, and then flex the other types of workouts within the week to have more of a volume emphasis, where you reduce the intensity and you might just look at larger rep ranges from 12 to 15 to 20. Another workout where you're looking at reducing the volume, but increasing the intensity and really trying to drive different stimulus to give you more end points of success. - Mm hm, great. No, that's really informative. Along the lines of androgens and intensity. When I think intensity, I think epinephrin, adrenaline. And since you have a background in catacholamines and testosterone, last time I was here at the UFC Performance Institute, we had a brief conversation, and I want to make sure I got the details right. That in the short term, and a big increase in stress hormone can lead to an increase in testosterone, like a parachute jump. - Correct. - But so, stress can promote the release of testosterone? - Yeah. - That was news to me. - Right. - We always hear about stress suppressing testosterone, stress suppressing the immune system, all these terrible things. But in the short term, you're saying it can actually increase the release of testosterone. So, I have that right? - Correct, yeah, yeah. - Okay, and so then the second question is, does my cognitive interpretation of the stressor make a difference? In other words, if I voluntarily jump out of a plane with a parachute, does it have a different effect on my testosterone than if you shove me out of the plane against my will? Well, presumably with a parachute too. - Right, I mean, so this was what all my PhD work was looking at was the exposure to a stressor, and the pre-arousal of how your body essentially prepares for that stressor, and then how it manages it throughout the exposure to the stress. And it was actually motivated from parachute jumpers. There was an older study looking at parachute jumpers into combat. And then, they were studying the cortisol, the stress response, and the epinephrin response of these parachute jumpers. So, it got us thinking about, hold on, there's certain workouts that you do that are just, they're daunting, you know? It's like, okay, it's squat Saturday or whatever it may be. Oh my gosh, this is going to destroy me. - Or I have to talk to this person I don't want to talk to or you know, right? - Exactly, yeah. - I mean, something, or a PhD dissertation exam- - Exactly or speaking- - Or something, yeah. - Giving public speaking or whatever it may be. Now, we used an exercise, we used a resistance training protocol that these athletes knew was going to be very, very challenging. There's going to have some anxiety to doing it, they knew there were going to be some physical distress from doing it. And therefore, their mindset of how they were going to approach that was already set. So what we saw 15 minutes prior to the start of an exposure to the workout, the epinephrin, the noradrenaline, the adrenaline was already starting to prepare the body sympathetically to go into what it knew was going to be a very, very challenging workout. So, that brings you back to exercise preparation, competition for certain preparation... Preparation for certain competition, excuse me. Pre-workout routines, the use of music, all these different things that we know can now anecdotally in the gym we put into place, but the data that I presented showed that... It was a first of its kind to show that this link between epinephrine and norepinephrine release and arousal, and then consequent performance. So, force output throughout the workout was intimately linked. - So, what was the takeaway there? Is it beneficial for people to get a little stressed about the upcoming impending event? Whether or not it's a lift in the gym or whether or not it's talking to somebody that you might be intimidated to talk to, or an exam? Is the stress good for performance or is it harmful? - Yeah, and I think that's a great question. And I think I can only talk to physical exertion, which is what we were exploring. And I don't want to tread on the toes of the psychologists with flow state and these types of things, because clearly- - I think you're in the position of scientific strength on this one. - Right. - I think you have the leverage. - All right. - I mean, I have a lot of friends in that community as I'll just say as a buffer to the answer you're about to give, that there's very little science around flow, and there's very little neuroscience related to most psychological states anyway. So I think we've got a lot of degrees of freedom here. - All right, I can breathe easy. - Yeah, yeah. - Thank you for that. - Anything you like, credit Duncan, anything you dislike, send the mean comments to me. - Yeah, I think from my data, certainly, the greater the arousal, the higher the performance was from a physical exertion perspective. And I think that was the intriguing part of some of my findings were there's definitely an individual biokinetics to some of these hormonal kind of releases. And as much as those guys that had the highest androgenic response in terms of epinephrin release, norepinephrine release also sustained force output for a longer period of the workout than those that didn't. So, the individuals that had a lower stimulus of the sympathetic arousal, let's say, certainly didn't perform as well throughout the workout. Now, the intriguing thing then becomes is okay, and I think this really segues into what we're doing here with combat athletes, with mixed martial artists. There's a philosophy, there's a paradigm now for myself in terms of the exposure, repeat exposure. You know, the more you do that challenging workout, do you get the same psychological stimulus? Do you still get the same stress response? And the assumption is unlikely. You accommodate, you become accustomed to the stress or your body will therefore adapt. And that's the classic overload principle, right? You then need to take the stressor down a different route. But I think when you look at the athletes that we work with here, it's a fist fight at the end of the day. There's nothing more stressful than that. But I think just the exposure to the rigors of training, to understand the bad positions, the bad situations, to know that they can get out of certain situations, out of certain submission holds or whatever it may be, I think that really ties in with some of my PhD work in terms of what these guys do to approach what is a really challenging sporting arena in mixed martial arts. - Yeah, it's definitely the extreme of what's possible in terms of asking does stress favor or hinder performance? Because yeah, like you said, at the end of the day, it's someone trying to hurt you as much as they possibly can within the bounds of the rules. - Right. - And you're trying to do the same. So, I find your thesis work fascinating. Were you never to be at the UFC Performance Institute, luckily they made the right choice and brought you here, but were you have never to come here, I was still fascinated by this because over and over we hear that stress is bad, stress is bad, stress is bad, but everything I read from the scientific literature is that stress and epinephrin in particular is coupled to the testosterone response to performance and to adaptation, provided it doesn't go on too long. So, unless I'm saying something that violates that. - Absolutely, I agree. - I mean, that's your work. So it's a really important and beautiful work. And I refer to it often, so I'm just glad that- - Thank you. - We could bolt that down, because I think the people need to know this, that that discomfort is beneficial. Now, there's another side to this that I want to ask about, which is the use of cold, in particular, things like ice baths, cold showers, or any other type of cold temperature exposure. In theory, that's stress also, it's epinephrin. And so, how should one think about the use of cold for recovery? So, if colds causes stress, then how is cold used for recovery? That's what I don't understand. And maybe you just want to share your thoughts on that. - Yeah, no, and I think it's a great question, and I think the jury is still out there, certainly, knowing some of the conversations that we've been having. But I think, when we talk about stress, it's your classic fight, flight or freeze approach. And throwing your body into a cold tub, an ice bath, or whatever it may be certainly is going to have a physiological stress response. Now, people are using that for different end goals. And again, I think that's where the narrative has to be explained. If you are using the stress specifically to manage the mindset, to use it as a specific stress stimulus, that's the same as me doing six by 10 at 80%. You're just trying to find something to disrupt the system, to do something that's very, for want of a better term, painful, discomfort, whatever. You're just finding a stressor and then being able to manage the mindset. But if you're using cold, specifically from a physiological perspective to promote redistribution of vascularity, of blood flow to different vascular areas of muscle that you feel have gone through a workout, that are damaged or whatever it may be, I think we've got to understand what that stress mechanism is. And the data, the literature is certainly still out there with respect to cryotherapy and cold baths, and some of these cold exposures in terms of what they do at the level of the muscle tissue. If that's the target, if you're trying to promote a flushing mechanism, or you're trying to promote redistribution of the blood flow, what you've got to understand is that cold is going to clamp down every part of the vascular system. And we've really got to understand how the muscle would be redistributed to areas of interest. So, I think the stress response is a real thing with respect to cold exposure. But I think the narrative around what are you using the cold for has to precede the conversation because yes, it's like putting your hand over a hot coal. That's a stress the same way as jumping in a cold bath is. - Yeah, I think most people don't realize that. You're going to get the epinephrin release from holding your hand too close to flame. - Absolutely. - And you're going to get it from getting in the ice bath. - Your body doesn't know the difference, right? Your body does not know the difference. It has a primordial kind of physiological response that it's created over millions and millions of years. And I think that that physiology is not changing. And it's fixed in a particular way right now, that it doesn't understand the difference between whether it's six by 10 doing a challenging workout over here, whether it's putting my hands on the hot coal, whether there's a lion stood in front of me or whatever, that epinephrin response from the level of the brain down to the whole signaling cascade is the same. - Mm hm, and cold, I've heard can actually prevent some of the beneficial effects of training. That it can actually get in the way of muscle growth, et cetera. - Yeah, there's some pretty robust data out there now showing that it definitely has an influence on performance variables like strength and power in particular, but absolutely in terms of muscle hypertrophy. And there's a big kind of theme in the world of athletic performance right now, in terms of periodization of cold exposure as a recovery modality. - Interesting. - When do you use cold? Should you be using cold for recovery in periods of high training load when you're actually pursuing, it might be general preparatory work, or are actually trying to pursue muscle growth? Well, that's usually where you get the most sore. It's usually where you feel the most fatigued, but it's probably not the most beneficial approach to use an ice bath in that scenario, because you're dampening, you're dulling the mTOR pathway and the hypertrophic signaling pathway. Whereas in a competition phase where actually quality of exercise and quality of execution of skill and technical work has to be maintained, you want to throw the kitchen sink of recovery capabilities and recovery interventions in that scenario because the muscle building activity should be in the bank. That should have been done in the general preparatory work. And now you're focusing on technical execution. So, you're absolutely right. - No, it's interesting. So, if I understand correctly, if I want to maximize muscle growth or power or improvements and adaptations, then the inflammation response, the delayed onset muscle soreness, all the stuff that's uncomfortable and that we hear is so terrible is actually the stimulus for adaptation. And so, using cold in that situation might short circuit my progress. But if I'm, I don't know that I'll ever do this, but if I were to do an iron man or something, or run a marathon, under those conditions, I'm basically coming to the race, so to speak, with all the power and strength I'm going to have. And so, there, reducing inflammation is good because it's going to allow me to perform more work, essentially. - Absolutely, yeah. You have to be strategic about when you use some of these interventions. And the time when you preparing for a competition is not the appropriate time... Excuse me, is the appropriate time when you want to drive recovery and make sure that your body is optimized. When you're far away from a competition date or out of season or whatever it may be, and you're really trying to just tear up the body a little bit, to allow its natural healing and adaptation processes to take place, well, you don't want to negate that. You want the body to optimize its internal recovery and that's how muscle growth is going to happen, so. - So interesting. - There's a time kind of consideration that you need to make with these interventions, for sure. - At the UFC Performance Center, are the fighters periodizing their cold exposure? Or are they just doing cold at will? - Well, it's not just the UFC. And again, I talk about my personal experiences with different sports. I think just education around where science is at and our understanding of concepts like the use of cold exposure for recovery, ice bath. Everyone wants to jump in an ice bath. But I think as we've stepped back and scientists have started to figure out and look at some of the data, we're now more intuitive about, well, actually that might not be the best or the most optimal approach. And I think that's any given sport. So, yes, certainly here at the UFC, we're trying to educate our athletes around appropriate timing. And it's the same with nutrition, it's the same with an ice bath intervention, it's the same with lifting weights, it's the same with going for a run or working out on the bike. There's tactics to when you do things and when you don't do things. And I think stress and cold exposure, we have to have a consideration around that as well, but it's not just MMA fighters, that's any athlete. And I think it's the best professionals, the most successful professionals do that really well. They listen, number one, they educate themselves, and then they build structure. And I think at the most elite level, we always talk about it here at the UFC, but at the most elite level, you're not necessarily training harder than anybody else. Everybody in the UFC trains hard, like everyone is training super hard, but the best athletes, the true elite levels are the ones that can do it again and again and again on a daily basis and sustain a technical output for skill development, therefore their skills can improve, or physical development, their physical attributes can improve. So that ability to reproduce on a day-to-day basis falls into a recovery conversation. Now, when is the right time to use something like an ice bath and when isn't, is part of the high-performance conversation, for sure. - So really they're scientists; they're building structure, they're figuring out variables. - Yeah. - But it sounds like the ability to do more quality work over time is one of the key variables. - I mean, it's fundamental. I mean, garbage in, garbage out. Quality in, quality out. But in our sport, I talk about mixed martial arts, it's truly a decathlon of combat. So there's so many different attributes, whether it's the grappling, whether it's the wrestling, whether it's the transition work, whether it's a standup striking. So, the different facets of a training program in this sport are significantly large compared to something like a wide receiver in football. And that's no disrespect for wide receivers, but they run routes. They're going to run a route, a passing tree, and that's all they need to do. These guys have to be on the ground. They've got to be great on the ground. They've got to be great standing up. They've got to be great with the back against the fence. So there's so many different kind of facets to our sport. So managing the distribution of all the training components is one of the biggest challenges of mixed martial arts and the best guys get that right. They allow their body to optimize the training. And remember, why are we doing training? We're doing training for technical and tactical improvement. Now, if your body is fatigued or you just can't expose yourself to more tactical development or technical development, then you're essentially doing yourself a disservice. You're going to be behind the curve with respect to those guys that can reproduce that day-in and day-out. - On the topic of skill development, regardless of sport, we hear all the time and it certainly is intuitive to me that the person who can focus the best will progress the fastest. But it's kind of interesting, sometimes I talk to athletes and they seem a little bit laid back about their training sometimes, and yet they obviously know how to flip the switch and they can really dial in the intensity. Do you think that there are optimal protocols for skill learning in terms of physical skill learning? Like, could it ever be parametrized like the six sets of 10 reps? And this gets to the heart of neuroplasticity, which is still, it's not a black box, but it's kind of a black box with portions of it illuminated, I like to say. But what are your thoughts on skill development? For somebody that wants to get better at sport, do you recommend a particularly long or short training session? Does intensity matter or is it just reps? - Yeah, I think, no, it's not a volume driven exercise. It's a quality driven exercise. And listen, my expertise is not in motor learning and motor skill acquisition. I tend to default to Dr. Gabriele Wulf here at UNLV for that. She's one of the leading proponents in this area. But if you look at true skill development, it is about rehearsal of accurate movement, accurate movement mechanics. And as soon as that becomes impacted by fatigue or inaccurate movement, you're now losing the motor learning, you're losing the accuracy of the skill. People can call it muscle memory or whatever they want, right? But essentially you're grooving neural axons to create movement patterns and they're situational throughout sport, right? Whether it's a Cruyff turn in soccer or a jump shot in basketball, or a forehand down the line, you can carve out that particular posture and position and skill, and you can isolate it, and you can drill it again and again and again. Now, as soon as fatigue is influencing that repetition, it's time to stop. And the best coaches understand that. They understand that it's quality over quantity when it comes to skill acquisition. So to answer your question in a roundabout way, I would say, yes, it's shorter sessions that are very high quality. And I think the best athletes in my experience are the ones that consciously and cognitively are aware of it at every moment of the training session. They should leave the training session not necessarily just physically fatigued, but mentally fatigued because they're completely engaged in the learning process. The problem then becomes okay, if we just do lots of 30 minutes sessions, we've got to do a lot of 30 minutes sessions to get the volume exposure of the repetition and the rehearsal of this skill again and again and again. So, it's a bit of a paradox. It's a bit of a double-edged sword, but a three hour session versus a 90 minute session, we'll take the 90 minute session any day when it comes to skill acquisition, because that's going to be driven by quality over quantity. - Yeah, training and skill learning is incredibly mentally fatiguing. I've often wondered why when one works out hard, whether or not it's with run or with the weights, why it's hard to think later in the day. - Right. - Yeah, there really does seem to be something to it. And I've wondered is it depletion of adrenaline, dopamine? I sometimes think it might be dopamine, and here I'm totally speculating. I don't have any data to support this, but if you hit a really hard workout or run early in the day, oftentimes the brain just doesn't want to do hard mental work. Which gives me great admiration for these athletes that are drilling their mind and body all day, every day, with breaks. But so what are your thoughts? What leads to the mental fatigue after physical performance? - Well, again, I don't want to talk out, I'm talking to the man here, you know? - Well, we're just two scientists- - Yeah, yeah. - Speculating on this point. Up until now, you've been giving us concrete peer-reviewed study based feedback on my questions. But if we were to speculate, I mean, I think this is a common occurrence. People think if I get that really good workout in in the morning, I feel better all day. - Right. - That's true, unless that workout is really intense or really long. - Yeah. - And then you just, the mind just somehow won't latch on to mental work quite as well. - I mean, just philosophically and I think coming back to this kind of stress consideration, like public speaking or taking an exam. I mean, if you have an amazing coach who is setting up training in a particular way, it's challenging, there's a strain related to it, and I'm not talking physical strain, I'm talking figuring things out, figuring out the skill. And I think that can be stressful. Like the learning process can be stressful. So, we've touched on stress. I also think if they hit the right technique, that reward center in the brain, that dopamine shot is going to fly up there. And there's only so many times that we can get that before that becomes dampened. And I think there's an energetic piece to it. There's the fueling of the brain. There's the carbohydrate fuel in exercise that actually the strategy around how you fuel for learning and fuel for physical training is actually pretty similar. - Glucose. - Yeah, it's glucose, it's sugar at the end of the day, right? So, are you fueling accordingly around your training sessions, be that very physical, because everyone thinks, okay, I'm going to jump on a treadmill and I'm going to bang out 15 sprints at max effort, and I'm going to be dropping off and laying on the floor at the end of it. I need to refuel. Well, what about the refueling of the brain in a very demanding exercise or drilling session where you're looking at technique, that you're trying to figure out, that's very challenging for your mind to figure out the complexity of it, that still needs to be fueled or refueled afterwards. And I think that's obviously might be an area where athletes do themselves a disservice by not appropriately fueling from what might be considered to be a lower intensity session, but the cognitive challenge has been significantly high. - So, they're skill work or drill work, and it's taxing the brain. - Correct, yeah. - And they're thinking, oh, I wasn't pushing hard lifts or doing sprints, and so I can just go off into the rest of my day, but then their mind is drifting. - Yeah, I mean, I speculate. - Yeah, that sounds very reasonable. I mean, I know that here and presumably with the other athletes you've worked with, nutrition is a huge aspect of that. And I think the general public can learn a lot from athletic nutrition because at the end of the day, the general public is trying to attend to their kids, attend to their work, whether or not they're lawyers or whatever, they need to focus. Nutrition is a barbed wire topic. - Oh yeah [chuckling]. - But since we're free to do what we would do if we were just sitting in each other's offices, which is to just speculate a bit, for the typical person, do you think these low carbohydrate diets... A typical person who exercises, runs, swims, yoga, lifts weights, maybe not all those things, but some collection of those, pushes themselves to do those things and to do them well, but isn't necessarily a highly competitive athlete. Do you think that nutrition that doesn't include a lot of glucose, doesn't include a lot of carbohydrates, is a problem or is it okay? What do you recommend for athletes? What do you recommend for typical people? - Yeah, again, disclaimer, I'm not a dietician, but I- - That's okay, the dieticians don't know what to recommend to athletes either. And I say that from having spent a lot of time with the literature now, it's a complete mess. - Right, yeah. - It's like, I thought we didn't understand anything about the brain, the nutrition science stuff is all over the place. - Right. - So I think we have, again- - We have some freedom. - Large degrees of freedom. - Right, right, right. I mean, I think it comes down to metabolic efficiency. So we would never advocate a high... I never say never, okay? But we rarely advocate a high performance athlete in a high intensity intermittent sport, like MMA, being totally ketogenic or- - You do not recommend that? - No, because at the end of the day, some of those high intensity efforts usually require carbohydrate fueling for the energy that's produced at those high intensities. So, we try to navigate around that. Now, listen, there are fighters in the UFC and elsewhere, Matt Brown is a great example, who promotes the ketogenic approach and it works for him. But we look at the science and the nature of the characteristics of our sport, and we don't necessarily promote that. - Can I interrupt you real quick? What about ketones for people that are ingesting carbohydrates? This is an interesting area because people always hear ketones and they think, oh, I have to be ketogenic to benefit from taking ketones. - Right. - But there are a number of athletes and recreational athletes now as well, taking liquid or powder-based ketones, even though they do eat rice and oatmeal and bread and other things. So are there any known benefits of ketones, even if one is not in a state of ketosis? - So, the use of ketones that I'm primarily aware of in our sport, is after the event. In terms of the brain health with athletes that are potentially taking trauma to the brain, et cetera, and looking to maintain the fueling and the energy supply to the brain. But yes, it's probably a little bit out of my remit. So I don't want to talk on that because I'm not fully familiar with that. - Well, I've heard that ketones after head injury can provide a buffering component. - Correct. - It's not going to reverse brain damage, but it might be able to offset some of the micro-damage. - Right, so that's how we use it, just to sustain the energy supply to the brain that might be compromised through brain trauma. So that's why we use ketones. To come back to your original question. If it's a general population then yes, I think there's a place to argue that actually being on a ketogenic diet at times, and maybe it's a cycling exercise, maybe not... I don't mean cycling a bike, I mean cycling ketosis is beneficial because I think it's going to lead to better metabolic management and metabolic efficiency, at those lower intensities where we should be fueling our metabolism with lipids and fats. Clearly the Western diet and the modern day diet is heavily driven by processed foods and carbohydrates that people become predisposed to utilization of that fuel source above lipid use, fat use, at intensities that are very low. So, some of our data with the fighters shows that as well. But I think the challenge for us is that we're working with a clientele that require high intensity bouts of effort. So, fueling appropriately is very important for that. Now, we use tactics here where we essentially have athletes on what you would say, kind of is a largely a ketogenic diet, but then we will fuel carbohydrates around training sessions. So, we'll do very timed exposure to carbohydrates. So it's not- - Post-training? - Post-training, immediately pre, during, and then immediately post. And then the rest of their diets, breakfast, lunch, and dinner, are what would look like ketogenic type approaches. So we're trying to be very tactical in the exposure to maximize the intensity for the training and then return to a metabolically efficient diet, which is heavily reduced in carbohydrate because we've fueled the sessions that need it. - I'm smiling because once again, this place, the UFC Performance Center is doing things scientifically, which to me, the idea, and I'm pleased to hear that, because to me this idea that the ketogenic diet is the best and only diet or carbohydrates and low protein diets are the best diet. It's just, it's ludicrous. - Right. - Then you mentioned metabolic efficiency. I think some people might be familiar with that term, some perhaps not, but the way I understand metabolic efficiency is that you teach the body to use fats by maybe doing long bouts of cardio, maybe lowering carbohydrates a bit. So teaching the body to tap into its fat stores for certain periods of training. And then you also teach the body to utilize carbohydrates by supplying carbohydrates immediately after training and before training. You teach the body to use ketones, and then you use them at the appropriate time, as opposed to just deciding that one of these fuel sources is good and all the others are bad or dispensable. Do I have that correct? - You've nailed it. I mean, from Bob Seebohar, formerly of USA Triathlon, is the guy that kind of came up with the concept of metabolic efficiency, but yes, you're absolutely right. I mean, at low intensities of exercise or just day-to-day living, we shouldn't be tapping into our carbohydrate fuel sources extensively. That's for higher intensity work or the fight or flight needs of stress. If athletes or any individual has a high carbohydrate diet, they're going to start to become predisposed to utilizing that fuel source preferentially. Now, at low intensity, that can be problematic, certainly for an athlete, because if they preferentially use carbohydrate at lower intensities, when the exercise demand goes to a higher intensity, they've already exhausted their fuel stores. They can't draw upon fat because the oxidation of that fat is just too slow. So they're essentially now become fatigued because they've already utilized their carbohydrate stores. So what we try to do yes, through diet manipulation and a little bit of exercise manipulation is as you say, teach the body or train the body to preferentially use a specific fuel source; fat, obviously at lower intensities, and carbohydrate at high intensities. And we will look at specifically the crossover point between the two, tell us a lot in terms of how an athlete is ultimately, how their metabolism is working. - Well, again, I'm smiling because I love this because it's grounded in something real and scientific, which is that we have these different fuel sources. The body can adapt to use any number of them or one of them. I think most people are looking for that one pattern of eating, that one pattern of exercising that's going to be best for them or sustain them. And they often look back to the time when they felt so much better switching from one thing to the next, but the adaptation process itself is also key, right? Teaching the body. So if we were to just riff on this just a little bit further, if somebody, I'll use myself as an example, since I can only speculate what other people's current nutrition protocols are, but if somebody is eating in a particular way and they want to try this kind of periodization of nutrition, could one say, okay, for a few weeks I'm going to do more high intensity interval training and weight training, and I'm going to eat a bit more carbohydrate 'cause I'm depleting more glycogen. Then if I switch to a phase of my training where I'm doing some longer runs, maybe I'm training less, maybe I'm just working at my desk a little bit more, then I might switch to a lower carbohydrate diet. Do I have that right? And then if I'm going to enter a competition of some sort, certainly not UFC- - Right. - Or MMA of any kind to be clear, not because it isn't a wonderful sport, but because that wouldn't be good for my other profession. But if I were going to do that, then I would think about stacking carbohydrates, ketones, and fats. Do I have that more or less right? - Yeah, you've said it eloquently. At the end of the day, you're consciously understanding what the exposure to physical exertion is, and you're flexing your day accordingly and I think that- - So, it's need-based eating. - Exactly, for want of a better term, you can call it whatever fancy terminology there is out there, but yes, it's needs-based eating, but you're very conscious and cognizant of what is my current exercise status. If I'm taking some time off, then don't gorge on the carbohydrates. We probably need to be cut, it's going to be lower intensity work, or even just habitual day-to-day walking around, doing your groceries. That doesn't require massive amounts of glycogen storage and carbohydrate fueling. So, you can potentially go more ketogenic in nature, oxidizing lipids for that fuel. If you are in a high period of high intensity training, then you have to consciously flex your diet to support that. That's not normal, you've made a change, you've elevated the demand. So, the fueling requirements for the regenerative, not only fueling the exercise, but the regenerative requirements of your body after that type of work is going to be really important as well. So, yes, take on more carbohydrates. So, I think it's consciously interpreting the nature of your diet against where you are at any moment in time. - Yeah, I like that. I think the listeners of my podcast generally are experimenters. - Right. - They are scientists of themselves, which makes me happy obviously. And I like to think that they're paying attention to the changes they're making and how they're affecting themselves. And they seem more open to trying things, provided they can do it safely, and seeing what works for them. And I'm certainly going to try some of the change up. I also am really a creature of habit. And I think that talking to you today, I realize I'm probably doing a number of things truly wrong in my training, but also that I don't tend to vary my nutrition with my training quite as much as I should. I'm just locked into a protocol. We covered a number of things related to your PhD thesis work, but I cut you off early on related to your trajectory. After you finished your thesis. - Yeah. - I know you were at Notre Dame for a while. Was that your first spot after your PhD thesis? - No, no, I basically finished my PhD and I dropped into the British Olympic system for about 14 years. - Oh my, okay. - I've done three full Olympic cycles with different sports, largely as strength and conditioning coach as a practitioner. I was always working in universities and academia alongside, in terms of continuing to publish and write and do research and teach as well. 'Cause I enjoy teaching. - That explains the huge volume of publications. - Yeah [chuckling]. - I don't think people realize all the work that goes into getting a quality peer-reviewed publication. It's not, what do they call it now on Instagram, anecdata? Where people would do something once. - Right. - They have this experience and then they put it in the world that it's a- - Yeah. - Anecdata are, I don't even know that we should call it data. So, 14 years in working with the British Olympic team. - Yeah, so whether it was GB boxing, primarily with the Beijing cycle, but also lightweight rowers and gymnastics. And for the London Olympic games, that cycle I was the lead strength and conditioning and physical performance coach for British basketball. So, GB basketball. I had about three years in the English Premier League with Newcastle United and the soccer team, and then for the Rio Olympic cycle, I was with Great Britain Tae Kwon Do. So, again, another combat sport. After I'd finished there, I kind of moved to the University of Notre Dame, where I went into more of a managerial position working across all the different technical services; medical, nutrition, strength and conditioning, sports psychology and sports science, whatever it may be, as the Director of Performance Sciences for Notre Dame athletics. And then, after about 16 months there, the UFC came knocking and they recruited me out of Notre Dame. So, it's been a great ride, and I've got lots of athletes have taught me a lot along the way, lots of coaches. Every day is a school day, I still try and keep that mentality. And in this world we call it white belt mentality. I'm a PhD, I've got 25 years of experience in high performance sport, but I still learn every single day from these people out on the mats and in the ring and it's impressive to see what they do. - Yeah, it certainly is. I got introduced to MMA just a few years ago. I think the first time I came out here was one of the first times I'd heard of MMA 'cause I was kind of in my laboratory, nose down. And it's a really interesting sport because it incorporates so many different types of movement as you said- - Right. - It's not just stand up boxing, it's not just kicking, it's ground game, everything, and I'm still learning about it. But as you mentioned, going in with that beginner's mind, the white belt mentality, what has been the most surprising thing for you in terms of being exposed to MMA in particular, as opposed to other sports? Like what's unique about MMA fighters, besides that they have this huge variety of tactical skills that they have to learn and perfect? - Yeah, that's a great question. I would say two things. I'm going to answer two questions. One actually reiterates what you've already said. Like the degrees of freedom in mixed martial arts are exponential, like no other sport. We've got 11 different weight classes. We have men's classes. We have women's classes. We have kickboxers, wrestlers, jujitsu fighters, judoka, karate fighters. The stylistic backgrounds are infinite. We're a weight classification sport. There's a whole issue relating to making weight and then rebounding to fight about 24 to 30 hours. Like just the variability in this sport, the considerations that you have to make are unprecedented compared to any other sport that I've worked with. And a lot of them go against and are the antithesis of what you would expect for high performance. In terms of we don't always have a very clearly defined competition schedule. Once these guys fight, they don't necessarily know when their next fight is going to be. - What's the closest spacing of a fight? - I mean, listen, I think the record is around, it's just over a month, I believe. - Oh, my goodness. - So, you know, that's a quick turnaround, but most of these guys are fighting three or four times a year, three times a year is pretty normal. The bigger fighters, maybe two times a year. But invariably, the guys don't know when that next date is going to be. So we're in this gray area of, okay, what do we do? Like, are we taking some time off? Are we just going to do some general prep work? Are we going to try and keep the knife sharpened in case I get- - I didn't realize this. In that way it's a lot like special operations. - Absolutely, you don't know when the call is going to happen. - They have to be ready at all times. There isn't this, like, let's get ready for the season. - Right, yeah. Like when I was with the British Olympic Association, I knew it was the British Open, the Spanish Open, the French Open, the European Championships, the Israeli Open, the American Open, the Canadian Open, the Olympic games. - It's a circuit in your brain. - Right, yeah. - I can tell, yeah. - You just plan like you know where all the targets are going to be. Here, it's a moving target because you might be just hanging out doing some general prep work, and then you might get a short notice fight. They give you a quick call and it's in six weeks or five weeks. And okay, I've got to ramp everything up really quickly. So, that's a real challenge in terms of just managing all these different components of a mixed martial arts alone. To come back to your question, the other thing which is truly fascinating about these individuals is just their mental resilience. And again, we've touched on it in the talk, but the ability to do what they do on a daily basis, to look at all the different skillsets that they have to try and engage in and bring into their training. To do that and embrace the grind, embrace the process of just learning, the physical side of our sport is unprecedented. But the mental side, we have a funny saying here. We always say it's 90% mental apart from the 60% that's physical. So, it's just more and more and more. And these guys' ability to just do that on a daily basis is very impressive. Like their resilience, their internal drive and their resilience is really impressive to see. - Yeah, all the fighters I've met here have been really terrific. It's interesting every time I meet a fighter, I shouldn't be surprised when they're often very soft-spoken. - Right. - [Andrew] They're always extremely polite. - Yeah, yeah. - You know? And fighting is such a... It comes from a very primitive portion of the brain, right? But a large portion of the brain, nonetheless. - But I think that's another skill is that switch. And again, that's the recoverability piece, right? Like you cannot be Taipei or you cannot be like super charged 24 hours a day because you're going to just fry your system, right? And I think that's something else where we're really trying to manage this whole process, be it through nutritional interventions, be it through education around sleep, be it through training program management, be it through psychological interventions. You could look at fighters and say like, these guys are go, like they're red alert and they'll run through a brick wall, but actually again, their ability to turn it on and off means that they can do what they do. They can bring it down and be very normal, very polite, very accommodating. - Maybe even better than most people because one of the reasons I'm obsessed with human performance, and high-performance, and people like fighters, and elite military, or even bodybuilders for that matters that they experiment. - Yeah. - They find the outer limits of what's possible. But one of the things that they have discovered, as you're describing, is this ability to toggle between high alert states and calm states. Most typical people can't do this. They see something that upsets them on the internet or something on the news or some external event pressures down on them and they're stressed for many, many days and weeks, and sometimes it goes pathological, right? And I don't say this as a criticism, it's just that most human beings, within our species, most members of our species never learn to either flip the switch or to just voluntarily toggle between states. I think athletes learn how to do that extremely well. And it sounds like MMA fighters do that even better than perhaps many other athletes. - I mean, yeah, there's the odd one or two that would struggle with, but I think in terms of that chronic exposure, we see that coming from challenges around cyclical weight cutting, and metabolic disruption, and metabolic injury, not necessarily from the psychological drive. They do understand that this is a job for them. And the time on the mats, most of them can turn it off a little bit and downgrade things when they're off the mats. It's impressive to see, because again, like, as a layman, just looking at the fight game, you think it's going to be crazy chaotic, 100 miles an hour every hour of every day, but that's clearly not the case. They manage their energy and their efforts pretty well. - So it's a little bit like science. Although maybe scientists could take a lesson from- - Yeah, that evidence-based practice or practice-based evidence, right? - Oh, I like that. [Duncan chuckling] That's good. A couple more questions, I can't help myself. I know we talked about temperature earlier when we discussed cold, but I can't help myself, I have to ask you about heat. Because earlier we were having a conversation about heat adaptation, about how long does it take for the human body or athlete or typical person that's maybe exploring sauna or things of that sort to learn to be a better sweater? It sounds like something none of us would want to do. We all want to stay cool, calm and collected. But one of the reasons to deliberately expose oneself to heat is for things like growth hormone release, et cetera. We can talk about this, but a couple of questions. One, is heat exposure stress in the same way that the ice bath or cold exposure is stress? The second one is, is there any difference there that's important? And the other one is how does one get better at heat adaptation or at least what are you doing with the fighters to get them better at dealing with heat? How long does that take? So the first question, just 'cause I threw three questions at you, [Duncan chuckling] is heat stress like cold is stress? - Yeah, I think it is. And I think heat shock proteins for example, are driven by that stressful exposure to a change in environment. So, I think we do graded response in terms of heat acclimation strategies, but yes, we've touched on it earlier in the conversation. For me, heat is still a stressor. And if it's managed incorrectly, you can have detrimental responses rather than beneficial responses. - So barring like hyperthermia and death, like I mean, obviously you heat up the brain too much, people will have seizures and die, but you lose neurons. But what's the right way to acclimate heat? Taking into account that people should check with their doctor, et cetera. We do all these disclaimers, but let's just say, I want to get better at dealing with heat, or I want to extract more benefit from heat. I mean, how many minutes a day are people typically exposing themselves to heat? How often and over what periods of time? - Yeah, so, we normally start with about 15 minutes of exposure. Now, if someone's really lacking acclimation to heat, you can do that in three, five minute efforts. Do you know what I mean? And actually take- - This is a hot sauna? - [Duncan] Yeah, hot sauna, take time to step out- - 200 degrees or something like it? - Correct, yeah. - Fahrenheit, yeah. - 200 Fahrenheit, yes. And we try to work up to 30 to 40 minutes to 45 minutes in the sauna continuous. Now, we have to understand, what's the advantage of heat acclimation for our athletes? Ultimately their ability to sweat and to lose body fluids is going to be advantageous to their weight cut process. So, their ability to make weight. It is a technique that some of these guys adopt. So, if you don't have high sweat rates, it means you're going to have to sit in the sauna for longer and longer and longer to get the same delta in sweat release. So the more acclimated you are, the more your body is thermogenically adapted, the more sweat glands you have, there's more pores, you can sweat more and therefore you'll lose that fluid quicker, and you spend less time in the sauna. So, that's why we do it, to try and promote... To limit the exposure. And it comes back to your first question, is it a stressor? It absolutely it's a stressor if you've got to spend two hours over a four hour period, two hours of it sat in a sauna. - Yeah, where the phone- - Because you just don't sweat enough. - Doesn't work, so you can't. No, I'm just kidding. - Right. - People, divorce them from their phone and that's a stressor in itself. - Right, I mean, yes, I think there's a... What we do is like anything, we build up in temperature, but we build up in volume of exposure. So, we start with 15 minutes and then we just try to add on and add on across a time. And now, for us, we kind of found about 14 sauna exposures starts to really then drive the adaptations that we're looking for. So it's not a quick fix. A heat acclimation strategy has to happen long before fight week or long before the fights. This is a process that has to begin eight to 10 weeks before the fight so that we can actually get that adaptation and that tolerance to the stressor, to the exposure of heat. - This is interesting, until today, when we were talking about this earlier, and again now, I didn't realize that, but it makes perfect sense now that I hear it, that heat adaptation is possible, that you basically can train the body to become better at cooling itself, which is what sweating is. - Yeah. - I mean, I should have known that before, but you don't see that in the textbooks and so, yeah. - I mean, listen, it's the same as the ketogenic conversation. You're training your body to be more metabolic efficient, you're training your body to tolerate heat more, you're training your body... Like the body as an organism, as an organic system, it's hugely adaptable, it's hugely plastic. But I think the skill is understanding the whens, the whys and the whereofs in terms of changing the overload, changing the stimulus to drive specific adaptation. And philosophically that's how we go about our work here. We talk about adaptation-led programming. Now, adaptation-led programming fits into every single category, not just lifting weights or running track. It fits into nutrition. It fits into sitting in the sauna. It fits into being in a cold bath or not. It fits into so many different things because we're driven by scientific insights. And that's how we really want to go about our business. - I love it, I love this concept of adaptation-led programming and doing that, not just in the context of throwing another plate on the bar or something like that, but in every aspect of one's training and performance. And I think there's a lot here that's applicable to the recreational athlete, too. - Yeah. - Would you say that, what comes to mind is 12 weeks. It feels like 12 weeks is a nice block of time for someone to try something in terms of to try something new, see how they adapt, adapt, and then maybe switch to something new. I realized that it's very hard to throw a kind of pan timeframe around something, but in terms of if someone wanted to experiment with heat adaptation or experiment with cold adaptation or change up their training regimen or diet, and look at metabolic efficiency, do you think 12 weeks is a good period of time to really give something a thorough go? And gain an understanding of how well or how poorly something works for oneself? Or would you say eight is enough? Or three? - I mean, that's the how long is a piece of string kind of response, right? - Yeah. - I mean, yes, if we're just talking arbitrary numbers- - Recreational experimenter. - Yeah, like three months exposure, 12 week training strategy, 12 week intervention is more than adequate to say for 99% of things that change within the body, that physiologically adapt to a training stimulus or an overload stimulus, you're going to start to see either regression or progression, beneficial or detrimental effects within three months. Absolutely, I would say so. Now, listen, I say that in as much as we do training blocks here that are three weeks long. - Right, well, that's because of this constraint that sometimes people suddenly have to, they get the call to fight. - Correct, yeah. So it's like super condensed. And in that scenario, we're always conscious of is their body or this individual, do they have the ability to tolerate that super overload, that super condensed exposure? Now, we might be doing that purposefully. We might be trying to do an overreaching strategy where we're really trying to damage or flex something. And I don't mean like negatively damage, but like we're trying to damage tissue to really get an adaptive response versus a more drawn out 12 week strategy, which is more coherent, more planned out, more structured in nature. But yeah, for all your listeners, I would say 12 weeks to engage in a process of trying to change and adapt your body or expose yourself to something is more than sufficient to see if it's going to be the right approach for you. And I think, the individual interpretation, it always has to be considered. And I think that's where it comes back to be a thinking man's athlete or be a thinking man's trainer, like someone that's going through exercise, you have to consciously understand where your body's at any moment in time, you know? You've got to be real with yourself. You create a journal, create a log of your training, create a log of your feelings, your subjective feedback of how you felt, your mood, your sleep. - Do your athletes do that? - Yeah, yeah. We try to promote that because again, that's part of this process, you know? It might be 12 weeks for you, but I might get the same responses in eight weeks. And I think that's another critical theme here is that we could put 15 guys on the mat and give them the same workout, and there's going to be 15 different responses to that same workout because the human organism is so complex. And in nature, it's going to adapt differently. Some people will tolerate it. Some people are going to be challenged by it. Some people have got a metabolic makeup that's going to promote it. Some people are metabolically challenged by it. There's just so many different things that we have to consider. And that's what we try to do here. It's the cross we bear is that we try to understand on an individual level how to optimize athletic performance. - I think it's terrific, and the athletes here are so fortunate to have this. And most people out there, I've certainly been trying to encourage people to learn some science and some mechanism and become scientists of their own pursuits, whether or not skill learning or athletic pursuit, et cetera. As sort of a final question, what are some things about the UFC or something about the UFC that perhaps people don't know in terms of its overall mission or what you guys are trying to do here? I mean, I think, I've become a fan of MMA and I am more and more as time moves on. Some people might be into MMA, some people not into watching MMA, but what are some things that the UFC is interested in and doing that most people might not know about, and certainly I might not know about? - Yeah, I mean, I think, we try to be cutting edge. We try to be super progressive. We think we've got an amazing platform here, particularly at the Performance Institute to do some really cool things that can inform many different people. And that doesn't just mean the 600 or so athletes that are on our global roster. What we're trying to do is, is influence global community around optimizing human performance. So, any moment in time, we're engaging in different technologies with different vendors, different partners, exploring opportunities to learn more, share data, understand what's the best mechanisms for interpreting your body, interpreting how your body's responding to training, interpreting your nutrition or whatever it may be. We're in a really privileged position to do that. But we've also, hence you being here today, we're also trying to venture into some really cool areas of science and research that's got applicability, that you can take from high performance athletes and apply to yourself, to Joe Blow walking down the street, out there that is really interesting. And that's everything from whether it's CBD and psychedelics, through to different technologies for thermal monitoring and Bluetooth heart rate monitoring or whatever it may be, through to data management, et cetera, and anything in between. We've got some great partners on the nutrition side, on the psychology side, on the data side. And I think we always try to just push the envelope a little bit more. I think we keep our core mission with our athletes, but I think a lot of what we do, hence your podcast, an amazing platform, you do such a great job of it, that we can all learn and take from the elite and interpret how it might help us, and just in the general population. So, I think that's our north star is to provide our athletes the best integrated service of care, but we also want to influence just the global community and put the UFC at the forefront of that. - That's great, well, you guys are certainly doing it, and we can't let the cat out of the bag just yet. But the things that we're gearing up to do with my laboratory- - Yeah, I'm excited. - And the work together, hopefully we'll be able to talk about that and share that in the year to come, but we're very excited about that. And, Duncan, look, I have this filter that I use when I talk to people, academics or otherwise, which is some people, they open their mouth, and it doesn't make much difference, but when you speak, I learn so much. I'm going to take the protocols that I've heard about today, I'm going to think about how I'm training and how I could train differently and better, how I'm eating, how I could eat differently and better for sake of performance and just in general. Thank you so much for your time, your scientific expertise, the stuff you're doing in the practical realm, it's immense. So, hopefully we can do it again. - Yes, thank you. This has been a blast. I appreciate it and yeah, keep doing what you're doing 'cause I know there's a lot of people out there that love the platform. So, thanks for the invite. It's been awesome. - Oh, thank you. Thanks so much. Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Duncan French. I hope you found it as insightful and informative as I did. If you're enjoying this podcast and/or learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. Please also leave us a comment or a suggestion of a future topic or future guests that you'd like us to have on the Huberman Lab Podcast. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. Please also check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of this episode. That's a terrific way to support this podcast. We also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast we discuss supplements; supplements for sleep, supplements for focus and for other health benefits as well. While supplements may not be for everybody, if you're going to use supplements, you want to make sure that those supplements are of the very highest quality. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne supplements are of the very highest quality and the amounts of ingredients listed on the label of Thorne supplements precisely matches what is actually contained in those capsules, bottles and pills and powders and so forth. This is extremely important. A lot of analysis of supplements and supplement companies have shown that what's listed on the bottle is often not what's actually contained in the bottle. Thorne's stringency is unmatched. They've partnered with all the major sports teams, with the Mayo Clinic. And so, there's a lot of trust in Thorne supplements for all the right reasons. If you'd like to try Thorne supplements, you can see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. There, you can see the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate into the Thorne site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. I'd also like to mention that if you're not already following us on Instagram @hubermanlab, you might want to do so. There I do brief science tutorials and offer science-based protocols for all sorts of things that are often separate from the protocols and information covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. We're also on Twitter as hubermanlab. And last and certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light music]

========================================

--- Video 303 ---
Video ID: poOf8b2WE2g
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poOf8b2WE2g
Title: Using Your Nervous System to Enhance Your Immune System
Published: 2021-11-01 12:00:26 UTC
Description:
This episode teaches you a lot about the immune system, immune-brain interactions and offers 12 potential tools for enhancing immune system function. I discuss how our immune system works and science-supported tools we can use to enhance our immune system.

I discuss the innate and adaptive immune systems and our various microbiomes-- not just in our gut but also in our nose, eyes and mouth and how to keep them healthy. And I review how specific patterns of breathing and foods maintain a healthy mucosal barrier that is crucial for fighting infections. I discuss how certain neurochemicals called catecholamines enhance our immune system function and how to use specific breathing protocols, types and timing of heat and cold exposure, and, if appropriate, supplementation to activate catecholamines. I also discuss the role and use of serotonin for the sake of accessing the specific types of sleep for recovering from illness, and I discuss how to increase glymphatic "washout" of brain debris during sleep. I also review fever, the vagus nerve and the use of atypical yet highly effective compounds for rhinitis (nasal inflammation). 

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com -- code: "huberman"
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
How and Why The Immune System Makes Us Sleep - https://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2576

Timestamps:
00:00:00 The Mind & Immune System, New Findings: Acupuncture & Fascia
00:03:00 Sponsors: ROKA, Athletic Greens, InsideTracker
00:07:41 Foundational Tools & Practices for a Healthy Immune System
00:11:20 Immune System Basics: Skin/Mucous, Innate & Adaptive Immune System
00:17:08 Killer Cells, Complement Proteins (“Eat Me!” Signals), Cytokines (“Help Me!” Signals)
00:21:06 The Adaptive Immune System: Antibodies
00:28:00 Tool 1: Nasal Microbiome and “Scrubbing” Bacteria & Viruses; Nasal Breathing
00:30:33 Tools 2 & 3: (Not) Touching Your Eyes; Gut Microbiome & Fermented Foods
00:34:20 Some Interleukins Are Anti-Inflammatory
00:34:56 Sickness Behavior
00:39:08 Some People Seek Care When Sick, Others Want to be Alone
00:42:00 Sickness Behavior & Depression: Cytokines
00:43:40 Reduced Appetites When Sick: Protein, Iron, Libido
00:46:45 Vagus-Nerve Stimulation: Fever, Photophobia, Sleepiness
00:53:03 Humoral (Blood-Borne) Factors, & Choroid Change Your Brain State
00:55:04 Tools 4, 5: Reducing Sickness: Glymphatic Clearance, Pre-Sleep Serotonin, 5HTP
01:07:03 Tool 6: Hot Showers, Saunas, Baths & Cortisol, Heath-Cold Contrast
01:10:53 Feed a Fever & Starve a Cold (?), Adrenaline
01:12:36 Tool 7: Activating Your Immune System w/Cyclic-Hyperventilation, Alkalinity
01:29:10 Brain Chemicals & Cyclic-Hyperventilation; Catecholamines, Dopamine
01:32:10 Mindsets & Immune Function; Yes, You Can Worry Yourself Sick
01:37:00 Tool 8: Healthy Mindsets, Hope, Dopamine; Tool 9: Tyrosine; Tool 10: Cold Exposure
01:42:05 Once You’re Already Sick: Accelerating Recovery; Tool 11: Spirulina, Rhinitis
01:46:09 Histamines, Mast Cells
01:49:22 Tool 12: Acupuncture: Mechanism for How It Reduces Inflammation; Fascia, Rolfing 
01:53:40 Mechanistic Science & Ancient Practices
01:58:00 Synthesis, Ways to Support Us (Zero-Cost), Sponsors, Supplements, Social Media

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are discussing the immune system, and we are also discussing the nervous system, which is the brain, spinal cord, and the connections of the brain and spinal cord with all the organs of the body. We are also going to discuss how the nervous system can be used to activate and control the immune system. Now, about 10, 20 years ago, if somebody said that the mind could control the immune system, they'd probably get laughed out of most academic conferences. And certainly the work wouldn't be published in quality journals, but nowadays there are dozens, if not hundreds of quality peer-reviewed studies on how the mind and how the nervous system can control activation of the immune system. This is a wonderful growing body of research. And just to give you a hint of where we are headed with this, just this last week, there was a paper published in "Nature" which is the apex journal for scientific publishing, premiere journal, extremely stringent, a paper published in "Nature" from Qiufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School, explored how acupuncture can reduce inflammation in the body. And I will describe this study in a bit more detail later, but what they discovered was that by stimulating the body in particular ways at particular sites on the body, they were able to liberate certain cells and molecules that enhance the function of the immune system, and potentially can be used to combat different types of infection. And just to give you another little hint, they found that a particular type of organ tissue called fascia, some of you may have heard of fascia, fascia surrounds our muscles. Just to look at it, you might think it's a kind of useless tissue, it's sort of like a dense bag in which the muscles are contained. Well, it turns out that those dense bags are much smarter than we thought. They don't have a mind of their own, but by stimulating the fascia in a particular location on the body, there's a pathway leading out of that fascia directly to an organ called the adrenal medulla, I'll explain what all this means, that could liberate particular chemicals that had a potent anti-inflammatory effect. So what we're basically saying is that the nervous system acts as a set of highways between the different tissues of your body, calling into action the immune system, liberating particular molecules that can reduce inflammation and lead to faster healing. And I will explain how all of that works as well as some other non-acupuncture methods for activating and enhancing the function of the immune system. So, today, we're going to be talking all about healing with the mind in a completely non-mystical, non-abstract sense. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are absolute suburb quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system, and I can tell you that one of the major issues our visual system has to contend with is how to see things clearly in bright environments or dimmer environments, et cetera. ROKA clearly understands the science of the visual system, because one thing that's wonderful about their sunglasses is that you can be in a very bright environment and then walk into a shadowed environment and you don't even notice the transition. Everything is still seen with crystal clarity. Their eyeglasses as well allow you to see things regardless of how bright or dim internal lighting is. I wear readers at night, I wear sunglasses during the day, and ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses are particularly nice because they're very lightweight, so I often forget that they're even on my face. They also don't slip off if you get sweaty. They were actually designed to be used while running or cycling. And so I can use them while exercising. They also have a great aesthetic. So you can go from exercising, to dinner or to work, without having to change from one set of glasses to the next. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code "Huberman" to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012. And so, I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens, and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice per day is because it allows me to cover all of my basic nutritional bases. It's got the vitamins and minerals that make sure that no matter what I'm eating, I'm covering all of my micronutrient bases. And it has the probiotics, and probiotics we now know are essential for a healthy gut microbiome. And a healthy gut microbiome we know is essential for many important biological functions related to human health, like metabolic needs, endocrine function, immune function, and so on. With Athletic Greens, I can mix that up with water. I usually add some lemon or lime juice. It tastes delicious. I like it very much and I'll drink it once early in the day, and once again later in the afternoon. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/Huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens, whether you're in the car, or on a plane, or on the move, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. There is now a lot of data showing that vitamin D3 is important for many biological functions that impact our immediate and long-term health. And most people do not get enough vitamin D3, even if they're getting a lot of sunshine. And K2 is also important or has been shown to be important for heart health and for blood lipid function, et cetera. So, again, if you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/Huberman to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs, and the year supply of vitamin D3K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your immediate and long-term health goals. I've long been a fan of getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the things that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. There's just simply no other body surface marker that you can look at somebody or yourself and say, "Ah, I know that my blood lipids or my cholesterol are good, or that my hormone levels are X, Y, or Z." We really need numbers on those things to know where they sit. The problem with a lot of blood tests, however, is you get all those numbers back, you don't know what to do with that information. InsideTracker has solved that problem, and they have a very easy to use dashboard where when you get your numbers back, it can tell you for instance, where your numbers are high or low or on target. And they can suggest very specific dietary intervention, supplemental interventions, and behavioral interventions that can allow you to bring those numbers to where you would like them to be. So they've simplified the whole process. And in terms of getting the blood tests, you can go to a local center to get the blood drawn, or they can even send somebody to your house. So, they've made the whole thing very, very easy from start to finish. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. You just use the code "Huberman" at checkout. Okay, let's talk about the immune system, and the nervous system, and how the two interact, and how you can control your immune system to serve you better. We are going to talk a lot of mechanistic science, a little bit of detail, you'll learn some new language around the immune system; names of the different cell types and so forth, but I promised to make it all very clear, regardless of your background. We are also going to discuss a lot of tools. And I think many of you are probably here because you want to know what you can do in order to boost or enhance the function of your immune system. That's a very reasonable question to ask. I want to begin by just acknowledging that if one were to put that question into the internet, you would get back a lot of answers. And there is now a sort of generic form of that answer that deserves our respect, but is not going to be the topic of conversation today. I just want to tip my hat to it, however, and list off a few of the things that we know set us up to be healthier than we would be if we didn't do these things. So the first of course is the foundation of all mental and physical health, which is to get adequate sleep. Meaning enough sleep, whatever it is for you that you require, to get deep sleep, so it's got to be of high quality, and to time that sleep correctly. Meaning you can't sleep during the day one day, and at night the next day, and expect your system to function well. I've talked a lot about that before on this podcast. You need a relatively consistent sleep schedule most of the time, about 80% of the time, or even better would be 90% of the time. But the realities of life make it that we can't always go to bed at the same time and wake up at the exact same time. Okay, so we need sleep. We do need sunshine. Why do we need sunshine? Because it sets our rhythm into a regular state where the genes in all of our cells can be expressed at the correct times. We're sort of a factory of cells, if you will, and that factory can only run properly if it knows when certain things should be active and when certain cells should not be active. And the best way to coordinate all of those activities of all the cells is to get sunshine in your eyes in the morning and again in the evening, and not to get too much bright light in your eyes in the middle of the night. That's just foundational. And then any lists that you'll find on any number of websites on the internet would say, "Okay, get good sleep, get sun, get exercise." How much exercise? We should all be getting 150 to 180 minutes of zone two cardio. That's cardiovascular exercise where we can just barely hold a conversation or maybe not, per week. We should be eating well. We're always told we have to get good nutrition. What good nutrition means to you is going to be different than what it means to somebody else. But we acknowledge that food intake and quality of food in particular, avoiding processed foods, that's going to be important. Social connection is important. Hydration is important. You're starting to get the picture. We can take all that, acknowledge it as useful and foundational for mental and physical health. But of course there are many people who still struggle with getting ill too often, or with not being able to heal from physical injuries and wounds, or from various bacterial and viral infections quickly enough or deal with chronic disease. And so, today's really about how you can take all of that information, acknowledge it, and follow it. But in addition to that, there are things that you can do to leverage your nervous system in order to enhance the function of your immune system in very robust ways. So that's where I'd like to shift the conversation to. The first topic we have to attack is the question of what is the immune system and how does it work? I think many of you have heard of antibodies or killer cells or the various organs of the body that are involved in the immune system, like the bone marrow, the spleen, the thymus, and the lymph nodes. I'd like to just take a moment and do a sort of brief immune system 101; really simple, cover the basic elements of the immune system so that everyone listening or watching this can get a clear sense of how the immune system functions and what its basic parts are. For some of you, this might be too basic. It might be a little bit of background that you already know. I think for most of you, this information will be new. And I promise you, you don't need a biology or medicine background in order to understand this. It's actually really simple because it is truly elegant in design. You have three main layers of defense for your health. These are the three things that are constantly at work to protect you from invasion and illness from bacteria, from viruses, and from parasites. And the first of those three is a physical barrier that we call your skin. And that might seem kind of obvious, but everything about you is contained in this compartment that is boundaried by your skin. And your skin is a very important aspect of your immune system. If you've ever had a cut, you essentially have a breach of the boundary that is your immune system, and you would notice a number of things would happen. You might get some swelling around that cut. You might get a scab, likely you would get a scab over time. If it got dirty, there were some bacteria that got in there, you might see some accumulation of white blood cells, what's called puss. I know it's kind of gross, but that's what that is. It might take on a yellow tint because of the accumulation of some dead cells there. But basically your skin is the primary barrier through which you keep things from the outside that could harm you from getting to the inside. Now, still in category one, your body and your external surface, you have openings to that surface, right? You're not just a round or a body shaped completely covered up with skin. You have openings, what are those openings? Well, let's start at the top and work our way down. A primary site of potential infection are your eyes. You have your ears, you have your nostrils, you have your mouth. Okay, those are going to be the primary sites by which things can get into your system. And you need to put things into your system; you need to drink and eat, and you need to get light into your system. That's why you have those openings, but bad things, meaning things that can harm you, can get into those systems. And then of course, along the back of your throat, all the way down to your stomach and your digestive system, and through your intestines and out your rectum, you have a tube, that you are basically a series of tubes. I've said that before on this podcast, and this is one such tube by which you extract nutrients from the outside environment. But all along that tube, including your nose and your mouth, it's lined with mucus. And while mucus might seem kind of gross to some of you, the more you learn about mucus, the more you realize that mucus is really, really cool because mucus essentially acts as a filter, as a trap for bacteria and viruses. And it has certain ways of scrubbing or killing those bacteria and viruses. Now, the mucus is constantly being turned over, as we'll talk about later, the chemistry of that mucus is really important in order to make sure that certain things don't make it into your system, and other things are allowed to move through your system and you can extract nutrients from them. So the reason I'm talking about this first category of barrier for immune system in such detail is I'd like you to envision yourself as a human, of course, but as a human that is a clear entity from everything else. And you have to bring in the right things and you have to keep out the wrong things or kill them. Now, inevitably, bacteria, viruses, and parasitic infections are going to make their way into our body, but whether or not they are killed off or whether or not they take over and cause us harm is going to be determined by layers two and three. So, layers two and three are the so-called innate immune system and the adaptive immune system. So the innate immune system is what I would call the second layer of defense. It's very fast. So whether or not it's bacteria, virus, or parasite, what happens when you have something enter your body, maybe you swallowed it, maybe got in through your eyes, maybe you shook somebody's hand who is carrying a particular kind of illness, and then you wiped your eyes. And I've talked about on this podcast before, very soon after we meet another person, usually within 30 seconds, believe it or not, most people wipe that person's chemicals somewhere on their face or on their body's surface. This has been demonstrated over and over again. If you want to learn more about that, we did an episode all about chemical signaling, where you can learn about it. I know it sounds weird and you might say, "I don't do that," but indeed you do, most of the time most everybody does. Okay, so, this innate immune system is this rapid response when something enters our system and our body doesn't recognize it. It's not food, it's not clean air, it's something that's either a bacteria, virus or parasite. And the innate immune system involves the release of particular cells that are waiting dormant, ready to attack whatever this invader is. And some of these cell types you've heard of before. The most typical one are the so-called white blood cells. So, the white blood cells will actively go to the site of invasion and will start to encapsulate or try and surround that given invader. The other names of these different cell types are things like neutrophils, macrophages, natural killer cells are just a few of the many types of immune cells. So there's kind of like an ambulance system, but rather than go and try and heal something like a paramedic would, they go there and they try and surround and kill whatever this invader is. They work in concert with two other assistants, and those assistants are called the compliment proteins. Compliment proteins exist in the blood, and what they do is they travel to sites where there's an invasion and they mark certain things for being engulfed and eaten. So they sort of put an "eat me" tag on it. They basically put a chemical tag onto invaders that then allows those white blood cells, neutrophils, macrophages, natural killer cells to say, "Ah, I need to basically kill this thing, and then wrap it in a body bag and send it off. Kill that thing, wrap in a body bag and send it off." And I'm using the analogy of the body bag, but in the sense it's the right one rather because these cells that come in and kill things, the way they do that is actually to engulf the invading bacteria, virus or parasite. So they actually surround it. And when you see puss or you see infection in maybe a cut on the skin or something like that, or even in an ingrown hair that gets some bacteria in it, that puss and the white part, I know it's kind of gross to talk about, but those are the white blood cells, oftentimes it's dead cells, and that's the dead invader sitting there. So it's trying to create an isolated compartment 'cause it wants to keep it in that part of the body. Okay, so you've got the innate immune system, the compliment comes through blood and helps it by tagging certain things with an "eat me" signal. And then there are the cells that are either damaged from the injury or from the parasite, or are suffering because of the bacteria or the virus itself, and the cells of your body will also release an alarm signal, which is not an "eat me" signal, but a "help me" signal. And those "help me" signals come in the form of what we call cytokines. And the cytokines are things like interleukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha. You may have heard of these things if you are at all curious about or have been learning about the health space, online health space, especially in the last few years, inflammation is all the buzz word now. Everyone's talking about inflammation, inflammation, inflammation. What do we mean when we say inflammation? Well, inflammation is a physical response, but it's also a chemical response. And many times the markers of inflammation that are measured in people or in animal models where this research is done, are things like interleukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha. So when those go up in the blood, it's a sign that somewhere there's a cell that's saying "help me, help me." And is secreting these things which calls in those neutrophils, macrophages, natural killer cells, and white blood cells, okay? And it might help to remember all this, by just telling people that what interleukin means is to communicate, right? So the interleukin is shouting out "help me," the compliment proteins are coming in and saying, "eat this" and tagging the invader with an "eat me" signal. And then the killer cells and the white blood cells are doing the job of trying to kill off that thing. That's the innate immune system. So, your skin and your mucus lining plus your innate immune system are a beautiful two-layered set of defenses against various kinds of invaders and infections. And then there's the third type, which is the adaptive immune system. And you'll notice that leading up until now, I haven't said the word antibody at all, and that's because it is the job not of the skin or the mucus or the microbiome or the innate immune system to produce antibodies that can recognize specific invaders, but rather it is the job of the adaptive immune system to create antibodies against bacteria, viruses, and even parasites and even physical intruders to your system. So, the adaptive immune system has this incredible ability to show up at the site of invasion or infection or inflammation. It's called there by various cues, including the cytokines that we talked about earlier. And what it does is it actually attaches to and creates a sort of an imprint of the shape of whatever invader happens to be there. So if that particular invading bacteria or virus has a contour that's kind of rippled or kind of spiky or whatever shape it happens to have, it creates an imprint of that. And then, using that imprint in concert with some other cells, creates antibodies that are specific to recognize that invader should the body ever have that invader inside of it again. Now, that's why it's called the adaptive immune system. And in many ways it creates a memory of a prior infection so that these antibodies can be made anytime that same invader comes back again, all right? And so, this is the basis of what we call immunity. This is the basis of what we call an enhanced ability to combat certain types of infections. And it's really a wonderful, and I mean, I can't even state how incredible this really is, that all of our bodies have this capacity, right? We have something called leukocytes. These are essentially white blood cells. We have red blood cells and white blood cells, and they both are derived from the same type of origin cell. It's a stem cell. When you hear stem cell, a stem cell just means a cell that can become many different types of other cells. We sometimes hear about stem cells in terms of people that are getting injections of stem cells or the potential therapeutic effects or potential of stem cells. But we all harbor certain stem cells within us as well, that can become lots of different cell types. And there's one particular type of stem cell, which is the hematopoietic stem cell, which can give rise to red blood cells and white blood cells. And in general, these reside in the marrow, at least in adults. So, in our bone marrow, we have this ability to make certain cells that can go out when they are called out chemically, they get called out to sites of infection and create antibodies, and then maintain those antibodies in our system, or have a memory of that particular infection so that if the infection comes back again, we can kill it off immediately. And it doesn't have to pass through these multiple stages of first, the innate response, then the adaptive response, taking some time. Now, there are a lot more details to the adaptive immune system, but I just want to emphasize a few points that might be relevant. First of all, the name of the antibodies that are created sometimes come in the form of IgM and IgG, things of that sort. This isn't a full deep dive immunology class, but Ig stands for immunoglobulin, okay? So the immunoglobulins are a part of the adaptive immune response in creating antibodies. If you hear IgM, the IgM is the first of the adaptive immune responses, and it tends to come on earlier. So if somebody is immunopositive for IgM for a particular type of viral or bacterial invader, that means that it was a fairly recent infection. Later, one creates... The adaptive immune system, I should say, creates an IgG, which is the more stable form of the specific antibody that's going to recognize a given invader. So IgG tends to come up a little bit later. So, just to recap, something gets into your system through your eyes, through some hole in your skin, a cut, through your mouth, sexually transmitted diseases come in through the mucus membranes that are on the genitalia or in the genitalia, sexually transmitted disease, airborne disease, gets into the mucus, somehow gets into the bloodstream. Then there's the innate response, which is a more general response of trying to contain and combat the infection or invader. And then the adaptive response is the one that generates the antibodies. First, the IgM response, the immunoglobulin-M response, and then the immunoglobulin-G response, IgG response. So, how do we keep these three barriers or these three defense systems to infection tuned up? Well, leaving aside the list of things that I mentioned before that generally enhances their function, things like sleep and sunlight and good nutrition, et cetera, the sort of generic things for good health, one of the key ways we can do that is to keep that mucus lining in really good shape. And what does that mean? Well, the mucus lining needs to turn over quite often and it needs to be the correct chemistry to be a trap for the bad stuff and for it to be permeable to the good stuff, to the nutrients that we need. And it is now very clear from hundreds, if not thousands of studies that the best way to do that is to maintain a healthy so-called microbiome. The microbiome being these little bacterial organisms that are good for us that live all along our mucus pathways and even in our eyes. Now, just to be really clear, it's not just about the gut microbiome; we actually have a microbiome in our eyes, we have one that's specific to our mouth, we have a nasal specific microbiome, there's one all along the gut and the species of microbiota that live all along the digestive tract differ from the mouth, to the throat, to the stomach, intestines, into the rectum. It's well-established that there are healthy microbiota that live all along that length, and that they differ along that length. There's also a urethral microbiota, and there's a vaginal microbiota that promotes health of that environment as well. So how is it that one can maintain the healthy microbiota and not favor growth of harmful bacteria, or allow that mucus lining to become too permeable to the bad stuff that can come in from the environment? Well, as far as we know, there are three main ways to do that. The first two are purely structural and mechanical. It's very clear now from work, some of which was done at Stanford, but elsewhere as well, that the nasal microbiome is particularly good at scrubbing bacteria, at preventing certain types of infections. So, this is a reminder that whenever possible, unless eating or speaking, you want to be nasal breathing, not breathing through your mouth. Your nose is a much better filter for viruses and bacteria than is your mouth. The mouth contains certain structural features, even organs and cell types that can protect against incoming infection, but you don't want to be a mouth breather for a variety of reasons. And there's a terrific book called "Jaws: A Hidden Epidemic," which was written by my colleagues, Sandra Kahn and Paul Ehrlich at Stanford, and Stanford Medicine with a foreword by Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky. So it's really a lot of heavy hitters on that book that talks about the increase in infection that one gets when breathing through the mouth, as opposed to the nose. Now, of course, during hard exercise, one breathes through the mouth, that's not necessarily bad. When one is eating or speaking, that's not necessarily bad at all. I guess it depends on what you're saying. That was a joke. But in general, when possible you want to be breathing through your nose. Many people have trouble breathing through their nose because of so-called deviated septums or chronically collapsed sinuses. The best way to dilate those sinuses is actually to breathe through your nose. So it can take a little bit of time, but there is some plasticity to the sinuses. And so, be a nose breather, not a mouth breather, you will combat more of the infections that you are constantly confronted with. I should mention that we are always bombarded with different types of bacteria, viruses, and parasites in our environment. And the goal of course, is to reinforce your immune system, so you can keep these things at bay and not get sick. There's actually a paper that was published in Cell Reports, "Cell Press Journal," excellent journal that showed that the nasal microbiome, it has particular species of microbiota that are good at fighting off infection. There has not been a direct link between particular patterns of nasal breathing and the nasal microbiome yet, but oxygenation of that environment by breathing through your nose, turns out to be quite important overall for enhancing it as a filter. So don't just think of your nose as something to smell foods and to bring in air. It's also an active filter for things that could invade you. The other way to try and keep out bad things and to avoid getting sick is the advice that your mother, and certainly my mother gave me, which is to not touch your eyes after touching other people or touching other surfaces. And as I mentioned earlier, we tend to do this subconsciously. But the reason to avoid doing that is the eyes are a primary entry point for a lot of bacteria and viruses. You're constantly lubricating the surface of your eyes with the so-called lacrimal glands, and tears and things of that sort. If you've ever noticed when you wake up in the morning, you have some sleep in your eyes, you know the kind of crusty stuff in the corners of your eyes or on your eyelashes, that sleep, that crust are actually dead bacteria that you've successfully battled during the night. Okay, that's what that is. It's not the accumulation of some healthy tissue. It's the accumulation of that your healthy mucus membranes and tears and other things that are specifically combating those bacteria. So, I know that sounds a little bit gross, but that's what that is. So you're wiping away the casualties of a battle that you fought at night. So during the daytime, you don't want to introduce viruses and things to your eyes as much as possible. It is a primary site of entry. This is why people wear goggles in surgical units and things of that sort, to try and avoid getting things into their eyes. Very, very important. And then the third way to keep a healthy line of defense for your entire mucus tract is to enhance the proliferation of good gut microbiota. The best way to enhance the quality of your gut microbiome and the mucus lining that serves as this protective layer all along your body is to ingest two to four servings a day of fermented foods, low sugar fermented foods. I've talked about this before a bunch of times on the podcast, but these are data from my colleague, Justin Sonnenburg's lab at Stanford Med. And there, I just wiped my eyes. Yep, you got me. But a paper published in the journal "Cell," which is a absolutely spectacular journal, really points to the fact that when people eat fermented foods, two to four servings per day, it helps reduce the activity of certain cytokines. Now, you know what those are, right? Cells make cytokines to call out, "help me, help me." To reduce the amount of cytokines, the so-called inflammatom. Now that doesn't render those cells more vulnerable. The reason they saw a reduction in IL-6 and IL-1, and some of these other cytokines is because when people have a healthy gut microbiome, there are fewer cells in the body being infected from outside infections and therefore less of a reason for cells to be crying out, "help," because they are thriving, not suffering. So, don't wipe your eyes, keep your hands clean, everyone tells you that, right? But keep your hands clean, don't wipe your eyes, be a nasal breather, not a mouth breather, unless you're speaking, exercising or eating, and keep a healthy gut microbiome by eating two to four servings a day of quality, low sugar, fermented foods, things like sauerkraut, things like natto if you can access that. I've tried it before, it's interesting. It's sort of an acquired taste, kimchi, pickles, again, low sugar sources are going to be the sources that are going to be most effective for this. So now you're armed with three ways to enhance the function of your immune system and combat infection that is, I like to think separate from the typical type of information that you get such as get good sleep, good nutrition, good social connection, et cetera. All of that stuff still holds true, but these three other points I think can really make a substantial difference in terms of bolstering the immune system, your immune system. I do want to mention, because these names are going to come up several times during this episode, that while interleukins like IL-6 and IL-1 encourage inflammation, they are these "help me" signals that call in cells to gobble up invaders. There are some interleukins that are anti-inflammatory. And the one that I'd like to highlight in particular, because it will come up again in a little bit is interleukin-10. So not all of the IL, insert number, not all of the interleukins are inflammatory, some are anti-inflammatory. So that's an important point to keep in mind as we go forward. Next, I'd like to talk about what's called sickness behavior. And indeed there is a category of behavior that we call sickness behavior that is very informative as to the things that we can do to avoid getting sick. Now, this notion of sickness behavior goes back several decades or more. And it's a very interesting way of looking at the function of the immune system, because what it does is it bridges us from this thing that we're calling the immune system where it's T-cells, and B-cells, and cytokines and leukocytes, and it starts taking us into the realm of the nervous system, because of course the nervous system controls behavior. So sickness behavior is a suite of responses that we tend to all undergo when we are feeling sick. So this is going to vary from person to person, but there's some general categories of things that we all do and that happen to all of us after we are wounded or sick or dealing with an infection of any kind. And by examining sickness behavior in some detail, it can be really informative as to routes that we can take to health. So the main thing about sickness behavior is that it tends to involve a slowing of our usual levels of activity. People start to feel lethargic, or they feel like the activities that previously they could do with relative ease are very difficult for them or somewhat overwhelming. The other thing you start to see is that people and animals, by the way, stop grooming, they stop taking care of themselves. Not necessarily stopped showering, although oftentimes that's the case, but they will stop doing their hair, they'll stop putting on makeup, depending on whether or not they did that before, they might stop. Animals will stop licking and grooming themselves. People will stop taking care of their cosmetic appearance. Now it's not just because they don't care how they look when they're sick, it's because there's this overall suppression of certain kinds of activities and an enhancement of other kinds of activities. And this is really important. Sickness behavior is actually a motivated state. It's a state that's designed to accomplish certain things. One of the other features of sickness behavior in addition to being lethargic, loss of grooming, will be a loss of appetite, right? Oftentimes people who have a great appetite normally just won't feel hungry at all. And there are several theories as to why this would be. One prominent idea in the literature is that it's to discourage vomiting and diarrhea, which of course can be infectious to other people. So, that's a theory. I don't know that that's ever been tested directly, but that's one idea. The other idea is that it's simply to harbor more resources for sake of repair. And I want to talk about that because we are all told to get extra sleep when we aren't feeling well or to rest. But just like any good two or three-year-old constantly asks, "why, why?" Good scientists, good people who are interested in health information should always be asking why. Why should I get more sleep? What happens in sleep that I should get more sleep when I'm sick? Why shouldn't I just push through this? And there are a couple of reasons for this that have been established in the literature. The first is that there does seem to be something useful about slowing circulation when we are ill. One idea that has some data to support it is that when we slow our circulation, our blood circulation, so not running around so much or running it all, but rather lying down, getting extra rest, maybe sleeping, maybe even just remaining still, is that the lymphatic system, which carries a lot of the immune-related cells and fluids, is able to ramp up its levels of activity. So, this is interesting, right? So reducing circulation of the blood, but increasing circulation of the lymphatic system. You've all probably been familiar with the lymphatic system when you're combating an infection, your lymph nodes can get sore. You've got lymph nodes behind your ears, in your groin, your armpits, around your throat, around near your thyroid, in your throat, et cetera. So, that's the other reason. Now, some people, when they get sick, psychologically go into a very vulnerable state where they really, really want people, other people to take care of them. You've probably witnessed this, or you feel this way yourself. About 50% of people have that response. They really want to be taken care of. Now, when you think about it from an adaptive perspective, this makes sense, right? A member of our species is ill and they more or less will cry out for help in one form or another to the other members of their species to take care of them. And of course this will be especially apparent in cases where people are young enough or incapacitated enough that they can't actually get resources on their own. If you've ever been really sick, just getting up and going to the fridge or to the restroom can feel like a monumental task. So about 50% of people report or describe seeking of help and support when they are sick. But you could also imagine how this would be a very non-adaptive response because it increases the opportunity to spread infection to the caretaker. So that's an interesting consideration. Another 50% of people seem to have the opposite response when they're sick. So, somehow, regardless of how they were prior to getting ill, the sickness behavior that's engaged by these neural circuits in the brain, they are indeed neural circuits in the brain, create a stay away from me. I don't want to be bothered. I want to be left alone. I don't want to be taken care of, right? It's not stubbornness. It's literally a lack of interest or a disinterest in social connection when one is sick. And you see this in animals too, some animals will seek out other members of their species. Others, like my unfortunately now passed away bulldog, Costello. When he was sick I always knew because he would go around the back of the house and he would just hide there. He would just take himself away from everybody else. He did not want to be taken care of. And it was just a natural response to him. I don't think he was trying to prevent me from getting whatever it was that he had. So if ever somebody doesn't want to be taken care of, or if they do want to be taken care of, realize that people tend to fall into these two bins naturally, and animals tend to fall into these bins. Regardless of what species they are, it's about 50/50. And again, this sickness behavior is a motivated state. It's designed to slow circulation of the blood, increase circulation of the lymph, and the other killer cells in the body, reduce the probability of infecting others by reducing, its thought, diarrhea and vomit, but also breathing on others, interacting with others. And in some cases it will activate this, I don't want to call it a regressed state, but many people feel somewhat more... If they are adults, they feel more childlike when they are ill and they want to be taken care of very badly. Some of it might be learned. Some of it might be innate. We don't know, but the sickness behavior is very interesting for a couple of reasons. First of all, it mimics another state that has been described in the neuroscience literature, which is major depression. And in both sick individuals, sick from bacterial or viral infection, and in people with major depression, it's been shown that there are robust increases in the levels of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha. So there is an idea now circulating that depression involves these inflammatory cytokines being very active. And we know that illness involves inflammatory cytokines being very active. So if you think about it, the similarity between major depression and being sick ought to be able to point us in a direction of interventions that could help us either prevent illness or move through illness more quickly. But as we head in that direction, because indeed that's the case, I just want to emphasize that sickness behavior is what provides this bridge between the immune system and the nervous system. And what we'll soon see also is that healthy behavior, behavior that allows us to avoid infection, also points to a clear bridge between the nervous system and the immune system. That it isn't just that we have a brain and body and our organs, and then we have an immune system. That's true, but they're interacting all the time. And this is going to lead us to a place where it's going to be very clear and not at all surprising how certain patterns of thinking and certain behaviors that we can elect to take can help enhance our immune system function and vice versa. There are two other features of sickness behavior definitely worth pointing out. One is a theory, which is that the reduced appetite, in particular appetite for protein rich foods when sick, is thought to be an attempt, a subconscious attempt, of the organism to reduce the amount of iron that it's taking in. Now, typically the amount of iron intake that's recommended or more or less is for men, it's about eight milligrams per day. For women, it's anywhere from 18 to 27 milligrams per day, depending on whether or not they're pregnant, lactating or menstruating, et cetera, the ranges can vary. But, and indeed, it's true that if iron levels in the blood go too high, like over 45 milligrams per day can be very toxic to the system. But the theory that's prominent in the biology literature and in the health literature is that the reduction in appetite is actually an attempt to reduce iron intake specifically because many bacteria and other forms of infection seem to thrive when levels of iron in the blood are high. And I don't want to see anyone take this too extreme and suddenly do an iron deprivation diet in order to get well. But it's an interesting theory that I'd be remiss if I didn't mention, because it makes good sense. Iron is actually attached to hemoglobin and red blood cells in the bloodstream. Normally that can help us quite a lot. It's also in muscle, I should mention that. Iron can be a sequestered into muscle, and iron serves a lot of important health promoting roles, but by reducing appetite and thereby reducing iron intake, it does reduce the capacity of certain things, including infections to travel in certain compartments within the body. So, again, that's just theory, but I think many of you are probably familiar with not having an appetite when you're sick. The other thing that's very typical of people with major depression is loss of appetite, not always but often loss of appetite. So, here again, we have loss of appetite in sickness behavior, loss of appetite and major depression, and perhaps not surprisingly one of the major symptoms of sickness behavior and major depression that map more or less onto one another is loss of libido or interest, not just in social interactions, but in sex and reproduction. And so, again, if you think about sickness behavior and depression, they are very, very similar. Okay, so sickness behavior and major depression have certain core features in common. We need to therefore ask ourselves why and how does being sick influence the way that we think and perceive our environment and impact our appetite, whether or not we want to be cared for more or cared for less? Again, people tend to diverge into two different bins there, and believe it or not, the pathway for this has been identified. When we have an infection someplace in our body, and it could be up in our head, it could be a sinus infection, it could be an ear infection, or I should also mention many of these same mechanisms can also be the consequence of a wound or an injury to the body. A back injury or a slipped disc or I guess it's called a herniated disc is the way that you hear it described. When we have that, we can be kind of irritable, we don't want to do certain things and we just want to be left alone. Things are harder. How? Why? Well, there's a known pathway, which is the so-called vagus nerve that connects the body and the brain, signals to particular brain sites to engage this category of motivational state that we call sickness behavior. Many of you have probably heard of the vagus, V-A-G-U-S, vagus. The vagus nerve is a very extensive nerve pathway, as the 10th cranial nerve comes out of the back of the brainstem, heads into the body, and branches out extensively to innervate or connect to many of our organs, including our lungs, our heart, our gut, et cetera. And all of those organs are able also to send neural signals back up to the brain. We sometimes hear of the vagus as the route to calming ourselves down. Unfortunately, that's more or less a myth that I don't know how it got propagated. You have lots of different pathways in the vagus Usually vagal stimulation actually creates more arousal and alertness, although it does have multiple pathways, but there have now been many studies of the vagus in various contexts, including in sickness behavior. And it's very clear that the vagus nerve is the fast pathway by which an infection in the body is signaled to the brain, to a particular location in the brain called the hypothalamus, which harbors a lot of different types of neurons. Neurons, for instance, in the preoptic area that increase body temperature and fever, right? That's one of the most important things is to increase body temperature, it's the body's attempt to kill off this invader because many viruses and many bacteria don't survive well at elevated heat. That's the function of a fever. A fever actually has a functional role. So, in biology, we like complicated words, so we call anything that increases body temperature or creates a fever, a pyrogen. Many years ago, in my undergraduate years, I was working on pyrogens, injecting something called lipopolysaccharide into the belly, which then gives you a fever. The way it does that is LPS causes an inflammation response in the gut. The gut doesn't know what is happening. The stomach cells don't know what's happening. So they just start secreting the IL-6, the IL-1, all those cytokines, the killer cells migrate into the gut. That's why you sometimes get a stomach ache when you don't feel well, you have a flu, or something like it. A neural signal, electrical signals get sent up to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus says, oh, I don't know what's going on out there, but there's a signal something's going on. Let's just heat up the body. Let's just start cooking whatever it is out there. And of course you don't want fever to go too high because you can kill brain cells. But within a particular range the fever is a functional and adaptive response, okay? So if you're taking drugs to try and lower the fever that might make you feel more comfortable, but actually that's limiting the response that your body is creating in order to try and kill off that invader. And again, you don't want fever to go too high. This is going to vary depending on age. You can look up online what the tolerable ranges are for fever. But when you're trying to lower body temperature when you have a fever, unless you're heading into dangerous levels of heating up, that's actually the wrong way to take your system if you do indeed want to kill off that invader. Okay, so the vagus nerve is the quick response. It also sends input to areas of the brain that change your perception of the outside world. One of the most obvious of these, obvious once I tell it to you, is photophobia, right? I love bright sunshine. I love bright lights when I want to be alert. We all have different levels of light sensitivity, but most people when they are sick, when there's an inflammation response in the body, they feel like bright lights are kind of aversive. They get a well-described kind of classical photophobia, and that's mediated by a pathway that goes from your eye to an area of your thalamus, called the anterior nucleus of the thalamus. This is work that was done by Clifford Saper at Harvard Medical School. It's really beautiful work. And then from there up to the outer lining of the brain, which is the meninges just sort of on the outside of the brain where the brain starts to interface with some of the other connective tissues. We'll talk more about these later. It can actually create a photophobia and a headache when one is ill. So, here's the pathway: Some invader gets into your system 'cause you wiped your eyes or it got in through your mouth. You didn't listen to your mother and got in through your eyes. You're feeling sick. Something's going on there. You have a stomach ache because of all the inflammation there, the signal goes up from your vagus nerve. You're heating up with a fever. You've got photophobia because you've activated this pathway by which what would normally be tolerable light is triggering this thalamic nucleus, the anterior thalamus, that's projecting up to the meninges. You got a headache in response to looking at light. It's basically triggering an overall pathway to get you to go into a quiet, dark place and rest. And the last element I'd like to talk about is the rest. There's something that gets triggered from the body to the brain, to the hypothalamus, and we think we know which hypothalamic area it is. It's the supraoptic nucleus, we think. Supraoptic 'cause it's right above your so-called optic chiasm, If you want to look up where that is, it's right above the roof of your mouth. And there are nuclei there that promote the desire to sleep even during the daytime, what would normally be the active phase of your circadian cycle. Now, that is really interesting because what's happening here is you've got multiple pathways that are saying avoid light, reduce your amount of behavior, heat up, all the things that are making you sick. This is sickness behavior, and it's going from your body to your mind to make you do the right thing. Now there's also a slow pathway that's purely mediated by the blood, so-called humoral factors. Not 'cause they're funny, but humoral factors are factors of the blood. As you have an infection for many hours or days, the amount of IL-6 and IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor and other inflammatory cytokines is starting to increase such that the total amount in your circulation gets high enough and is communicated to the brain. And it tends to enter the brain through a particular type of tissue that's really interesting called choroid, C-H-O-R-O-I-D. Choroid is really interesting. It's kind of this fluffy tissue that sits in your ventricles. The ventricles are the spaces in your brain, and the spaces in your brain have what's called cerebral spinal fluid in them. The cerebral spinal fluid contains a number of important things, but the choroid starts releasing and responding to these cytokines, the inflammatory cytokines, and then the brain actually starts to experience all sorts of changes in terms of inflammation to neurons, your memory tends to get poor, your cognition tends to get poor. These are transient things most often. Eventually these things will pass, but this is deep into sickness when you're really feeling lousy. You can't read, you can't watch a movie, you can't do anything. So if you ever get sick and you just can't be bothered by anything, it's probably because you've had that fast response from the body and you've also had the slower response where you literally have a set of tissues in your brain that are sending out these inflammatory signals. And now your whole brain is starting to cope, or is trying to cope with this infection. So you've got a slow pathway and a fast pathway. That all sounds really terrible. So, now, I'd like to talk about what you can do to reduce the probability of getting sick. And there are actually things that one can do as you start to get sick and once you're sick, to accelerate the healing process by flipping the equation. Up until now we've been talking about how the body activates certain areas in the brain to create sickness behavior that's very much like depression. You're probably all familiar with this from anytime you've had a cold or a flu or something really lousy or an injury. Now, let's flip the equation and ask what can we do with our nervous system in order to enhance the function of our immune system in order to be able to heal and recover from illness and injury more quickly. So let's say you are in that unfortunate circumstance of waking up one day or coming home, and you've got that tickle in your throat, or when you breathe, your nasal passages don't feel the same way. You've got a little bit of a headache. You're feeling kind of off. We all know what we should do. We should all hydrate, drink some water and go to sleep. Right, that's we are all told, but there are actually things that you can actively do in order to get your immune system to deploy a more robust response at that early phase of potential infection. Let's focus first on the rest component. Yes, of course we are all told that we should take a hot shower and go to sleep, and get nine or 10 hours of sleep. But there's an interesting way of looking at sleep, specifically for its role in enhancing the immune system. And there's a wonderful review, I'll put the review in the captions that looked specifically at the literature surrounding sleep that is different because it occurs in support of the immune system. So normally when we go to sleep, we have slow-wave sleep predominantly in the early phase of the night, and then over time as we sleep longer and longer, we get more so-called REM, rapid eye movement sleep. I talked all about this on the episodes on sleep. Of course you have slow-wave sleep and REM sleep throughout the night always, but it's the fraction of slow-wave sleep to REM sleep that shifts, and they have different functions, et cetera. There is some evidence that the sleep associated with an infection, in particular, early stage of infection, is associated with elevated levels of serotonin in the brain that either through an adaptive mechanism or for whatever reason, the neurons in the brain of the so-called raphe nucleus start releasing more serotonin. And that serotonin and its related pathways can help enhance some of the immune system function that could combat the infection. There is starting to be some data, and I emphasize starting because it's not a very robust literature yet, looking at whether or not supplementing precursors to serotonin like 5-HTP, which can be taken in a supplement form or consuming foods that increase serotonin naturally. So these would be any foods that contain high levels of tryptophan. You can look up what those are. So, white meat turkey, for instance, certain complex carbohydrates can often be rich with tryptophan. That consuming those foods can enhance the amount of serotonin that's available in the brain and blood and thereby lead to the particular quality of sleep that allows for more deep healing or for when I say deep healing, I mean for a more robust immune response. Now, again, those are still emerging data. What is very clear, however, is that during sleep and in particular, during sleep that's associated with the early stage of any kind of viral or bacterial infection, the so-called glymphatic system is much more active than it would be normally. What's the glymphatic system? The glymphatic system is actually a relatively recent discovery. I mentioned lymph and the lymphatic system earlier, the glymphatic system with a G, is a system in the brain by which debris that accumulates throughout the day, but in particular, debris that accumulates under conditions of neuroinflammation and inflammation of the body, is cleared out or is washed out of the brain. And the activity of this glymphatic system is extremely important for the recovery from infection of any kind. And it's now becoming clear, is important for recovery from traumatic head injury, and maybe even from psychological trauma. So, the glymphatic system can be thought of more or less as a plumbing system that runs through the ventricles, but also mainly through the lining that sits between the brain and the skull and some of the other tissues and things of that sort. The choroid is involved as well. Brain imaging reveals the glymphatic system is very active during deep sleep. And there's this kind of wash out of the glymphatic system. And I am aware of some studies that are ongoing now where augmenting the serotonin system through either supplementation of tryptophan or 5-HTP or even serotonin itself, these are laboratory studies, is being looked at for its capacity to increase the amount of circulation in the glymphatic system. And the idea is that it might, and I want to underscore might, potentially lead to more rapid recovery from injury and illness and potentially ramp up, if you will, the activity of the immune system. So, it essentially is a ramping up of the activity of the immune system. Now, regardless of whether or not you decide to, for instance, supplement with 5-HTP before sleep or not, I'll talk about what that might look like in a moment, there is a way that you can increase the activity of your glymphatic system under normal circumstances. Because of the mechanics of the glymphatic system, it turns out that if you elevate your heels by about 12 degrees, it doesn't have to be exactly 12, as you sleep by putting maybe a rolled pillow or two pillows underneath your feet, by having the head below your legs. It seems that there's more glymphatic washout or clearance during sleep. And this is without taking any compound to adjust the serotonin system. So I would say if you're not feeling well, yes, take the hot shower. Yes, get into bed and go to sleep, but elevate your feet to try and increase the activity of the glymphatic system. Some might even consider that if you have to be awake, that you might want to be awake with your feet elevated above your head. Now that might not be practical for the workplace, but it might be practical for a short nap during the day or something of that sort. The glymphatic system is not just active during sleep. It's also active during certain phases of waking, in particular when we are in a deep state of relaxation. So as many of you probably know I'm a big proponent of self-hypnosis because of the quality scientific literature on this. If you're interested in self-hypnosis, you can go to Reverie, R-E-V-E-R-I.com. Reverie is a cost-free app for Apple and Android that was developed by my colleague, David Spiegel, and others at the Stanford University School of Medicine, based on quality studies and peer reviewed data, showing that deep states of relaxation can be used to improve pain management, improve transition time to sleep, and a number of other things. You can select the various sort of outcomes that you're seeking using Reverie. It's a great thing especially for people that are challenged with meditation could use, because you just listened to the script. It involves deep relaxation. I would suggest using that script, or the script for sleep, but with feet elevated to increase activity of the glymphatic system. Now, if you do decide that you want to test out this serotonin hypothesis on your own, obviously check with a doctor. I'm not a doctor, I'm a professor. So, I'm professing things, not suggesting things, but 5-HTP is a supplement that I've talked about before on this podcast that I actually do not recommend for most people for sake of sleep, because it can disrupt the normal architecture of sleep and create a deep sleep early in the night, and then a spontaneous waking with some trouble to get back to sleep. And that's because of the way that the serotonin system and the melatonin system interact. However, under conditions where one is feeling like they might have an infection or an early stage of illness, in that case, 5-HTP might be a useful supplement in order to access these states of sleep that are not typical. They're not the typical deep sleep that you would achieve when you're feeling healthy. These are states of sleep that are specifically there in order to try and repair some of the immune system related inflammation that's occurring. If you'd like to explore the 5-HTP approach and you feel it's right and safe for you, and you've talked to your doctor, it's 300 to 500 milligrams taken about 30 to 60 minutes before going to sleep for the night. That's the typical protocol. Not incidentally, increasing serotonin is also one typical approach for the treatment of major depression. This is the basis for things like SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, like Prozac and Zoloft, and so forth. The 5-HTP approach is a much milder approach than prescription drug, of course, but will allow more serotonin to be synthesized and/or released. Now, for those of you that are interested in learning more about the glymphatic system, it's a fascinating system, and you might want to do a deep dive there in terms of the behavioral protocols, and what's known about it, there's a wonderful article called "The Glymphatic System: A Beginner's Guide." This is a scientific article. The first author is Jessen is the last name, J-E-S-S-E-N. If you put in "Jessen, The Glymphatic System: A Beginner's Guide," you can access the full length manuscript easily online. It'll show up immediately in your search. And in a really interesting way, the glymphatic system has now also been tied to the iron deposition system. Earlier we were talking about iron and how, of course, getting enough dietary iron is important, but if levels of iron are too high it isn't good for a number of reasons. There's a very interesting article that just came out last year called "Dysfunction of the glymphatic system might be related to iron deposition in the normal aging brain." So, we're starting to see these links between iron levels being too high, the glymphatic system not being active enough and so forth, leading to sickness behavior, inflammation, and maybe even damage to neurons associated with aging. We can flip that on its head and say that increasing the activity of the glymphatic system, feet elevated during deep sleep, maybe even feet elevated above the head while awake, during a nap or doing a Reverie script once a day or something of that sort, could increase the activity of the glymphatic system, lowering iron to a point that's probably below the typical intake during periods of infection, perhaps, I should say, can enhance the glymphatic system and vice versa. And then you've got this specialized sleep that's related to sickness behavior that seems to have heightened levels of serotonin that might be augmented by ingesting 5-HTP. Again, not on a regular basis. I don't suggest that people take compounds that increase serotonin unless it's prescribed to you for depression or something, but not doing by supplement with tryptophan or 5-HTP on a regular basis, but only under conditions where as I mentioned, you might be starting to feel sick or you're coming down with something, or you're combating some sort of infection. So if we consider the advice that we typically get when we're not feeling well of take a hot shower, get into bed and go to sleep, and we've now touched on ways to potentially increase the efficacy of the sleep part through the glymphatic and the serotonin system. What about the take a hot shower part? Is that good advice? Well, it turns out it is, and there's actually a way to do even better. There's a study, a very interesting study, the title reveals where I'm going with this, it's "Effect of a single Finnish sauna session on white blood cell profile and cortisol levels." In this case, it was done in athletes and non-athletes, which is kind of nice. This involves taking athletes and non-athletes and exposing them to sauna. It wasn't particularly hot. It was 96 degrees, which isn't cool, but it's not really hot. Nowadays you hear about people doing very, very hot sauna. The humidity of the sauna, if you want to know, is 15 plus or minus 3%. But basically what they found was that just one 15 minutes sauna session could really increase white blood cell profiles and could adjust cortisol levels in ways that were beneficial for combating infection. And now there are many other studies like this. Now, this should immediately make sense based on what we said before about fever; heating up can actually help combat infection. But for those of you that have listened to the episodes on temperature, what you probably know is that when you get into a sauna or any kind of hot environment, your body is also going to be actively pushing to cool itself off. So, there's probably an increase in heat, there is an increase in heating, but then afterwards your body will cool off, maybe even with a dip below baseline. I do want to provide a cautionary note that if you are already running a fever, getting into a sauna could take your body temperature into dangerously high levels, dangerously meaning you can kill neurons. And once you kill neurons, they do not come back. So, please don't kill your neurons. I don't recommend getting into a sauna if you're already running a fever. So this would be something to do at the initial stage of an infection or if you're feeling a little bit off. So this is kind of a ramping up or a super protocol of the typical advice of take a hot shower and get into bed. That is good advice. Now we're talking about a hot sauna, probably showering off and then getting into bed, maybe augmenting serotonin. I know many people don't have access to sauna. So, in that case, a very hot bath or shower, don't scald yourself, of course, but as hot as you can comfortably tolerate or right at that edge of what you can tolerate would be a good idea. Some people I've heard are creating saunas in their bathrooms by running hot water and creating a ton of steam. Anything that really heats you up, but not to dangerously high levels is going to be beneficial. If you have access to a sauna, terrific. This again was only 15 minutes. They'd had a cool off session. Would you get more of an increase? People always want to know if you did it twice as much, would you get twice an increase? Those data don't really exist yet. However, if you are interested in maximizing the effects of sauna, it is clear that a cool off period is important. So it's not that a 15 minute sauna is good, and a 30 minute sauna is better. If you are going to take that route of exploring more, it does seem that doing a 15 minute heating period followed by a five to 10 minute cooling period, and then getting back into the heat can be beneficial. And this is interesting. It gets to the mechanisms by which the hypothalamus areas, the areas of the hypothalamus, that is, that generate increases in body heat, the activation of those neurons occurs as you heat up and then were you to just stay in that heated environment, they would actually shut off and some other neurons would be handling the job so to speak. But by getting in and out of the heated environment, you actually force that system to send repeated pulses of these cortisol lowering and white cell stimulating signals to the body. Some of you have probably heard the phrase, "feed a fever, starve a cold." I don't know who first said that. I couldn't find the citation, but we hear this. And we can speculate that the reason that phrase, "feed a fever, starve a cold" came to be is because of the adaptive function of fever, that increases in body temperature make it challenging for intruding viruses and bacteria to survive. Even though, of course, highly elevated body temperatures pose a danger to the host organism, to you. Feeding, eating does cause an increase in body temperature through the so-called thermogenic effect of food. So I can understand the logic of feed a fever. It would mean that when you have a fever, it's your body's natural attempt to heat up and kill some invading thing. And by eating, you would further increase your body temperature. Why you would want to starve a cold, I don't know, however. Maybe it's because when your nasal passages are congested, it's uncomfortable to eat or something of that sort. So the feet of fever part makes sense to me, the starve a cold part is still mysterious to me. I couldn't find any logical reason why that would be good. There are communities out there that believe that fasting is a viable way to combat certain types of infection. Fasting, in particular, prolonged fasts, do increase the amount of adrenaline, also called epinephrin, in the brain and body. And as we'll next explain, epinephrin, adrenaline does have a powerful effect on the various inflammatory cytokines and on the immune system in general. So, let's talk about a behavioral protocol that anyone can use; it doesn't involve any equipment, you don't need a sauna, you don't need anything at all, that has been demonstrated in excellent peer reviewed research to enhance the function of the immune system and actually allow people to combat infection in very dramatic ways. Next, I'd like to do an in-depth analysis of a study that has achieved some prominence out there, not just in the scientific literature, but on the internet, because it relates to how particular types of breathing can impact the immune system and the ability to combat infection. The title of this paper is "Voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system and attenuation of the innate immune response in humans." This is a paper that was published in PNAS, which is the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. It's a very prestigious journal. For those of you that know PNAS, you know that there are certain papers published in PNAS, or there used to be that were not peer reviewed. In recent years, I think all of them have moved to peer reviewed papers. So this is a peer reviewed, very high quality study. And I just want to describe the basic contour of the study. I'll explain the findings, and then I want to go in-depth and explain the mechanistic basis for these findings and the protocol that we can all export from these findings. So, here we go. First of all, a couple of terms so that everybody is on the same page. The sympathetic nervous system is one division of our nervous system. It's a set of neurons down the middle of our spinal cord and in our brain that generally lead to a heightened state of arousal and alertness. It's associated with epinephrin release in the brain and adrenaline release in the body. It's the so-called fight or flight system when it's really active, but it's the system that's active when we are wide awake. And we already talked about the innate immune system. That's that first line of defense after the skin barrier, of course, whereby some infection comes into the body and there's this rapid response of increasing inflammation. And that's also about the time that you first feel lousy. So when you start to feel like, "ugh, I think I've got something. I don't feel right, a headache. I feel nauseous. I'm heating up. I don't feel good." That's the innate immune system kicking in. So what they did in this study, and by the way, I should say they, this first author is Kox, K-O-X, last author, last name Pickkers, P-I-C-K-K-E-R-S. What they did was they exposed human subjects to an endotoxin. In other words, they injected people with E. coli, which is a bacteria which makes people, all people feel terrible. Makes you nauseous, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, it's very unpleasant, okay? These people voluntarily signed up for this study. However, some of the subjects in this study performed a behavioral protocol that can best be described as cyclic hyperventilation. My lab works on these types of breathing protocols. This is not work that my lab did, but basically subjects hyperventilate, followed by breath retention, by breath holds, and I'll explain exactly what they did. They also looked at other forms of behavioral protocols, but let's focus on that one. So, they're comparing controls that do just sort of a basic meditation versus people that do this intense breathing followed by some breath holds. I'm just paraphrasing here, in the intervention group, the breathing group, plasma levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, so this is a cytokine that is lowers inflammation, increased after endotoxin administration. And that was triggered by an increase in epinephrin and adrenaline. So, in other words, doing a particular pattern of breathing allowed an anti-inflammatory cytokine to be turned on, whereas that was not the case in the subjects that did not do this particular breathing protocol. And they discovered that levels of proinflammatory TNF-alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha, IL-6, interleukin-6 and interleukin-8, which you should all be familiar with now, as proinflammatory cytokines were lower in the intervention group. Whereas these IL-10 levels that are anti-inflammatory went up. Finally, flu-like symptoms were lower in the intervention group. So this is an amazing finding, right? These are human subjects. One group of subjects is doing this breathing protocol. The other group of subjects is just meditating. Both sets of subjects have been injected with E. coli. So, you know everyone's getting the same amount placed into their system. This is very, very interesting. And it leads to the question that every good scientist, two year old or health information seeker asks, which is why? How? How in the world does this work? Why does this work? Well to make a long story shortish, because I am going to go into depth here, the reason it works is because the sympathetic nervous system, the so-called stress part of our nervous system, it's not really called that, but the part of our nervous system that triggers stress from mild stress, to severe stress, even to panic, causes the release of adrenaline and epinephrin in the brain and body. And under normal circumstances, when we have some sort of invading infection, our body is able to push back on that, to resist it by engaging the stress response. So what's happening here is there's a behavioral protocol involving the nervous system, 'cause all behaviors are generated from the nervous system of course. A behavioral protocol that people are deliberately employing that allows them to activate the sympathetic nervous system, which in turn allows them to activate the normal pathways by which immune system function is enhanced. Okay? Now, the reason I'm underscoring this is that the common interpretation of this study is that somehow it blocks the normal immune response, but that's not really what's happening here. Yes, there's a reduction in inflammatory cytokines and there's an increase in anti-inflammatory cytokines, but that's not really the same thing as blocking the immune response. This could just as easily be viewed as enhancing the immune response and combating the intruder, in this case, E. coli. So, let's parse this study a little bit more closely. First of all, what is this magical pattern of breathing? Some of you may recognize this as so-called Wim Hof breathing. Wim, of course the Dutchman. I think his occupation online used to be listed as daredevil, believe it or not, on Wikipedia. That's a pretty cool occupation. Wim is best known for his activities with cold exposure, he holds multiple world records for that, swimming under icebergs and other incredible feats, that you definitely don't want to try unless you're extremely skilled and really know what you're doing, as he does, but also for the use of breath work. The breathing that is so-called Wim Hof breathing is very similar, not exactly the same, but very similar to Tummo breathing, as it's been described historically. In the science and physiology community and in my laboratory, 'cause I run a university laboratory, we refer to it as cyclic hyperventilation, which just means repeated deep breaths in and out. And then there are these retentions. So, because I'm here in the hot seat anyway, I might as well demonstrate it for you so you know what this looks like. There are variations on this, so with respect to Wim, with respect to Tummo practitioners, with respect to the cyclic hyperventilators everywhere, this is one general theme of it. It involves 20 to 30 deep inhales and then exhales through the mouth, followed by a exhale of all one's air and a breath hold, that's the retention. And then at some point, 15 to 60 seconds later, repeating the 25 or 30 breaths. And then again, a breath hold with lungs empty. There are variations on this, but in our laboratory and in this particular study, it looks something like this. Okay, I'm not going to do the whole thing right now, but it goes something like this. [Andrew deeply breathing] Okay, so let's assume I did that for 30 breaths. I can already feel myself perspiring a little bit. You're heating up, that's the release of adrenaline. It's caused by that breathing pattern, and then exhaling all of one's air, no speaking in between like I'm doing. [Andrew deeply exhaling] And then sitting lungs empty until one feels the impulse to breathe and then repeating for several rounds, two or three or even four rounds. Now some people will also introduce a big inhale and breath hold at the end and find that indeed they can hold their breath much longer than they normally would be able to. Because the trigger to breathe is normally activated by increases in carbon dioxide in our blood. We have neurons in our brain stem and in our various regions of our brain, actually, that respond to when carbon dioxide is too high and trigger the reflex to breathe. But when we exhale deeply, we blow off a lot of carbon dioxide so we don't feel that impulse to breathe come quite as soon. Basically this study looked at people doing these cyclic hyperventilation with retention, 25 or 30 breaths, then the retention, 25 or 30 breaths, then retention, 25 or 30 breaths, then the retention. So, three rounds of 25 to 30 breaths followed by exhale, hold in between of various duration. But in general, 15 to 60 seconds is typical. What happened physiologically? This is one of the reasons I like this study. What happened physiologically? Well, a couple of things. Of course, blood oxygenation drops. You would expect that based on hyperventilation and especially based on the exhale of so much carbon dioxide. We could explain why that is, but blood levels of oxygen drop. The pH, the alkalinity of the body goes way up. This is very interesting. If you look up this paper, you can look at Figure One, Panel C, the pH goes way up. People become alkaline. You've heard before of alkaline water. I hate to say this, I'll probably lose some friends for this, but yeah, don't waste your money on drinking alkaline water. You can't really shift the alkalinity of your body. There are cases where some compartment in your body needs to be more alkaline than the rest. Your gut is a different alkalinity than other areas of your body, et cetera, but ingesting high alkaline water isn't going to shift your overall alkalinity. If someone can send me a quality reference that shows different than I'm happy to revise that statement. But in any case, doing that pattern of breathing that I just described greatly increases the pH. Greatly, I should say, it doesn't send it off into dangerous levels. It takes it from 7.4 to 7.6, which is a significant increase in alkalinity. So, as pH levels, for those you remember high school or college chemistry, as the numbers on the pH go down, you're becoming more acidic, as they go up, you're becoming more alkaline, okay or more basic. So, these subjects went from 7.4 to 7.6 during the breathing, and then afterwards it returned to normal. But that shift in alkalinity is thought to be important here. So, what's going on here? How is the breathing leading to the shifts in... Or I should say reduction in inflammatory cytokines and an increase in the liberation of these anti-inflammatory cytokines. Well, the authors make some good arguments as to why it's not the shift in pH per se, or the shift in carbon dioxide levels in the blood, but rather it's the release of epinephrin. And there's some good reason to believe why that's the case. It's beyond the scope of this discussion, but that it's actually the release of epinephrin, AKA adrenaline, that's causing this reduction in inflammation. And that's actually supported by something that you've probably experienced before, which is if you've ever worked, worked, worked, worked, worked really hard, or you've been a caretaker for somebody else or studying for exams, and people around you are getting sick and you're just powering through it and you're not getting sick, but then you stop, you turn in your final exam, you stopped taking care of somebody else, or you finally stop and rest or you go on vacation, and then you get sick. Well, you've just experienced the effect that adrenaline, epinephrin can have in activating your immune system by way of the nervous system, in order to keep fighting and combating infection. And that brings us to a larger theme, which is that stress and combating infection or a wound is not one unique system. It's the same stress system that you use to combat psychological stress. So when you're very, very stressed, at least in the short term, because you release so much adrenaline and epinephrin, you're actually better able to combat infections and you reduce inflammation and the whole feeling lousy response, right? Remember reduced flu-like symptoms here. So this pattern of breathing is actually a very useful tool. And I confess, I use this pattern of breathing anytime I am at the initial stages of getting some sort of bug. If I feel like I've been running myself ragged, or if I somehow, for whatever reason, have a tickle in my throat, or I have that kind of sensation in my nose, like I might've caught a bug of some sort, I will do this pattern of breathing. I've been doing it consistently, gosh, for the last four years or more. Now this is just anecdotal reports, but I find that it allows me indeed to either have those early symptoms disappear, or it allows me to just kind of push through and harder, longer. I don't suggest people continue to push through exposure to infections. Obviously you don't want to infect other people, nor do you want to crash and suddenly get a massive illness of some sort because you stopped doing this breathing. But I do think it's a useful tool. It's a purely behavioral intervention that has been shown here and now there are additional studies on the way, to enhance the function of your immune system and to reduce inflammation. And this is to me, one of the most concrete examples of a zero cost tool that bridges the activation of the nervous system through breathing with the immune system by way of releasing adrenaline and thereby reducing the terrible effects or feelings of lousiness from, in this case, an E. coli infection. Now, I'd like to focus on a couple of important points that I haven't heard discussed broadly elsewhere, which is that the hyperventilation and the breath retention are both important. So you can't simply hyperventilate to get this effect at the level of epinephrin release and reduction in inflammatory cytokines. It's been shown before that the hyperventilation phase and the hypoxia, which is a low oxygen saturation due to the breath retention, they both combine to increase epinephrin adrenaline levels. So, you have to do the 25 or 30 breaths, and then the retention. 25 or 30 breaths then the retention, meaning that the exhale with the breath hold, in order to get the full effect. I'd also want to provide a critical cautionary note. Don't do this anywhere near water or while driving a car. These things might seem kind of obvious, but obviously in the off chance that you black out or something like that, it could be disastrous. So, please be careful. And again, don't try and push the breath hold. The moment you feel the impulse to breathe, just breathe. And it did seem that the three rounds of 25 to 30 breaths with breath hold retentions in between was the ideal protocol. There's one last very interesting feature of this study that I want to emphasize. And that was that they actually measured the so-called catecholamine concentrations. Catecholamines are things like dopamine, epinephrin, norepinephrine. These are chemicals in your nervous system and body that promote states of alertness, dopamine, of course, part of the reward and motivation pathways. They explored the levels of these molecules in blood, in plasma during and after this breathing protocol. And it was interesting, as I mentioned before, epinephrin showed robust increases compared to the control group, norepinephrine, significant increases occurred in the breathing group, in the cyclic hyperventilation retention breathing group, of course, but less so. And dopamine levels actually dropped somewhat. But this is very interesting because there's a new and emerging literature largely from Asya, A-Y-S-A Rolls' lab in Israel. What her laboratory has shown is that motivational state and mindset has a powerful impact on various aspects of the immune system that were thought to be independent of the brain and mind and thinking. So this brings us back to something that we discussed at the very beginning of this episode, which is that 20, 30 years ago, the idea that you could heal the body with the mind was considered kind of quackery. I think that there was an intervening period up until now where people might've said, "sure, if you're stressed out, it's going to make things worse." I mean, I think everyone agrees that stress makes every thing worse at some level, outcomes to neurodegeneration, performance in a physical endeavors and mental endeavors. If stress is too high for too long people experience different challenges and essentially every major psychiatric disorder, everything suffers, but in the short term, stress can actually be beneficial in the ways that we just described. And stress, if we break it down is really a neurochemical state, right? It's the release of these catacholamines. And what Asya Rolls' laboratory has shown is that when the so-called dopamine system and at several episodes, I described there are multiple dopamine systems, but the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway involving areas like the nucleus accumbens, et cetera. When the reward system that's associated with dopamine and norepinephrine is activated, you see incredible effects, including for instance, highly significant reduction in tumor size in cancers. Now, why would that be? How is it that mindset, dopamine and tumors, and tumor growth are somehow linked? We now know how this occurs largely through the incredible work of Asya Rolls and others. So, now I'd like to turn our focus to how it is specifically that certain mindsets impact the immune system in ways that we can actually point to specific biological pathways and also specific protocols related to mindset. I guess a simple way to frame all this would be to say that most of us are aware that yes, indeed, you can worry yourself sick. We've been told that, you're going to worry yourself sick. And actually there was a paper published in "Science," again, one of the top three journals out there, the top three really being "Nature," "Science," and "Cell." And then other of course, excellent journals exist, but this was a paper that came out in "Science" last year. First author is Kataoka, K-A-T-A-O-K-A, describing psychogenic stress and fever. So this was looking or asking the question, are there areas of the brain that actually underlie this notion that we can worry ourselves sick? And they discovered a new pathway and they were able to both activate this pathway independent of worry and stress and see illness occur, and they were able to inhibit this pathway, block activity in this neural pathway and prevent psychogenic fever and the worrying of oneself sick. So, they were able to do this in a very controlled way. I'll just mention the pathway in case you want to look it up in more detail. This is a corticolimbic pathway. So, just to orient us, the cortex is more or less the outer shell of the brain. It's involved in thinking and sensation and perceptions and learning and maintenance of a lot of memories are stored there. We all hear that you learn and remember in the hippocampus, that's the initial site of learning and memory, but then that information, believe it or not, is passed off to the cortex where it's stored in kind of a long-term hard drive type storage. So the corticolimbic pathway is one in which your thoughts, your prior experiences can literally in a structure way, feed down onto the areas of the brain that control very basal processes, including temperature regulation. So this is a corticolimbic hypothalamic pathway. We talked earlier about the hypothalamus as controlling temperature and a lot of sickness related behavior, right? Remember vagus up to the hypothalamus and all the sleep more, less appetite, fever. Okay, that's all in the hypothalamus. This is a top-down corticolimbic hypothalamic pathway, and it has a fancy name. It's the dorsal peduncular cortex, dorsal tinea tecta. The short of that is the DP/DTT. Let's just call it the DP/DTT, to the dorsomedial hypothalamus. A lot of D's. It shouldn't mean anything. It doesn't really matter what we call it. But what's important is conceptually it's a pathway that originates insights to the brain that are associated with thinking, with emotion and with prior history, and feeds directly into an area of the brain that's involved in basic physiological subconsciously controlled processes. So, that's incredible, right? And it points to a physical pathway by which the way we think about something changes something core about our physiology. Now, in some ways that shouldn't be surprising, right? If you think about something that excites you, your heart rate can increase. You think about something that terrifies you, your heart rate can increase. So the idea that thinking controls our physiology is not a new concept at all, but somehow human beings, we have been challenged with the idea that we could actually think ourselves into being sick. But this paper from Kataoka shows that if you expose somebody to a psychological stress, you can actually activate this pathway and create a fever. And how do they do that? Well, you can do this by exposing subjects to a very stressful real event, and you cue it through our associative learning. So, maybe, like my PILOT V5s, which I love so much, we could traumatize me to the PILOT V5 if I had some horrible experience happen to me while I'm looking at and concentrating on the PILOT V5. Then you take away the horrible experience, you give me the PILOT V5, and I start to experience a lot of the symptoms associated with that terrible event. They were able to do this using sickness inducing stimuli and so forth. They did all the various derivations and identified this pathway that when activated, even in the absence of some horrible event, could create fever and illness-like behavior and so forth. And if they blocked certain stations along this neural pathway, they could block that effect. So this is really concrete evidence, proof, if you will, that there are dedicated pathways in the mammalian brain, your brain and mine, that allow us to turn thoughts into illness. That's kind of a depressing idea. What about the inverse? What about turning thoughts into health? Well, that's the work of Asya Rolls. They explored the well-established psychological phenomenon that when cancer patients or very ill people or people who are suffering from very debilitating injuries, when people had a reported a sense of hope, their rates of recovery were much higher, right? Sounds very subjective. But what is a sense of hope? A sense of hope is a sense of the future. A sense of the future is tightly associated with the dopamine system. Dopamine, again, being this molecule of reward and motivation and movement, but movement and motivation are about things that are beyond the confines of our skin and are about the future. And so what they've discovered and through other studies from other groups have discovered is that stimulation of the dopamine pathway, either simply by thinking about a future, ideally a positive future, but thinking about a positive future leads to activation of the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway and could reduce the size of tumors, could accelerate wound healing, could greatly accelerate the passage from a state of illness to a state of health and wellbeing. So there are many, many studies now starting to wick out related to this. There's also the idea that augmenting the dopamine system can increase the rate of healing. And so, there are individuals out there who opt, for instance, to take things that increase dopamine. Now, obviously drugs of abuse would not be a good idea in this context, even though they increase dopamine, they lead to big crashes, they have addictive properties, et cetera. I've talked before on this podcast about things like L-tyrosine, taking anywhere from 500 to 750 milligrams can increase dopamine because tyrosine is a dopamine precursor, of course. Things like Mucuna pruriens, which are L-dopa, the immediate precursor to dopamine. Some of these will lead to somewhat of a crash in certain individuals. Other people tolerate them a little bit better. Again, you have to talk to your doctor, you have to figure out what's right for you. If you have bipolar or mania or schizophrenia, these things, I would not recommend them at all. I'm not recommending them at all, I'm just mentioning them for potential exploration if it's safe and right for you. But the point is this: the dopamine system, when activated can accelerate healing, it can accelerate the recovery from injury of all kinds. And that shouldn't come as a mystery or surprise result to us. It's because this reward pathway and the fact that it's related to a sense of the future seems to liberate entire systems within the body that make inflammatory cytokines go down, and anti-inflammatory cytokines go up. Exactly as was demonstrated in the beautiful PNAS study where breathing, cyclic hyperventilation, was used to increase epinephrin, increase norepinephrine, and to augment the catecholamine system. So, I think that the bridges between these studies are really relevant. In one case, I'm talking about potentially taking an over-the-counter compound to increase dopamine to accelerate healing. In another case, we're talking about using breathing. There's also the use of cold water exposure to increase dopamine. I talked about this several episodes ago, but it's been shown that immersing oneself in cold water up to the neck or so. How cold? Well, it depends on what you can tolerate, but uncomfortably cold, but not so cold that you become hypothermic, but where it's challenging to get in, but you can stay there for three to 10 minutes or so, has been shown to lead to very significant, up to doubling or more of baseline dopamine levels and epinephrin levels that go on for several hours. This may be the basis for why people will do cold showers or ice baths and then get into a sauna. So, what's called cold-heat contrast therapy, as a way to augment these neurotransmitters. Today, we've been talking about how these neurotransmitters can be used to enhance the function of the immune system. And so just keep in mind that anytime you're talking about increasing neurotransmitter levels, that can be done pharmacologically through supplementation, or the can be done behaviorally through exposure to cold water, for instance, or it can be done even just simply by breathing in a particular way, cyclic hyperventilation followed by retention. The catacholamines, noradrenaline, dopamine, and norepinephrine are the bridge of activation for the immune system and the nervous system. They are the way that the nervous system calls out to the immune system, "Aha, we have a problem. We need to counter this." So you can think of them, them meaning dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, as being able to deploy larger amounts of immune cells, all the types of immune cells that we talked about at the beginning of the episode. Okay, so thus far, we've been discussing how one can prevent getting sick or when one starts to feel ill, how one might be able to shorten the course of that infection by ramping up the activity of the immune system. But what about when you're already experiencing symptoms? The runny nose, stuffed up nose, congestion, headache, et cetera. Well, there are many ways to address that at the symptom level. You're probably aware of all the over the counter medications, many of which focus on the epinephrin system. Things that are of the Sudafed variety prevent or reduce congestion because of the way that they cause release of epinephrin, and some of the effects on dilating the bronchioles and dilating the nasal passages and so forth. I'm not going to speak to whether or not those are good or bad choices. They do have a couple of effects that are not so great for the course of treating the underlying cause, which are first of all they can cause dehydration. So you have to make sure that you're hydrating well, both fluids and electrolytes, and they also can interfere with sleep because as I've talked about in the episodes on sleep, one of the hallmarks of deep sleep and in particular REM sleep is that epinephrin, adrenaline levels are low. This is what allows you to have intense, often very emotionally-laden dreams during REM sleep and not act those out. And low adrenaline, epinephrin during REM sleep is basically a signature, a neurochemical signature of the REM sleep state, which is so vital for emotional and physical repair and so forth. So, the fact that they can inhibit sleep, the fact that can cause dehydration, the fact that they can make people feel kind of lightheaded and jittery makes them not terrific choices for a number of people. There is an interesting alternative choice. And when I say alternative, I do mean alternative. The choice that I'm referring to is spirulina, which is actually a form of algae. Years ago, I think when I first heard about spirulina, it sounded very much of the kind of 1970s, 80s health food store variety. It seemed really kind of mystical and wacky, but actually now there are some really nice studies and some data, and also an understanding of the mechanism by which spirulina can have potent effects in reducing what's called rhinitis, which is a fancy word for congestion of the nose and an inflammation of the nose. Basically, anytime you hear a word that includes "itis," at least if it's in the medical or health context, it generally means inflammation of some tissue. So rhinitis just being inflammation of the nasal passages, but that's one of the most uncomfortable symptoms of any kind of infection. So there are two studies I'd like to highlight just very quickly. One is the effects of spirulina on allergic rhinitis. And the other is a clinical comparison to the efficacy of spirulina platensis, that's a technical name, and cetirizine for the treatment of allergic rhinitis. These looked at humans, so this is not a mouse study, this is a study on humans. Both sexes, so males and females. In one case, looking at 100 plus subjects, 129 subjects. The other, 65 subjects, so decent number of subjects, randomized trial, double blind. Both cases saw significant decreases in nasal obstruction, improved ability to smell, improved sleep, daily working inflammatory cytokines were reduced as well, reduction in nasal itching, all the stuff that you'd like to experience, I can imagine, after taking two grams, two grams, not milligrams, but two grams of spirulina. Sometimes had to be taken for a short while before the effect kicked in. So, that's pretty impressive, I would say, but it doesn't really speak to mechanism, but in exploring the underlying mechanisms for spirulina's effects on reducing rhinitis, it's interesting to find that spirulina actually can inhibit the formation and/or activity of so-called histaminergic mast cells, M-A-S-T, mast cells. We haven't talked a lot about mast cells, but they are a very interesting cell type in the immune response. Essentially what they are, are little packets of histamine. And when we have some sort of injury or irritant rather to the skin, so a mosquito bite, for instance, or poison oak or poison ivy, something that causes an itch or something that causes inflammation internally, doesn't just have to be on the skin, these mast are these little bubbles that contain histamine that go to that site [hissing], and release their histaminergic contents and cause swelling and inflammation of whatever cells are affected locally. You might think, well, why would I want to have a mechanism in my body that would cause swelling and inflammation? Ah, well then those cells in turn send out cytokine signals that recruit the very cell types that we were talking about way back at the beginning of the episode, the cells that are characteristics of the innate immune system that come in, the macrophages and the other types of cells that will come in and gobble up the foreign invaders or will help sequester and move away, say the poison from a bite or from whatever irritant. Again, it doesn't just have to be at the skin surface. I'm describing an example of at the skin, for instance, if you've ever had hives of any kind, that almost certainly involved mast cells. So, and when you take an anti-histamine in order to deal with seasonal allergies, for instance, you're taking a compound that's reducing histamines in mast cells. And spirulina has also been used quite effectively as a way to treat seasonal allergies and some of the symptomatology. Equally on par with some of the major prescription and over the counter drugs for that. One cautionary note, spirulina can carry some side effects for people that have a genetic mutation leading to something called PKU. These people know who they are. They're very sensitive to phenylalanine. These same people cannot drink any sort of NutraSweet or diet soda for reasons that they understand. It can be quite dangerous. It's a rare genetic disorder, but nonetheless, spirulina can be an issue for those people. For most people, the side effect profile is pretty minimal. And just to be clear, I don't have any relationship to spirulina company or anything. I just find it interesting that there are these compounds that sound rather, forgive the phrase, but rather new-agey because they come from a algae, from a plant. But when you look at the underlying mechanism, it makes perfect sense. So that's often what we like to point out here is that if there are these so-called alternative therapies, alternative because most people haven't heard of them, it's always nice if they map to a specific logical mechanism and framework by which that compound would work, as opposed to just some anecdote of, "Oh, I hear spirulina is great for allergies." Well, now we know why, it inhibits mast cells and histaminergic mast cells in particular. Earlier, I mentioned a new and very exciting study published as a full article in "Nature." Full article means that it is a major finding. At the journal, "Nature," they have letters, which are important findings. They're still very high stringency for getting a letter in "Nature" published. But the full articles, generally there's only one or two per issue in the weekly edition of "Nature." And just last week, there was a very exciting article published from Qiufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School. Qiufu I've known for a number of years. His group has done phenomenal work on the mechanisms of itch and pain and discovering some of the receptors and pathways for itch and pain. And more recently they've been exploring the mechanistic basis of acupuncture. And the title of the article is, "A neuroanatomical basis for electroacupuncture to drive the vagal adrenal axis." And while that's a mouthful, now most all of you are probably familiar with what I mean when I say vagal adrenal axis; vagal meaning of the vagus, and adrenal of the adrenal glands. And so perhaps we should not be surprised, although excited, nonetheless, that when Qiufu's lab looked at stimulation of the body with so-called electroacupuncture. So, these are needles where a small bit of electrical current, low level of electrical current, is passed into the needle and therefore into the body. They located sites on the body that can increase inflammation by way of releasing inflammatory cytokines. These areas included the abdomen, and they found areas on the body such as the lower limbs, or the hind limbs in this case, that can stimulate the vagal adrenal reflex and can lead to reduced inflammation. And what was really interesting is that they figured out that it was activation of nerve endings that resided in the fascia. I mentioned earlier what fascia is, but just to remind you, the fascia is a really thick sheath of tissue that surrounds muscle. If ever you've heard of Rolfing, Rolfing is a form of very intense massage. I've never had this done, but I've heard about this. It involves among other things, actually separating the muscle away from the fascia somewhat. So it's a very, very deep tissue massage. Actually a good friend of mine who had this done told me that it was probably the most challenging physical experience that he had ever been through going through this Rolfing procedure. Maybe some of you have have been Rolfed, as they say, and can report to the experience, whether or not it was pleasant or unpleasant, or you felt benefits or not. In any case, this study isn't about Rolfing per se, but it is about the fascia. And so what they discovered is there's a specific population of neurons. Those neurons have a name, as they often do in science. Name isn't important, but if you want to look it up, it's the PROKR2 neurons, P-R-O-K R2 neurons. And they send a connection deep into the limb fascial tissue, okay? And then they send another connection, the connections we're referring to are axons, neurons have axons. So a wire in one direction that goes into the deep fascial tissue of the lower limb, near the calf and thigh. And then they send another wire up into the spinal cord, into a region of the hind brain in the back of your brain kind of near your neck in the medulla oblongata, that neuron also has a name called the DMZ, doesn't matter. And that neuron connects to the adrenal gland to release our good old friends, the catacholamines, noradrenaline, adrenaline, and dopamine, or norepinephrine, epinephrin, and dopamine. And their release causes a reduction in inflammation, even in response to an injection of something called lipopolysaccharide, which can actually induce fever. So, what does all this saying? This is saying that activation of the deep fascial tissue causes a chain of neural reactions that leads eventually to the release of norepinephrine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, and dopamine. And once again, lowers inflammation, very much like the breathing study that we talked about earlier in the pattern of cyclical hyperventilation with retention, leading to reductions in inflammation. I can't tell you how happy this makes me. I had nothing to do with this work, but the reason it makes me happy is because I have a particular fondness for when practices that have existed for many centuries or even thousands of years, such as acupuncture, such as respiration work, start to converge with some of the hardcore mechanistic science. And the reason this excites me is not because we want to take science and erase the previous tools and methods of these ancient practices, not at all. And it certainly isn't the case that we just want to name things or rename things with modern science. What's very exciting is when we can discover mechanism that explains why certain practices work. First of all, that validates those as legitimate practices, maybe even insurance will start to cover them, whereas maybe they previously had not, I don't know what the current status is for insurance coverage of acupuncture. I'm guessing there are places that do it, maybe others that don't. I personally am not somebody who receives acupuncture. I have in the past, but it's not that I'm in particular a fan of it, but I think that there are a number of people that have benefited from it. So, I think that's wonderful. Breath work and respiration work is something that I've cultivated as a practice over the years. I mentioned earlier, how I use it to push back on incoming infections and so forth. And now that doesn't sound like total... You know, like just a figment of my imagination, there's actually a mechanism, a published mechanism to explain it. But the most exciting thing to me about all this is that practices that traditionally have been shrouded in complicated language or were the unique domain of the practitioners and relied on phrases like the meridians or the chakras, of which I think is perfectly valid language, but doesn't inform mechanism. And then in a separate community, the community I come from, the community of scientists, have used language like PROKR2 neurons, medulla oblongata, vagal adrenal axis. And basically no one can communicate with one another because the language is shrouding. What we're now starting to see is that at their convergence is a common mechanism. And with that understanding, what's going to be really terrific is as new protocols start to emerge. So in understanding mechanisms and pathways, and in being able to understand the base set of practices like breathing, like electroacupuncture, and so forth, we can now start to daydream in a very realistic way about the development of new protocols, more effective protocols. Protocols that perhaps one can do at home without needles, perhaps protocols such as the breathing that you can do anywhere, anytime, and be confident that you're actually impacting the IL-6 and the IL-8 pathways, reducing those and increasing IL-10. So we are no longer wandering around in the fog hearing about these magical techniques without understanding why they work, nor are we just seeing a bunch of science that is descriptive, but not mechanistic or pointing to specific protocols. So, I'm just delighted. Again, I had nothing to do with this work, but really terrific work, Qiufu and colleagues. And I also want to acknowledge a journal as prominent as "Nature" for featuring this upfront, because I think it really does mark the beginning of a new path in medicine. And just to underscore that point a little bit further, the National Institutes of Health, of course has a cancer institute, an eye institute, that deal with trying to combat cancer and to cure blindness and so forth. And now they have what's called NCCIH, which has complimentary health. And so, there are good tax dollars being put to the kinds of explorations that we're talking about that undoubtedly are going to lead to better treatments for immunological diseases, neurological diseases, the convergence of the immune system and the nervous system. Very exciting times and I hope that by learning about some of this new and emerging science and hearing about some of the protocols that are either zero cost or low cost, certainly for respiration that's the case or for the use of heat or cold, or maybe even electroacupuncture if you have access to that, that we can really see that we're starting to evolve as a field of health and medicine and science and ancient practices, and that they're really starting to converge and have a vector, as we say, in a new and more exciting direction. Once again, we've covered a lot of information today. We learned about the immune system, the adaptive immune system, the innate immune system, and the nervous system and how those interact. And throughout, we discussed protocols that can allow you to tap into this relationship between the nervous system and immune system, and hopefully avoid and/or shorten the course of any illnesses, injuries, or inflammation that you might encounter. If you're enjoying and/or learning from this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. And also on YouTube, please leave us a comment. One of the best forms of comments you can give us are suggestions for future topics and future guests to have on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Please also subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you can also leave us up to a five star review and leave us a comment there as well if you like. In addition, please check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of each episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. And we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. A few times during this episode, and in many previous episodes, I mentioned supplements. Not everybody needs to take supplements, but many people find benefit from them. A key thing if you're going to take supplements is to know that the quality of the supplements that you're taking is very high and that's not always the case with many supplement brands. That's why we partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E. Thorne supplements are known to be of the very highest quality and the specificity of the ingredients is very high as well. Meaning what they list on the bottle is actually what's contained in that bottle. They've worked with the Mayo Clinic, all the major sports teams. So, trust is very, very high with Thorne products. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. And there, you can see all the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you enter the Thorne site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. That's T-H-O-R-N-E.com/u/huberman, to see the supplements that I take or get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following HubermanLab on Instagram, please do so. There I teach neuroscience and health-related topics, sometimes, but not always overlapping with the content of the podcast. We are also HubermanLab on Twitter. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light music]

========================================

--- Video 304 ---
Video ID: oUu3f0ETMJQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oUu3f0ETMJQ
Title: Dr. Samer Hattar: Timing Light, Food, & Exercise for Better Sleep, Energy & Mood
Published: 2021-10-25 12:00:21 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I host Dr. Samer Hattar, Chief of the Section on Light and Circadian Rhythms at the National Institute of Mental Health. Dr. Hattar is a world-renowned expert on how viewing light at particular times adjusts our mood, ability to learn, stress and hormone levels, appetite, and mental health. We discuss how to determine and use your individual light sensitivity to determine the optimal sleep-wake cycle for you. We also discuss how to combine your light viewing and waking time with the timing of your food intake and exercise in order to maximize mental and physical functioning. Dr. Hattar is credited with co-discovering the neurons in the eye that set our circadian clocks and regulate mood and appetite. He explains why even a small shift in daylight savings leads to outsized effects on our biking because of the way that our cells and circadian clocks integrate across many days. And he offers precise tools to rapidly adjust to jet lag, shift work, and reset your clock after a late night of work or socializing. This episode is filled with cutting-edge data on the biological mechanisms of human physiology and practical tools for people of all ages. 

#HubermanLab #Science #CircadianRhythm

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com -- code: "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Magic Spoon - https://www.magicspoon.com/huberman

Support Research in Huberman Lab at Stanford:
https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Samer Hattar:
Twitter: https://twitter.com/samerhattar
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/samerhattar
Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samer_Hattar

Links:
Graphical Explanation of Temperature Minimum for Overcoming Jetlag: https://www.instagram.com/tv/CKWiRVJHVwC/

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Samer Hattar, Ph.D.
00:02:17 Sponsors: ROKA, InsideTracker, Magic Spoon
00:06:15 Light, Circadian (24 hour) & Circannual (365 day) “Photoentrainment” 
00:14:30 Neurons in Our Eyes That Set Our Body Clocks: Similar to Frog Skin
00:18:55 What Blind People See 
00:20:15 When, How & How Long to View Light for Optimal Sleep & Wakefulness
00:30:20 Sunlight Simulators, Afternoon Light Viewing, Naps
00:33:48 Are You Jet Lagged at Home? Chronotypes & Why Early Risers Succeed 
00:38:33 How to Decide Your Best Sleep-Wake Schedule; Minimal Light Test
00:42:16 Viewing Light in Middle of Day: Mood & “Light Hunger”
00:44:55 Evening Sunlight; Blueblocker Warning
00:48:57 Blue Light Is Not the Issue; Samer’s Cave; Complete Darkness
00:53:58 Screens at Night
00:56:03 Dangers of Bright Light Between 10 pm and 4 am: Mood & Learning
01:01:05 The Tripartite Model: Circadian, Sleep Drive, Feeding Schedules
01:05:05 Using Light to Enhance Your Mood; & The Hattar-Hernandez Nucleus
01:07:19 Why Do We Sleep?
01:08:17 Effects of Light on Appetite; Regular Light & Meal Times
01:18:08 Samer’s Experience with Adjusting Meal Timing
01:22:51 Using Light to Align Sleep, Mood, Feeding, Exercise & Cognition
01:30:15 Age-Related Changes in Timing of Mental & Physical Vigor  
01:31:44 “Chrono-Attraction” in Relationships; Social-Rhythms
01:33:40 Re-setting Our Clock Schedule; Screen Devices Revisited
01:37:50 How Samer Got into the Study of Light 
01:39:33 Clock Gene mRNAs & More Accurate Biomarkers
01:41:08 Light as Medicine
01:42:48 ADHD (Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder) 
01:43:35 How to Beat Jet Lag: Light, Temperature, Eating
01:50:44 Vigor: The Consequence of Proper Timing 
01:52:15 Waking in the Middle of the Night: When Your Nightly Sleep Becomes a Nap
01:54:10 Melatonin, Pineal Calcification
01:55:25 Our Seasonal Rhythms: Mood, Depression, Lethargy & Reproduction
01:59:08 Daylight Savings: Much Worse Than It Might Seem 
02:05:27 Eye Color & Sensitivity to Light, Bipolar Disorder
02:09:28 Spicy Food, Genetic Variations in Sensory Sensitivity 
02:10:52 Synthesizing This Information, Samer on Twitter, Instagram
02:13:00 Conclusions, Ways To Support the Huberman Lab Podcast & Research

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Samer Hattar as my guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Dr. Hattar is the Chief of the Section on Light and Circadian Rhythms at the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Maryland. Dr. Hattar has many important discoveries to his name. He was one of a handful of groups that discovered the light sensing neurons in the eye that set the circadian clock. This is a fundamental discovery made in the early 2000s that has led to an enormous number of additional discoveries on how light regulates our sleep, our immune system, our mood, mental health, metabolism, feeding, and many other important processes. If ever there was somebody who understands how all of these processes interact and can inform best practices for our daily behaviors, it's Dr. Hattar. During our discussion today, Dr. Hattar answers questions that are absolutely essential for us to know about our health and wellbeing. For instance, how to align our sleep schedule with our activity schedule, such as exercise, and how to align light, activity and exercise with our feeding rhythms. He presents a new model of how light, activity, and feeding rhythms converge to support optimal health. And when those are not aligned correctly, how our mental and physical health can suffer. It's a discussion that is rich with scientific mechanism, made clearly, of course, so everybody can understand, as well as specific protocols to deal with shifts in day length, shifts in activity, and in order to optimize sleep, metabolism, and wellbeing of various kinds. I learned so much from Samer as I always do. He is an absolute wealth of knowledge on all things related to light and circadian rhythms, physiology, and neuroscience. I don't think you'll find anyone else as knowledgeable about these topics as Samer. And so, I'm delighted that he joined us here on the podcast to share this information. Before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent my career working on the science of the visual system and I can tell you that one of the things that our visual system has to contend with is adjusting so that when we go from a very bright area to a dim or shadowed area, we can still see things clearly. ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with the science of the visual system in mind. And so they make those transitions seamless. You always see things with crystal clarity. Another great thing about these glasses is that they're very lightweight, so you don't even really remember that they're on your face. And they won't slip off if you get sweaty. The glasses were designed initially for running and for cycling and for active wear, but they work great for that and they work great, and they also happen to look great for work, if you go out to dinner, for social settings, so they can really be worn in essentially any circumstances. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code "Huberman" to get 20% off your first order. That's ROKA.com, enter the code "Huberman" at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term health can only be detected in a quality blood test. The problem with a lot of blood tests out there, however, is you get numbers back, but you don't know what to do about those numbers specifically. ROKA has solved that problem at a number of levels. First of all, they make getting the blood tests very easy. They'll come to your house if you like, or you can go to a local clinic. Second of all, once you get your numbers back, there's a very easy to use dashboard where you can identify obviously what the numbers are, but also the various things that you can do to bring those numbers into the ranges that you want; through either behavioral practices like exercise, through nutritional practices or supplementation, et cetera. So they made the whole thing very easy start to finish, in a way that allows you to best direct your health goals. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans, just use the code "Huberman" at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. I am not ketogenic, meaning I don't follow a purely ketogenic diet. I tend to fast in the early part of the day, I tend to eat kind of low carbish through the middle of the day. And then in the evening I eat carbohydrates. That's what works best for me, and allows me to feel alert all day long, and to sleep really well at night. Magic Spoon is a terrific snack for me because it tastes terrific; it's got some sweetness, but it doesn't take me out of that state that I want to be in during the day where I'm sort of ketoish, I would say. I'm not actually in ketosis, but I'm following more or less a low carb diet during the day, which keeps me alert. So either fasting or low carb, and Magic Spoon is consistent with that. And then as I mentioned before in the evening, I do eat carbohydrates. Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar, 13 to 14 grams of protein, and only four net grams of carbohydrates in each serving. So I think it qualifies as low carbish or low carb. In addition, it only has 140 calories per serving. It's also just delicious. They have flavors like cocoa, fruity, peanut butter, frosted. I particularly liked the frosted one because it tastes like donuts, and I particularly like donuts. Although I try not to eat them too often if ever. If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to MagicSpoon.com/Huberman to grab a variety pack. You can use the promo code "Huberman" at checkout, and you'll get $5 off your order. Again, that's MagicSpoon.com/Huberman, and use the code "Huberman" to get $5 off. And now, my conversation with Dr. Samer Hattar. Samer, thanks for sitting down with me. - My pleasure. - Yeah, we go way back. So, you are best known in scientific circles for your work on how light impacts mood, learning, feeding, hunger, sleep, and these sorts of topics. So, just to kick the ball out onto the field, so to speak, how does light impact the way we feel? So, when I get up in the morning, I have the opportunity to interact with light in certain ways or to avoid light in certain ways. I have the opportunity to interact with sunlight or with artificial light. Maybe you could just wade us into what the relationship is between light and these things like mood and hunger, et cetera. - Sure. So, I mean, you do appreciate the effect of light for vision. So, when you wake up in a beautiful area, beautiful ocean, light is essential; the sunrise, the sunset, blue sky, beautiful mountains. So, that's your conscious perception of light, but light has a completely different aspect that is independent of conscious vision or image forming functions. And that's how it regulates many important functions in your body. I think the best that is well studied and well known is your circadian clock. And the word circadian comes from the word circa, which is approximate and diem is day. So, it's an approximate day. Why is it an approximate day? Because if I put you or any other human being who have a normal circadian clock in a constant conditions with no information about feeding time, about sleep time, about what time it is outside, you still have a daily rhythm, but it's not exactly 24 hours. So it will shift out of the solar day because it's not exactly 24 hours, and hence the name circadian. - So, just to ask a quick question about that. When you say you have this about 24 hour rhythm, how does that rhythm show up in the tissues of our body? - Great question. So, it shows up at every level that we know we studied; it shows up at the level of the cell. It shows up at the level of the tissue, and it shows up at your behavior. The most obvious for you is your sleep-wake cycle. You sleep and you're awake and sleep at the 24 hour rhythms. And if you measure the sleep-wake cycle of humans who are maintaining constant conditions, you will see that the period length of the sleep rhythm on average is more than 24 hours. In humans it's 24.2 hours. So you'll be drifting .2 hours every day out of the solar day if you don't get the sunlight. So the sunlight adjusts that approximate day to an exact day, so now your behavior is adjusted to the light-dark environment or the solar day. - Okay, so if I understand correctly, if I were to go into a cave- - Yeah. - Or I would to be in constant light. - Yeah. - And I didn't close my eyes- - Yeah. - In constant light, that I would still sleep in one coherent about. - Yes. - And I would still be awake for more or less one coherent about, maybe a nap. - Yes. - But the total duration of my day, so to speak, would be a little bit longer than 24 hours? - Perfect. - But if I'm in a condition like most people are where the sun goes up and the sun goes down, and I have some understanding of that sunrise and sunset, then- - You don't have the understanding, you don't have to have conscious understanding. You have the detection. - Right. - So, circadian photoentrainment is the word we use, entraining the circadian clock to the photic environment is completely subconscious. You're not aware of it. It's not like vision or image forming, where you actually know what you're looking at. So, it's all hypothalamic. It's part of the brain that is not consciously driven. So, you actually do not know when it happens or when it doesn't happen. And that's what we'll get into when I tell you why light affects your mood and why sometimes people don't know how to deal with light to improve their mood, for example. - Okay, so this is a subconscious vision. - Yes. - Okay. Before you tell us about how light impacts mood, I'm curious, what is the relevance of adjusting this clock from a little bit longer than 24 hours to 24 hours? I mean, it seems like a small difference, 24 hours and 40 minutes or 24 hours. Like what's the relevance? I mean, why should we care about that short difference? - So, let's do the math. If you shift out .2 hours a day, in five days you're shifting out one hour. So you're literally one hour off in your social behavior in five days. In 10 days, you're two hours off. And if you're an organism that is living in the wild, shifting out of the right phase of the cycle, you could either miss food or you could become food. So it's really essential for survival. I think it's one of the strongest aspect of survival for animals to have the anticipation and the adjustment to the solar cycle. - And for humans as well. When you say animals, I'm assuming that applies to us? - Absolutely, yeah. - I see. So even though it's just a short bit longer than 24, if that accumulates over days, then you could find yourself very much out of phase with the rest of your species essentially. - Yeah, so let's say it's .2 hours. So, in five days it's one hour. In 25 days it could be five or six hours. You could be in New York and you're feeling as if you traveled from New York to London. So, you would be having jet lag in New York, even though you didn't do a jet lag travel. So it's very important for the adjustment. And if we have time, maybe we could talk about why this is important for seasonality, because also it allows animals to anticipate the change in season. And the more you're high in the north or the south, the more that these weather changes occur very harshly, and you have to be ready for them. And that happens in us as well. - All right, well, we will definitely get into seasonality. Okay, so we've got this subconscious vision that aligns us with the turn of the earth. How does that work? What is the machinery that allows that to happen? And how does that machinery work? - Yeah, so, we knew that in mammals, including us, we are mammals, humans, that the eyes are required for this function. So, if humans are born without eyes, or the optic nerves are damaged, humans are not able to adjust to the solar cycle. So we know that the eyes are required. And since we thought we knew about the eyes a lot before 2000, we thought that- - You say before the year 2000? - Before the year 2000, yes. - Mm hm, yep. - We thought it's these photoreceptors in your retina that allow you to see. So, in the human retinas, there are two types of photoreceptors; they are called rods and cones because of their shapes. And these rods and cones simply take the photon energy, which light is made of, and they change it in a way to an electrical signal that allow us to build the image of the environment in our cortices. - Subconsciously? - Consciously in this situation cause it's vision, right? It's image forming vision, it's a visual cortex, and associative cortices, which allow you to build conscious perception of the environment. However, people have found, including me with the work of David Berson and Ignacio Provencio, that there is a subset of ganglion cells. The ganglion cells are the cells that leave the retina, their axon leave the retina and project to the brain. So these were thought to only relay rod and cone information from the light environment to the brain. We found that a small subset of these ganglion cells are themselves photoreceptors that were completely missed in the retina. And these are the photoreceptors that relay light environment subconsciously to the areas in the brain that have and house the circadian clock or the circadian pacemaker, which adjusts all the clocks in our bodies to the central brain clock that allows them to entrain to the 24 hour light-dark cycle. - Incredible. So, as I recall 'cause I was a graduate student at the time, in the year 2000, there was this landmark discovery made by you, Ignacio Provencio, David Berson, and others, that these cells exists that can communicate day and night information to the brain. - Yeah. - In this very small subset of cells. Since then, I've heard, but maybe you can confirm or refute that this system that connects the eyes to the rest of the brain is actually the most ancient form of vision. That this is probably the form of vision that some early version of human beings had before they had pattern vision, before they could see colors and shapes and motion and all that. And that the same cells that perform this role are actually similar to insect eyes. I think I heard David Berson say once that we actually have a little bit of the fly eye in our eye. What's he talking about? - Yeah. So, it's really interesting actually, because these same ipRCGs we discovered they contribute a little bit to image formation. And now, work from Tiffany Schmidt specifically have proven that they do contribute to image forming functions. But they contribute to very limited aspect of image formation. So, it fits your hypothesis that these are an ancient photoreceptors. The other thing that adds to that hypothesis is that they are expressed in cells that don't have any modification that make them look like photoreceptors. So, the photoreceptors that I told you about that are important for vision, image formation, they have very specialized structures that allow them to pack these structures with photopigments; these are the photo-detecting proteins, so they could detect a high sensitivity of photons that pass through them. These new photoreceptors don't have these specialized structures. So they just really need a lot of light at the time, we thought they need a lot of light to be activated. So that's why we think they are ancient. And that's why we think they adjust to ancient functions that are as important as regulating your body circadian clock to the solar environment, to solar day or to the light-dark cycle. - So, you mentioned ipRCGs, intrinsically photosensitive. So these are cells that connect the eye of the brain that behave like photoreceptors. - Right. - Essentially. And then you mentioned melanopsin, which is the actual pigment that converts the light into the electrical signal- - Yeah. - More or less. And my understanding is that melanopsin was identified first in frog melanophores. - Yes. - So does that mean that we have like little pieces of frog skin in our eyes? - So, honestly, David Berson say you have a fly in your eye because it sounds better. The more accurate I think is that you have a frog skin in your eye. It's not as catchy, but really, the name melanopsin is from melanocyte opsin, so it's melanopsin because it was found in the frog melanocytes. You know the frogs can change their color depending on light and melanopsin drives this response. So when Ignacio Provencio first discovered these opsins in frogs, luckily he was smart enough to see if they are expressed in the frog eye. They were expressed in the frog eye and it what appears to be retinal ganglion cells, which I told you, the one that connects the eye to the brain. He had the insight to go and see if they are expressed in the monkey eye. And he found that they are also expressed in what appears to be retinal ganglion cells, and really that what opened the field wide open. Then David Berson did the seminal experiment where he went to the brain where the central oscillator, the oscillator that drives circadian rhythm in the brain called the suprachiasmatic nucleus, that has been known for many years to receive retinal input. And he labeled the cells that project there. And then he found that even if you destroy rods and cones, you could get light responses from these cells. So you could imagine he nearly fainted when he saw that these cells can respond independent, completely in the absence of rod and cone input. - Yeah, I'll never forget reading those papers in 2000, 2001. I was at the meeting in DC when Ignacio, Iggy, we call him Iggy, showed this image of this basically what is frog melanophores in the human eye. - Yes. - [Andrew] And everyone was like, "oh my goodness, this is the thing." - Yeah. - And I want to get into how light actually can control circadian rhythms. In a moment. - Absolutely. - But I think it's worth mentioning now that people who are pattern vision blind, so people who cannot see and no conscious vision, but have eyes, many of them still have these cells; these melanopsin intrinsically photosensitive cells, and can essentially match or entrain, as we say, onto the light-dark cycle. - In fact, they possibly have no problems in circadian photoentrainment, they'll have a normal sleep-wake cycle. - But they're totally blind? - But they are totally image blind. And what's really interesting is that, and this story I heard from Chuck Czeisler, so I'll give him credit, that some of these people who are image blind, usually they get dry eyes and they give them a lot of pain. And doctors used to think, oh, since they are image blind and they're getting dry eye, why don't you just remove their eyes? They're not using them anymore. And the minute they would remove their eyes, they start having cyclical sleep problems indicating that now they are not entraining to the light-dark cycle and are having cyclical jet lags when their clock shifts through the light-dark cycle. - That's really interesting. And I hear from a number of blind people in my various aspects of my job, and a lot of them have issues with sleep. I think, in part because they don't realize that they too need to see light at particular times of day or night in order to match their schedule. - Absolutely. - Well, I think that's a perfect segue for us to talk about how light and viewing light can impact our sleep-wake rhythms. And then we'll move into some of the other ways in which light can impact other forms of bodily function. - Yeah, so I love the way you set it up because one of the most interesting and difficult aspect of trying to educate people about light effect on subconscious vision is that it's subconscious. So we're all aware of what we think is intensity because we see the room, but if you talk to people who know how to take photographs and stuff like that, they know that the intensities varies greatly. But our system, because we have to see the same way in very bright conditions and very dim conditions, we're not very good at estimating intensity consciously. So when you try to tell people about intensity, you really struggle because they think they know intensity, but they really don't. - You mean light intensity? - Light intensity. - Yeah. - So the cones themselves have an incredible ability to adapt to different light conditions. So you can see at all different conditions. Otherwise it'd be a disaster. If you don't change the setting on your camera and you go from inside the room to the outside, it becomes completely white, you don't see anything. So if your cones don't adapt to the environment, then you're not going to be able to see in this room and on the beach, right? But the problem is your ipRCGs, the cells that we talked about, they measure intensity pretty well. They really know what intensity is. They have a very good linear measurement of intensity. They don't adapt as well. They don't adapt actually that much, to be honest. So that tells you that subconsciously the system is used to measuring light intensity in a natural environment, because when you are now in the natural environment, you don't have industrialized lighting, then your system is functioning very well. But now when we change these environments, we could really mess up ourselves. So you have to teach people how to understand intensity. And that's something that you have to explain to people. And I think I love to do it myself. I do it in what is called the lowest amount of light required to allow you to see comfortably. So you have to do this as an fun experiment. - Okay, so explain to me how this goes. And maybe we could break up the day into three or four parts. So let's say assuming that most people wake up in the morning- - Mm hm. - As opposed to night shift workers, et cetera, we could talk about later. - Right. - But they wake up in the morning, so let's divide the day into quarters. What is the proper way to interact with light in the first part of the day? - So, I honestly think the easiest thing is waking up, get as much light as you can. - To your eyes? - Yeah, it's really nice. Your system is prime. If you're entrained, it's prime to get light, the sun should be out. Most animals in the wild, they actually seem to track the sun. The sun has a huge influence on life on earth. It's actually life on earth is because of sun. So, that's easy. In the morning when you wake up, you need light. Just get the light. - Okay, so what is the behavioral practice that you recommend? Let's say somebody is in a condition where there's a lot of cloud cover. - Yeah. - Is it important to get outside? - So, I have to tell you, the cloudiest day is going to be much more brighter than your room. You could ask any photographer. A cloudy day, unless it's really dark, dark clouds, usually cloudy days have much more light outside than inside the room, even when you have good lighting inside the room. So I think in the outside is usually even when it's cloudy, you're going to get to enough intensity to help you adjust your cycle to the day-night cycle. - So, how long do you... These are general rules of thumb, but how long do you recommend people go outside? - So, if you do it daily, you possibly need very few. If you do it daily, because remember this thing is going to happen on a daily matter. So, let's say 15 minutes. - So, the clock is tracking it on a regular basis? - Absolutely. It's photon counting, it's tracking. I would say 15 minutes. If you don't do it daily, you may want to increase it. And we'll talk about when you travel, what you could do, but yeah, 15 minutes should be fine. You do it more, it doesn't hurt. - And through a window, my understanding is that through a window, it dramatically decreases the amount of light energy coming in. - It depends on how thick the windows are and how dark they are. So, but it's also nice to go outside and to feel the seasons. - Sunglasses off? - I don't use sunglasses. - Yeah, but you have your Jordanian photopigment. - Yeah, yeah, that's right. - You know, so, yeah. Whereas my eyes are very sensitive, right? - No, but I personally, if I'm in the shade or if it's not incredibly bright, I try to, especially in the morning, but I'm also an early person. So we have to differentiate between early- - What time do you wake up? - I wake up at 4:30 in the morning. - But the sun isn't out yet. - It's not out yet, so it's- - So, what do you do? You turn on artificial lights? - I usually don't turn on artificial light because I know the sun is going to come up eventually, but that's why I don't like the change in the timing that they do. - Wait, but what do you do between 4:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.? - I mean, I look at my computer, and my phone. - Oh, I see. - So possibly I get enough light, but in reality, I mean as long as you let your body get the morning sunlight, which I think is really, to me and there is no evidence of this, but to me, if you look at all animals, plants, this morning sunlight seems to be very important. And we don't have experiments to show it, but I have a gut feeling that it has a huge impact on humans. - Well, Jamie Zeitzer's lab at the Stanford Sleep Lab has shown that these early morning light flashes can adjust the total amount of sleep- - Absolutely. - That one will get. It makes it easier to get into sleep. - Absolutely, absolutely. And Ken Wright also did this beautiful camping experiments that showed that- - Maybe you could describe those 'cause those are beautiful experiments. - Oh, yeah, they are beautiful experiments. He took these college students that had a late onset of sleep and late waking time, and then he said, let's go camping and just don't use any artificial light and you could go to sleep as late or as early as you want, and wake up as late or as early. And he found a huge shift in their sleep pattern just by exposing them to the light-dark cycle. I mean, so- - And it has lasted. - And it lasted, yeah. - Even after they came back. - Exactly. - Those two days of camping reset the circadian clock? - Seven days, but it lasted. Yeah, it's pretty amazing. Yeah, it's really incredible. - Okay, so get bright light of some sort early in the day, ideally sunlight, even on a cloudy day, it's going to be- - Absolutely. - Brighter than indoor light. - So that's easy. - Okay, so then- - And the other thing that I would like to mention to people, if you think it's very dim outside, let's say it's very cloudy, stay longer. So remember intensity is only one component. Duration is also important because remember that the circadian system is not like the image system. In the image system you have to change every second because you're looking at different objects. You have to change your perception. But for the circadian system it's trying to figure out where am I in the day-night cycle? So the more you give them the information, the better you are. So, if it's very bright, you don't need a lot because it's clearly going to make you fire like crazy. But if it's not bright, stay longer, stay for one hour. You know, have your coffee outside or something like that. It's just going to help. - I think you said something extremely important, which is that this circadian system is trying to figure out when you are in time. - Exactly. - Not where you are in space. - Sorry, I said, where you are in time. - Yeah. - I mean when you are. - Oh no, no, I wasn't correcting you. I just meant that I think fundamentally that's the incredible thing about this system. - Absolutely. - That you have this clock, this 24 hour clock in your brain, but it needs to be synchronized to the outside. So could we go a little deeper into this circadian setting behavior and come up with some general rules of thumb? So, let's say it's a very bright day. - Mm hm, mm hm. - Extremely bright. No clouds, the sun's out. You said 10 minutes, 15 minutes. - And I'll tell you if you're sensitive, you don't even have to go in the sun. You could be in the shade. There's going to be so many photons out there in the shade. It's going to be perfect. You don't even have to see the sun. You don't have to have the sun. You know, it's great for vitamin D, that's a different story. You could do this for your skin and protect your skin. That's not my area of expertise, but for that effect on the circadian system, as long as you're outside in the shade and it's sunny day, 10 to 15 minutes should be ample amount. - Okay and then let's say it's kind of overcast. You know, it's not particularly bright or there's solid cloud cover, but obviously the sun is out, but it's not as bright. How long do you think it would take to set the clock? - 10 to 15 should be sufficient. Stay for half an hour. Stay for 45 minutes. If it's very darker out, stay for longer. - Okay and if for some reason, one finds themselves very far north, and it's very, very dense a cloud cover. How long and at what point should somebody consider using an artificial light source to mimic the sunlight? - Yeah, honestly, this is where we don't have a lot of information still, because this is where we're going to discuss this maybe in more detail, that if you put humans in artificial conditions, the circadian system is very sensitive to light, but in reality, in the real environment, light also is affecting other aspects that are independent of the setting of the circadian pacemaker. - Okay. - And these which we call the direct effect of light on mood, for example. So, that is very hard to figure out what intensity you need to use. And we haven't done enough experiments 'cause this system has been discovered just recently. But I would say if you use bright light in the morning, and I mean, it's hard for me to give numbers. It can get complicated. But yeah, I mean, honestly, if you're that far north and you're in the winter and you make sure you don't, use these light boxes. I would suggest that personally, but that's it. - I use, it's actually not designed for circadian setting, but I have a 930 lux light pad that I bought and I bought it, they're very affordable compared to the dawn simulating lights. - Yeah, you don't need them. - Which are quite expensive, frankly. - Yeah. - And I put it there. And so, just basically, when I wake up in the morning, I use that until the sun comes out, and then I make sure once the sun is out, I go outside. But I keep that thing on all day. And I don't know if that's good or bad. Is a good or bad? - I, honestly, I don't think being exposed to bright light in the day is going to ever be bad because really if you're outside in the day... Unless, you know, the worst that's going to happen if the temperature is very high, your body's going to say don't dehydrate and go to sleep. So you could tell actually sometimes when it's very hot, the more you get exposed to bright light, the sleepier you feel in the afternoon, which is counter-intuitive. - Mm hm. And that's to protect us, you think, against dehydration? - I think if you think about the human evolution from near the equator in between noon and a certain time in the afternoon, it would have been very hard for you to maintain physiological homeostatic function, being active at this very high temperature time. So I think napping was a way, that's why I think it has a major function which is still... Napping was a way to somehow take you away from that dangerous zone. And maybe that's why people in the north they say, in the winter we can't wake up in the morning 'cause they don't have this long light. So, they sleep more at night. But in the summer they say, we feel like we can't go to sleep. We have to put all these dark curtains. So, I think, venturing that much up north has been... Came up with a problem because evolution was used to a certain light environment that was completely changed with a human. With other animals, I think that lived there longer, they have come up with very interesting adaptation of actually measuring even very small changes in the light intensities that still occur. And so, even if you're near the poles, even though it's always light, but there is a change in the light intensity across the day-night cycle. So, your system, if it's linear, and remember I told you that ipRCGs are incredibly linear, can still measure, oh, this is lower light than higher light if the organism has the ability to do that. - I see, yeah, it's interesting. I've spent so much time learning from you fortunately about these cells, and yet I never really appreciated until now how on the one hand they are tracking the amount of light to understand when we are in time relative to the 24 hour cycle, but also that you keep mentioning this linear measurement of intensity; that they really are trying to figure out when we are in time by measuring the intensity of light. And of course the sun is the most intense source of light available to us. So, okay, so I think we've nailed down that first part of the day. - Exactly. - Basically it's get 10 to 30 minutes depending on how bright it is, and try and do that as often as possible to give the system a regular source- - Daily is the best. This system is really about, and you'll see that even for the effect on depression, it's about multiple days it is. So you don't have to worry if you missed it one day, stay longer if you want. But if you're in a hurry and you want to do other stuff, that's a great recommendation. - Mm hm, so you might want to compensate with some extra time if you missed a day or two. - Absolutely. - And this is why I've heard you say before, it's entirely possible to get severely jet lagged without traveling. - Absolutely. - Simply by staying in, being on your phone too much, not getting the sunlight. - Absolutely. And you saw this during the pandemic. A lot of people mentioned that their sleep-wake cycles suffered a lot. Because if you're not going out and if you're staying at home and you don't have big windows and you're waking late, waking up late, and then you're using very bright light too late at night, your body is going to shift. And now, your day is going to start instead of like really when the sun comes up, let's say at six o'clock in the morning, so your day is going to start at 11 o'clock in the morning. That's what your body's going to think is the beginning of the day. So, then you're not going to be able to sleep at 10 o'clock at night, because now that's really for your body, it's completely different timing. And you could see this happen during the pandemic at a very high scale. People get delayed in their sleep-wake cycle a lot. - And there is this idea of chronotypes, that we all each intrinsically have a best rhythm of either being a morning person. - Absolutely. - You called yourself an early person, or a night owl, or more of a kind of standard to bed around 10:30, up around 7:00 type thing. And I think there are now good data, correct me if I'm wrong, from the National Institutes of Mental Health and elsewhere showing that the more we deviate from that intrinsic rhythm, the more mental health issues and physical health issues start to crop up. - So, there is great data on this, and there is a couple of things that complicate this. The first is the people who usually are late, they tell you that the society doesn't accommodate. - By late, what do you mean? People that wake up late and go to sleep late? - Go to sleep late and wake up late. They have an overwhelmingly higher level of depression and failures. I mean, clearly, I mean, the reason the people say sleep early, wake up early, you're better because human notice that people who go to sleep early and wake up early, they do better in life. They notice that. - They just perform better? - They perform, but the question is, is that intrinsic to the system or is that society because society start things usually early or late? That's a hard question to ask- - We discriminate against late risers. - In a way, we discriminate, right? But the other explanation is Ken Wright's experiment. These late riser, if they were truly chronotypically late, why would they shift so easily when you put them in the... If you were really chronotypically late, and there is a phase relation between the light-dark environment and your circadian clock, then doing this camping experiment should not have caused much changes because it's not that light is going to affect you in a certain way, it's that this is the relationship that your body decided that I'm a late sleeper, late waking. So, I'm honestly, I'm still unable to figure out how much of this late waking up is controlled by the light environment and how much is intrinsic. I'm sure there are differences, but are they as big as we see in the environment? Because you have people that go off to sleep a 7:00 p.m. and wake up at 1:00 a.m.. These are clearly advanced phase- - So people that go to sleep at 7:00 p.m. and wake up at 1:00 a.m.? - Yeah. - And feel good doing that? - I'm not so sure they feel good, but a lot of the time you talk to people, they say they are high achievers, but they suffer because they go to 7:00 p.m., wake up advanced phase sleep syndrome. They call it a syndrome, but then you have people who would not be able to sleep till 5:00 a.m., and not be able to wake up till 3:00 p.m., right? And I'm not so sure that the circadian system is that variable in the human population. I mean, clearly there are maybe some genetic factors that make a small percentage of like everything with the bell shape. But I think most of the time, the light environment may play a role. And once, as we've talked about, this as a long-term effect of light. Once you get into a rhythm, and I don't mean it as a pun, in reality, once you get into a rhythm, it's hard to break out of that rhythm because if you start sleeping late and waking up late, you're not getting the morning sunlight. - Right. - And so, you're just going to be late. And if you're like me waking up early, you're getting the morning sunlight. You're getting what Zeitzer said... I said his last name wrong. The one in Stanford who did the- - Oh, Jamie Zeitzer, yeah. - Zeitzer, yeah. - [Andrew] He actually worked for- - Zeitzer, yeah. - Zeitzer. So, Zeitzer and Czeisler. - Yeah, it's confusing. - Yeah, there are a lot of zz's and i's in their names. - Yeah. - Both phenomenal scientists. - Yeah. - What it seems to me is the case is that the only way to really know if you're meant to be an early bird as they call it, an early person or a late person, or somewhere in between is to get morning sunlight, and figure out whether or not that makes you feel better. - And to understand, to be educated about how to measure intensity. "How to measure" I put in quotation 'cause you either get a measuring device, but you cannot depend on your eye to measure intensity. - Okay, so how do we do that? 'Cause you keep coming back to this. So, that tells me that it's important. - It's very important. - So, obviously, so there are apps, free apps like Light Meter, where you can walk around and hold the button down and see how many lux are in the environment. - These are complicated because you have to point them to specific regions. - Right. So, how do people start to develop an intuitive sense of the measurement of intensity? - Yeah, I think at one point I posted on Instagram, how I keep my nighttime at home. And I found out that my night vision is very strong. So I found out that I, especially in the winter, I only need candle lights. So I literally use these tea lights, and I put like 15 or 20 of them- - How romantic. - And it's so nice. I could see it clearly doesn't affect my circadian system. - You and your cats- - And my wife. - And your wife of course. - It's just great, right? But I don't expect people to have the same night vision as me. So, I mean, I tell people, do the experiment. So if you put three or four lights in your room, switch two, sit for 15 minutes. - Switch two off? - Switch two off. Let's say you're using five. And see, after 15 minutes, you will not recognize you switched these two off. My gut feeling is that most people would need at least 10 times less light than they use at night to see. The problem people use it because most of the time they didn't see the morning sunlight. They are actually hungry for light without their knowledge. So they come switch all these lights on, but at the wrong time. Because they woke up late. - Okay, now I understand. So, this morning light viewing goes way beyond- - Absolutely, absolutely. - Setting your clock. It's also a way to determine how little light you need later in the day. - Exactly. - And we're going to talk about this in a moment, but how little light you get later in the day is a very strong determinant of things like when you will wake up, whether or not you wake up feeling refreshed, et cetera. Let's move- - And that's why, - Yeah? - I'm going to break it on your show, Andrew, that I'm going to tell you, I think there is something else that people do need to think about, which is the tripartite model. That this model incorporate three components we should talk about in details that allows us humans and all animals to incorporate the circadian clock, and its relation to light, the homeostatic drive, and the direct effect of the environment, which includes stress, light, all kinds of stuff. They have to be incorporated together. If you think, that's what I think right now, if you think of one alone, you will always miss something. And when you think of them as a whole, things really become clear. It's actually quite amazing. - Okay, well, we will definitely want to hear about your tripartite theory and go into detail about those homeostatic mechanisms. I want to make sure that for people who are thinking now, I'm sure about light and how it impacts them. So the morning light viewing behavior, I like to think we've tacked down clearly. - Absolutely. - And thank you for that because there's so much information out there and I've tried to relay that information. Of course, you're my primary source for all things circadian, as well as Jamie and others, of course, and Matt Walker. But I think you've made that very, very clear. Now, let's say I've gotten my morning sunlight. Okay, great. Maybe my bright artificial light, and throughout the day you said to get a lot of light. So, I'm working at my desk. Maybe I'll go out during the day a few times, but I'm working at my computer, I'm doing things. Is there anything about light viewing in the middle of the day that people should keep in mind? Or can they just sort of freestyle it depending on what they're doing? Most people are not in a dark room throughout the day- - Yeah, so my gut feeling, if you've got your morning sunlight, you walk from your car slowly or you walk to work, you didn't wear sunglasses when the lights were still dim in the morning, that you could freestyle it. That even if you don't get a lot of light, there is a way to just... In the day, you don't have to just worry about getting a lot of bright light, but personally, I like to do that. So I go out at lunch and have my lunch outside as well. This reminds the body that here it is even brighter now. But the evidence is that you could literally help your circadian clock by giving lights at dawn and dusk. But again, if you think of the tripartite model, this may be important for the circadian clock, but is it important for your mood? So that's where I think you need, or the homeostatic drive. So that's where you need to think about it. So, for the clock, for entraining your clock, you literally can entrain it only by the dawn sunlight. You actually don't need dawn and dusk. People usually forget that. - Yeah and I appreciate that you're distinguishing between circadian effects and other effects of lights. - Yes. - You're being very precise, which is appreciated. Until we hear about this tripartite model, which we will cover, for the sake of the discussion, let's treat the light viewing behavior as what are the benefits or drawbacks of viewing light for all biological purposes, not just circadian settings? So, in the morning, it's clearly going to set the clock. And then, during the day, if I understand correctly, the idea is to get as much bright light as you can, because you're feeding, it sounds like a sort of light hunger. - Exactly. - I see. - I love this way to put it. I think there is a weird light hunger considering that we're not photosynthetic organisms. There is a weird light hungers in animals that they need measure. And I think that relates to the season because the whole reproduction cycle of animals is going to depend on the availability of food in the environment. And if you don't know when the season is going to happen, they don't have calendars, it's going to be very hard to survive. So I think that's why we have this light hunger. That's a major hypothesis. It's not been tested. - Interesting. So, then afternoon and evening start to approach. So, I've had this weird experience. Maybe you can psychologically or biologically diagnosed me now, Samer. So, where if I go into a movie in the afternoon, like a matinee. - Uh huh. - And I come out and it's dark, I notice a significant drop in my mood and my ability to go to sleep. Whereas if I get some view of the light in the evening, it doesn't have to be the sunset, although sunsets are nice, but I get some light pulse in the afternoon that I have no trouble whatsoever falling asleep. - And this happens on a single time to watch them? - Yeah, more or less. - Wow, that's interesting. - And then you mentioned the camping experiment where when they went camping, they're seeing the sunrise and the sunset. - [Samer] Mm hm, mm hm. - So what should people do in the afternoon slash evening time in terms of their light viewing behavior? - I mean, the best thing to do is to let the natural light creep into darkness, right? That would be the best, but clearly that would be inefficient. You want to go home, you want to read, you want to talk to your kids, you want to talk to your family. So, I think it's nice to extend the day. I don't think that's wrong. If you somehow can block that light from affecting your circadian clock. - So, should people use blue blockers in the evening? - I personally do not like any blockers that take a single wavelength of light. Because again, if you think of a holistic approach, yes, the blue blocker is going to prevent you from affecting your circadian clock very much. But then your vision is going to be distorted because we always see in full spectrum, the sun has this beautiful spectrum, right? And then when you start seeing without the blue, things look yellow and it can get really weird, right? I mean, so I personally, I've tried the blue blocker and I couldn't even wear them. I thought they were just really horrendous to be honest. - Well, along the lines of blue blockers, I think a lot of people mistakenly wear them all day long. - Oh my God, that would be very bad. - A lot of people do that. - That would be very bad. - A lot of people do that. They think that blue light is bad. I think that the- - No, no, no. - The concept of blue light being bad led to a lot of product development. And a lot of people are just assuming that viewing blue light is what was giving them headaches. When in fact it might've just been looking at screens at close distance all day. - So, here's the problem, right? I mean, the blue light got the bad reputation because people who gave a pure blue light showed that it 'caused a huge retinal damage. But again, if you're using blue light in its pure form, it has a lot of energy because it's shorter wavelength, but we're talking about full spectrum light. There are ways now where you could change the spectrum of the light and keep it white between day and night and change the content of the color without you noticing. So you don't even have to affect your vision. - So how would you go about doing that? - So, you just lower the level of the blue light. You don't have to eliminate it. - So just dim the lights? - Dim the blue, then increase the yellow, but keep all the colors in a certain white. So, you know, you could have different warmness of white. And people know how to do this. Physicist know how to do this. People who work with light know how to do this. - Well, maybe somebody in the wellness slash, I don't like the word, but biohacking, or optical community will do this. I think it's really important, I see so many people wearing blue blockers. - They have meetings now. I don't know why they block- - Well, I think they're just uninformed. I think, frankly- - Yeah and to be honest, it's easy, right? It's easier to explain to somebody if ipRCGs respond mostly to blue, remove blue, you'll be fine. - Right, right. - Right? But that's not as simple as that because they also receive rod and cone input. So you want to actually... And we could go into details, that's boring for your listeners, but it also affect the adaptation properties of the whole retina. So you don't want to do something so drastic that you take just one color of the spectrum. It just seems very counter intuitive to me, to be honest. - You've told me before as well, that just because these intrinsically photosensitive circadian setting ganglion cells respond best to blue light, if the light is bright enough because they also get input from other components of the eye, it doesn't matter if you block the blues. - Yeah. - If you're looking at bright light at night, you're going to disrupt your circadian cycle. - Absolutely and that's why I didn't want to go into the boring details, but themselves, the photoreceptors have a wide range of responsiveness. So they are more sensitive to blue light, but that doesn't mean they don't respond to green light or to shorter than blue light. They respond to very, very wide spectrum with different sensitivity. So unless you understand the system just removing 480, I don't think it's going to do- - 480 nanometers, yeah. So, your home is a cave at night basically with some- - It's a nice cave. - It's nice cave. - Yeah. - With candles. - That's right. - Right and you and your cats- - And I watch TV and dim it. - And your lovely wife. - Yeah. - Who I know, who's also a phenomenal scientist in her own right. - Thank you, yeah, she is. - She is. But you do keep your home quite dim to dark at night? - Yeah. In fact, I did go to meetings with some of my friends who work on this and they really struggled with me. They said we could have broken our legs living in the same light environment that you do. So I am an extreme, but I measured it for myself. And I asked, Rejji, my wife, if she's okay with it. She also liked the dimness. Both of us can see well in dim conditions. And that helps us a lot, but I think you have to measure it for yourself. You really have to... It's a very simple experiment. Just try to dim the light as much as you can. I call it the minimum amount of light you require to see comfortably. - And that's how you want your environment ideally at night? - At night. This is what I think is the game changer. If you reach to a level where it's just barely, you're literally on the cusp of seeing uncomfortably versus seeing very comfortably, you are going to be very much better than I don't like to make it completely dark. I think complete darkness induce anxiety in humans, to be honest. So I don't like complete darkness. - Kids don't like complete darkness. They like a nightlight. - Even animal, even nocturnal animals don't like complete darkness. I mean, we have studies in animals that are nocturnal, that if you put them in complete darkness for several weeks, they have severe anxiety and depression like effect. So keep the light dim, use red light that is very dim, if you want to keep the room for sleeping. Red light that is very dim has very small effect on the circadian clock. And below 10 lux of red light, literally doesn't affect sleep at all. So there are ways to do it. It's just we need to educate the public. And I feel like you literally need a whole lecture to just explain to the people how to deal with light because it's not as simple as people think. - Well, that's what we're doing here. - Yeah. - We're stepping through it piece by piece and the reason we're doing that is because it's not as simple as saying, just block blue light or get a lot of light during the day, and minimal at night. - I mean, just to put it in perspective and tell that we only have three different cones in our retina that respond to three different colors. We call them red cones for simplicity, green cones and blue cones. Yet we have only three of these, but we could see massive palette of colors. So that tells you something. If the system was just simply about a single color and us just removing 480 or just blue is sufficient, then we should only see in red, yellow, and blue. We shouldn't see all these different hues of color, but because the system is not that, we see all these different colors. And that's why it's important to remind people that the white light is made of many different colors. It's actually like the rainbow. That's why you see the rainbow, it's made of many colors. White light is never truly white. It's made of lot of different colors. - It's like the Pink Floyd album cover. - Exactly. - With the light coming through the prism. - Exactly, exactly. - So, dim at night, maybe dim red light ideally, or candle light. Find that minimum required light level. - Test it, just make sure when you lower the lights, sit for at least 10 to 15 minutes, let your system adapt. Because if you had a bright light and you switch it off, surely you're going to suffer because your system didn't adapt yet; it was used to very bright light. So you want to engage your rods, which take a long time to dark adapt. So that's why I tell you, just wait a little bit. Don't just switch it off and now I don't see, put it on. Put it off, sit down, wait for 10 minutes, ideally 15 minutes and then see how you see. And then once you do that, you will notice that actually, yeah, I could see quite well even with much less light. - What do you do regarding screens? - Yeah, that's the hardest thing. Again, I mean, there are beautiful programs that change the whole intensity and color of the screen. These could help dim your screen at night to the lowest part. I mean, yes, you won't see it when you wake up in the morning, but then you can increase that intensity. So, try to decrease. I mean, just what we were talking about. Think of light intensity, duration, color, and time of day. You really have to keep these four things together, right? - We've roomed together at a couple meetings from time to time, no longer, because one of us not to be named has a severe snoring issue that made the other one pseudo-homicidal. [Samer laughing] You can guess who that was. But I've seen you check your phone after dark once or twice. - Mm hm. - And you did it by sort of pointing your phone away from you, right? - Exactly, yep, absolutely. - And actually I'm sort of half joking, and you dim it quite a bit. - Yeah, dim it quite a lot. - I'm sort of half joking, but it actually makes sense that if you shine a flashlight in your eye, it's much brighter than if you shine a flashlight- - Light only go in direct line, so if you'd just look on the side, most of the light is going to go this way, and you're only seeing this way. - Okay, so, and as silly as that might seem to people listening, I mean what it means is that getting bright light in your eyes at night is something that you really want to avoid. But there is the reality that- - And even when I check sometimes if I have something, and I check it so fast and switch it off so fast. So I'm also aware of duration- - Not my messages. - I'm also aware of the duration, right? So duration, intensity, color, and time of day. Ideally I should not check iPhones an iPads. I don't use iPad at night because it's hard to lower it enough 'cause it's a huge. But even my iPhone, I try not to use it at night. And like once it becomes 8:30 or 9:00, I don't look at it at all. - Unless it's World Cup or Euro Cup, in which case Samer's on 24 hours, everybody. - Right, that's only every four years. - He's a big soccer fan. All right, this has been incredibly, no pun, illuminating. Let's talk about the relationship between light and some of these other non-circadian or pseudo-circadian effects. And we will try and link those. But you had a what I consider absolutely landmark beautiful paper published in "Nature" a few years ago, showing that if you disrupt the exposure to light or the timing of the exposure to light that there are dramatic effects on the stress system and on the learning and memory system. Maybe we could talk about each of those separately or together. What are the effects on stress and the effects on learning when light viewing behavior and sleep-wake cycles are disrupted? - Yeah, so just to remind you, you know that, but to remind your listeners that I was trained as a circadian biologist. So I really was indoctrinated into thinking that light has to affect the clock, which then caused all these different effects. So, that's what I believe. That's my dogma. That's what have made me really happy. And then Tara LeGates and Cara Altimus joined the lab and we started discussing a lot of data. And we said, what if there is a direct effect of light that we're missing, independent of the circadian clock? So this is not an easy question to us to answer, because as we've been talking all along, light affects the circadian clock. So how could you give light at different times of the day and not mess up the circadian clock? Luckily, we came up with such a way, and that's why it was important to do these experiments the way we did them. And we proved that this light-dark cycle does not disrupt the clock, there is still a circadian rhythm, and does not cause sleep deprivation. And yet, surprisingly, if you give light at the wrong time of the day, even without disrupting the circadian clock or without causing sleep deprivation, as you mentioned you get the huge mood changes in the organisms and you get learning deficit. So, this really, and at the time people have really hit us hard. I mean, it was really hard to publish this work and you could, yeah. - Well, it came out in "Nature." - Yeah. - So in the end you prevailed, but I want to make sure that I understand. So, you're saying that yes, there are effects of light on the circadian rhythm. - Absolutely. - Sleep meaning sleep and wakefulness. - Yes. - And their timing. However, there are direct effects of light on mood that can be dissociated from the effects on sleep and waking. - Absolutely. - So if I interpret that correctly, that could mean that when we view light and how much light, could make us feel happier or less happy or even depressed, stressed, learning, et cetera. - Bingo. - Even if we're sleeping and waking up at the appropriate time? - Bingo. I mean, eventually because we're talking about the whole system, eventually when you start having the other problems, you also develop sleep problems, but you're absolutely right. And in fact, now, research from Diego Fernandez in the lab have found that now we know that they actually require different brain regions. So we don't only have a theory, we don't only have a light environment that showed they can be dissociated, we know that they use completely different brain regions. So, the SCN that I told you about earlier, the place where the central pacemaker is, the one that receives direct input from the retina through the ipRCGs to adjust your circadian clock is not the area that receives the light input for mood regulation. It's a completely different brain region. - What's the brain region called? - So the brain region, we called it the perihabenular nucleus. I'm not so sure how good or bad the name, but it doesn't matter, it's that PHb. And what's really amazing, this region also receives direct input from the ipRCGs, but projects to areas in the brain that are known to regulate mood, including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, which has been studied for many years to be impacted in the human depression. So just by this amazing serendipity to find that a region that is so deep in the advanced brain, like the prefrontal cortex is your executive brain, one of the most elaborated in humans, to see that they receive inputs from these ancient photoreceptor was stunning to us, and told us how much we didn't understand the importance of light on a human behavior. - So, how does that finding inform daily protocols for you or for other people? I realize you can't leap always from one paper- - Absolutely, yes. - To daily protocol. But if light indeed does control prefrontal cortex, executive function, learning, stress and mood, and let's say I'm waking up each morning and I'm sleeping. What should I do different? - That's why we came up with the tripartite model because yes, we could think about just adjusting the clock with lights in and being dark throughout the day. But that may not be important for your whole physiological function. So, now, if we include these other effects of light, that's why I prefer to still get a lot of light in the day. I don't want to be in very dim light condition throughout the day. - I see. - So, even though it doesn't affect your clock, as you beautifully said, Andrew, it may affect your mood and learning and memory. It may affect your alertness level, which is going to allow you to learn better. It may affect your homeostatic drive, maybe your homeostatic factor would go higher so you could sleep earlier. So it's important to think of light as stimulating all these brain regions, which means it's producing more activity, which in reality this is how people think of the homeostatic drive, that the more active you are, the more the homeostatic drive is built up, the better you sleep. So that's why we came up with the tripartite model because as a circadian biologist, I only thought of light through the circadian clock affecting behavior. As a sleep biologist, they only thought of the homeostatic drive affecting sleep, affecting behavior. And for people who study light for vision and other form, they thought only of the environmental input. But now if you put them all together, you get with this tripartite model where it's really mind boggling. And it makes so much sense. The organism doesn't want to depend on a single component, but if you could incorporate these three together, you could have a beautiful system that is well adapted. So let me tell you the sleep-wake cycle, right? So we know that there is a homeostatic drive to affect sleep. You've had beautiful talks about that. - Which is basically the longer you're awake, the more you want to be asleep. - So, that's your homeostatic drive. We've talked about the circadian influence of sleep and the fact that light-dark cycle affect the circadian system, which eventually affects sleep. So these two components are well understood. Now the third factor is your direct light or environmental input. How much stress, how much light you get from there also can highly impact sleep. So even if you have a good circadian and homeostatic drive, if you're getting light at the wrong time of the day, or if you're being stressed and thinking a lot, then your sleep is going to suffer. So you have to think of the three together to have a beautiful sleep-wake cycle. - I see. - And that's why we came up with the tripartite model. The same thing happens with feeding. I could beautifully put it to people. Your hunger, your energy level is measured by the arcuate nucleus. Your daily intake of food is again, dependent on the SCN and light-dark input. We found that if food is not available, there is yet a third input that is not depending on the SCN, not depend on the arcuate, depending on a completely different brain regions. So the animal can actually start looking or the human can start looking for food when it's scarce, even at time when they are not supposed to be active. So, that's how the organism think, they have to evaluate multiple inputs for them to decide what is the best physiological outcome at that moment, at that season? - I see. So, I want to get into arcuate and feeding, but just to make sure we can keep our hands around this tripartite model. So, if I understand correctly, we've got the circadian influence, then you've also got the drive to sleep. - Right. - Actually, one of the ways that I think that can be best understood is if somebody ever pulls an all-nighter, they get tired around 11:00 or 12:00 or so, and then very tired around 3:00, 4:00 a.m., but then even if you stay up sometime right around 7:00 or 8:00 a.m., your normal wake up time, you start to feel alert again. - Exactly. - And that's because the sleep drive is extremely strong, but there's a circadian rhythm that drives wakefulness in the morning. - Exactly. - Okay, so that's two are the components. - [Samer] Right. - Before we get into the feeding component, I want to talk about these direct effects of light on mood. - Mm hm. - Okay, Diego Fernandez's data. And this perihabenular thing. - Sure. - So, let's just for the moment set aside the tri part of the tripartite model and just focus on what are the direct effects of light on mood? And the way that I interpret what you've said so far is that the protocol that emerges from this if one trying to optimize their mood is, yes, see light, view light I should say, early in the day, in order to set your circadian clock. Maybe also in the evening as well. And of course, avoid light at night, get it as dim as possible. However, you said, it's also a good idea to get as much bright light during the day as you safely can, in order to improve your mood independently of regulating your sleep-wake cycle. - And that's the hypothesis. Here's the problem where it's not going to be as satisfying as the circadian is that as you know, this brain region has been discovered very recently. - Habenula? - The perihabenular region. - Well, we've known about it a long time, but nobody knew what it did. - So, we knew about the habenula, but that's why the name is confusing. It's actually not the habenula itself. It's the perihabenular. - Oh, near the habenula. - It's near the habenula. - Why don't you just call it the Samer Hattar nucleus? - I should have. I don't know why I haven't done that. - Maybe 'cause if you do that, it's not okay. Okay, so for here ever after the perihabenular nucleus, we should probably call it the Hattar- - The Hattar-Fernandez. - How about Hattar-Fernandez-Berson nucleus. - Yeah, that should- - Okay, this is like nerdy science attribution stuff, but I'm just going to call it the Hattar nucleus. Wikipedia, line it up. Okay, so this structure is taking light, and independent of sleep rhythms and circadian rhythms, it's driving changes in mood. - Something. - How does it do that? Is this through the dopamine system? The serotonin system? - We still recently, we haven't identified this region very well. We don't know what light does to it. We don't know how it interacts. So this is an area that is ripe for discoveries and we're working on this right now. But that's why I said, it's not satisfying. This is like the function of sleep. Why do we sleep? We know sleep is very important to us, but we still don't have a satisfying function of why do we sleep, right? - I see but the why questions- - We have hypothesis. - The why questions, I think it's our good friend and colleague at University of Washington, Russ Van Gelder, who always says, when somebody asks why, that the best answer is just to say, I wasn't consulted at the design phase. - Yeah, exactly. - Right, none of us really know why. - No, but the point is maybe I shouldn't have said why, what is the function of sleep? It's still very hard to know. What is the reason organisms have to go offline for so long? You know, people assume it's for repair, assume it's for learning and memory, assume all kind of stuff, but there is really no clear function for sleeping. There is no clear function for sleeping. I mean, if you talk to people, there are hypotheses. - I mean, all we know is that if you don't sleep- - Exactly. - Or your sleep is very fractured, you get messed up. - And you could die even, right? I mean, it's really bad if you don't sleep, but we don't know what is the function? What is that sleep have done to organisms that couldn't have done with rest? What if you just could rest without sleeping? Just sit down and rest. - Well, my lab is trying to figure out whether or not these non-sleep deep rest protocols can compensate for sleep. - That would be interesting. - I mean, obviously sleep is better, but many people are not getting the sleep that they need. - Right. - But, okay. So, and if people are sensing that Samer and I are about to start talking over each other and arguing, that's always the goal when we talk, right? - That's right. - Unlike other scientists I interact with, when Samer and I get together, it's considered a successful conversation if we get into a big fight, and then go for a big meal- - That's right. - Where I pick the restaurant. [Samer chuckling] Okay, so let's talk about food and eating and appetite. You had yet another, yes, I greatly admire your success in this way, yet another incredible discovery showing that there are direct effects of light on appetite and feeding behavior. Okay, maybe you could just summarize those results for people. - Honestly, that paper is the one that allowed us to come with the tripartite model, because we were thinking completely wrong about it. We wanted, this experiment, it'd be fun for your audience to hear why we started this experiment. Remember that when we discovered the ipRCGs, we figured if they are the only relay to entrain the circadian clock, then you could kill them and have an animal opposite to the one that we spoke or a human opposite to the one that we spoke about earlier. Where instead of having no pattern vision and have circadian photoentrainment, we could produce an animal that have pattern vision, but no circadian photoentrainment. - Hm, so circadian blind. - Circadian blind, but pattern sighted. And we succeeded in that. The problem when you have these animals, which I've told you many times already is that they don't adjust to the day-night cycle. So doing experiments on them become very complicated. - What is their behavior like if you don't have these cells? Are they awake and then asleep, awake and then asleep? - They just drift like the humans we've talked about. - They think they're in Las Vegas with no clocks or watch- - They drift, exactly. - They stay up later every night and go to sleep- - They can either, depend on their clock. If their clock is shorter, they come in earlier. If their clock is longer, they come in later. - So they're really messed up? - They really don't adjust to it. If they were in the wild, they'll be eliminated in a second, right? There is no way they'll survive. So, me and Diego started talking and we're like, what if we use non-light in training agent? And what is the strongest non-light in training agent? Food. So we thought that the light defective animals will have more sensitivity to food entrainment because as you know more than me, this is an area that you've worked really well on, for vision, if you're image blind, your hearing and somatosensory get improved, right? The lack of vision improves your hearing and sensation. But we found actually that if you don't have the light to system, actually the food ability to entrain the animal goes completely to the ground. Completely opposite to what we predicted. - So light viewing and feeding behavior are interacting in ways that support one another. - And that's why we came with the tripartite model. We figured it's different than sensation of the environment. When you sense with vision, vision and hearing interact, but your vision is a real full modality. You want to see. That's what vision wants to do. You want to hear. That's what hearing wants to do. You want to sense. That's what sensing want to do. But for the circadian system, light, food, all these entraining agent, they somehow have to interact to keep a coherent system. You don't just assume if you remove light, this one is going to be stronger. No, they need to know each others. The light informs when the animal is going to eat. - Well, what I like about this so much is that in the world outside of science, in which I don't really exist in, but that I see a lot of, this kind of wellness and stuff with all this mind-body integration stuff. It's interesting because people view the body more as a system, right? A system of organs that interact, as opposed to the way that standard science and medical profession is like, you work on the liver or you're ear, nose and throat, or heart and lung, or brain or- - Wow, that's a great way of thinking about it. - But the biology is integrated. - Yeah. - And so, for somebody who's interested in effecting their eating behavior, something that you are familiar with, and that we will talk more about your experiences of in a moment, how should they use light in order to adjust their eating behavior? - Right. So, now that I've told you about all these interaction between the different inputs to the circadian clock, just you think about it as an engineer, what would be the best thing? The best thing is to know when your food times happen in the day, when should you get light, and when is your circadian clock in your system, right? So, if you eat at very specific times of the day, that's another signal that is telling your body, your clock, you're in a certain time of the day. So if you're having lunch at the correct time every day, and you're getting bright light, now you have two systems that are informing your clock, your clock is going to be better. - So regular mealtimes? - Regular mealtimes that fit your circadian clock. So, and in fact, if you do that, when I started doing this, and it helped me lose weight, is that I'm exposing myself to the right amount of light-dark cycle, I'm eating at regular time. It is amazing. You would be not hungry, let's say you eat at noon, you will not feel any hunger at 11:45. And then all of a sudden the hunger jumps. This is clearly not an energy issue because it could not be that drastic. - No, the desire to eat is mainly driven by these cues, these hormone cues that are very exquisitely timed to- - Exactly. - Sleep-wake cycle, but also to light. - Exactly. And you know, in the wild, you could imagine why energy level through the arcuate nucleus- - You should explain to people what the arcuate is 'cause I don't think we've done that adequately. The arcuate nucleus is an area of the hypothalamus that drives hunger and feeding behavior. And what we're talking about is the fact that it's taking cues from your viewing of light, believe it or not, is impacting your level of hunger. And this is a non-trivial way in which your timing of hunger and amount of hunger is regulated by when and how much light you view. So, let me ask you a couple of practical- - But can I just, this is really, before you asked me- - Sure. - Sorry, Andrew. We said we are going to fight, but to me, the interesting thing to think about it, in the wild when you didn't have the availability of food that we have, the arcuate plays a huge important role because if you weren't successful in getting food, then the arcuate is going to tell you, look, you have to take risks and go get food because your energy level is very low. And that's great, there's tons of great research about that. But I think what's missing is the fact in humans, we're not getting to a situation... Most of us, we're not getting to a situation where we have low energy levels. Most of the time actually we eat not because we are really have low energy, but because we want to eat. So I think that's why I feel that the timing is very important for us because we always have enough energy level for us to eat. - Well, I mean, I enjoy eating so much that I'll eat just for the sensation of chewing. - True, true. - I mean, I enjoy the taste too. - True, absolutely. - And I enjoy the social aspects when those are a part of it. - Absolutely. - But I literally enjoyed the physical act of chewing. - [Samer] Absolutely, absolutely. Uh huh. - Which explains a lot. Okay, so how regular are you or do you recommend people be about mealtimes? Because what I'm hearing is that light viewing behavior is pretty straightforward. Get a lot of light in the morning and throughout the day, minimize it in the evening and at night, generally speaking, for sake of mood and circadian rhythm. But for sake of regulating timing and quality I should also say of food intake, because people clearly make better choices about food intake when they are anticipating a meal and they aren't constantly hungry. And so, the ability to regulate hunger for particular phases of the circadian cycle is quite valuable for all people. Not just people trying to lose weight, but all people. Are we talking about down to the minute? - Absolutely not. - All right, so 12:00 noon is my normal lunch, let's say plus or minus? - Half an hour. - Okay. So eat around between 11:30 and 12:30. - If that's the time. And it depends if you also do multiple meals. Remember three meals, that's a decision that somebody came up with, I don't know why. - And nowadays, fewer people are doing that I think. - Yeah. - Given our friend, Satchin Panda's work. - Right. I mean, so you could have two meals, you could have very multiple meals that are distributed across your active time. I agree with Satchin Panda's work that try to avoid eating when your system is supposed to be relaxing, when you're supposed to be at non-active times. So, limit your eating to the active time of your cycle. And that seemed to be, and Joe Takashi is doing some beautiful stuff on this, that seems to be incredibly important for aspect of the circadian. - And for health. - And for health. - Yeah, we're referring to Satchin Panda's work, he wrote a beautiful book called "The Circadian Code." Maybe Samer, with some luck you'll write a book as well. Meaning the world will be lucky to have that book, but Satchin's data really strongly point to the fact that liver health, brain health, metabolic factors, and endocrine factors of various systems and organs all seem to benefit from having a period of each 24 hour day in which we are not eating anything and then eating at very regular mealtimes. - [Samer] Absolutely. - Let's talk about eating and mealtimes and let's move a little bit away from the science for the moment, although we will return to it, and talk a little bit more about your experience with eating and mealtimes. So, you're looking in good shape lately. - Thank you. - I know you've been putting work into it. - Yeah. - We talk a lot and you've been exercising and you've been eating well, meaning quality food. You just came back from Jordan where I'm assuming the food is amazing. - Yes, the food is amazing and honestly, usually I gain a lot of weight in Jordan, but this time I didn't gain any weight, which was really nice, so. - Yeah, when I met you, you were probably about 100 pounds heavier than you are now. - Yeah, 275 pounds. I'm 219 now. It's crazy, yeah. - You had a lot of vigor then, and you have a lot of vigor now, but I know that you undertook a very specific protocol in order to lose the weight, based on your understanding of the circadian system- - Yes! - And of light, and appetite and mood. Maybe you could just tell us a little bit about what that schedule looks like. And we realize that this is not a prescriptive for everybody, but you found what worked for you. - Yeah. - To maybe just describe those changes. - I mean, honestly, I followed my circadian cycle, right? Of what we've talked about, right? So I dimmed the light at night, I slept at regular hours, I ate my major food in breakfast and lunch when I'm really active and I'm really hungry. And at night when I avoid dinner, because my circadian system really shuts off at 3:00. I'm an early person. Like you could give me anything I would eat before 3:00, after 3:00, nothing appeals to me anymore. My system is shut off. - Well, what time are you going to sleep? And what time are you waking up? - Oh, so in my case, I should have put this up. I mean, I go to sleep literally at 9:00 p.m.. I mean, I literally five minutes after 9:00 p.m., I'm completely out. And I wake up between 4:30 and 5:00 a.m.. So if I extend it, I go to 6:00 a.m., but very rarely. It depends on how tired I was. - And that, as I recall, was an important set of changes for you to be able to- - Absolutely. - Regulate your food intake. - Absolutely because then I'm having very big breakfast, and again for different people it's different, I have a big breakfast at 7:00 a.m. maximum. So I have a big breakfast, coffee, and all this stuff. Then I have some simple snack around 10:00. Then I have regularly lunch at noon, or between noon to 1:00. Then I have another snack at 3:00. And the hardest time to regulate the food is between 12:00 and 3:00. This is when I really feel hungry all the time. - This is your equivalent of kind of late evening for most people. - Yes! - So for me, it would probably be between 7:00 and 10:00 p.m.. - Exactly, exactly. - Got it. - And then at night I'm completely not hungry, but usually as you said, the beauty or the enjoyment of food, like when my wife cooks some really beautiful Indian food, I eat, but I'm not hungry. And I notice if I eat with that, I usually gain weight. But if I regulate that at night, I also lose weight. So there is a combination of all these things that help you adjust the input of food, the input of light, the input of the clock, and the drive to hunger. - Yeah, I appreciate you sharing that. And I want to emphasize that some people are not hungry early in the day. They might be late shifted people. - Exactly. - In which case, eating later in the day will work well for them. - It will work well as long as they don't eat early in the morning. That's just, you have to work with your schedule, with your active schedule. - Yeah, you and I have been talking about this offline for years. I'm glad we're finally having this discussion publicly now. What we're talking about really is finding your ideal sleep schedule. - Exactly, exactly. - And finding your ideal eating schedule. - Exactly. - And understanding how those two things interact. - And do you know the nice thing, as you said, finding them out is going to help you to understand how they interact because we know from the tripartite model that they are all interconnected. And for each person they're going to be interconnected differently. So, for each person you would... You know, for me, if I exercise at night, I'm going to mess up my whole system. - When do you exercise? - Morning. Morning works great for me. I mean, it's amazing. Morning exercise for me works great. If I tried one time, because it was easier for me to exercise at night before I leave, when the traffic is there from the night. And I think that messed me up because I couldn't sleep well and I couldn't wake up well. And that led to more changes in my food. I gained weight again actually, believe it or not, even though I was exercising. So I think this really makes me think that you have to think of the tripartite model to see what is the best times and what is the best interrelation between the different component, as you beautifully said, between your mealtimes, your light exposure, and your sleep that works for you. - Well, thanks for that. Usually Samer's insulting me. Today, he's complimenting me. I'm going to compliment him right back by saying, this is the first time that I've ever really understood how yes, light can control sleep. Yes, it control mood. Yes, it can impact feeding, but that it's really about doing the self exploration to align those in the way that works best. And what I'm hearing, tell me if I'm wrong, but what I'm hearing is that once you understand what gives you the best sleep-wake cycle, then you should exercise during the period of time in which you feel most alert. And if it works for your schedule, ideally you would also eat during the time in which you feel most alert and then stop eating and stop light viewing behavior as you head towards sleep. - Right. So, the only thing I would say that complicates all of this, and that's what makes me sad, is your light exposure. - Mine personally? - Sorry. - No, I'm just kidding. - The people's light exposure, right? This is what complicates it because you're not going to be able to figure all this out if you're shifting yourself out of your comfort zone. - By viewing- - By viewing light at the wrong time of the day. So, let's say if you were under an ideal natural conditions, you're a person who would sleep later than me. Let's say we'll sleep at midnight and wake up at 8:00 a.m.. Let's say you don't eat anything till noon, and as you said, you eat late in the evening. Then this would be perfect for you, but now see what happens if now you include the light component. Now, if you push your sleep from midnight to 4:00 a.m., now you're waking up in the morning and you're actually really not the morning... You're working, I'm sorry, at noon instead of eight o'clock, and the time where you're not supposed to be hungry, now you're going to start eating directly at noon or something like that, or even delay it. And now you're shifting your whole cycle. And you don't know if this interaction between your sleep, feeding and the light-dark environment are still going to be maintained or not. And that's the problem that people have. - So, as I'm hearing this what I'm realizing is most of us, probably me included, are messing up at least one, two, or three of these components. - Exactly, exactly. - But that the probe, the way to figure out what's right for oneself is to start manipulating light exposure. - Right and I'm going to be honest, I'm biased 'cause I believe that light is the strongest time giver. And a lot of people disagree. Some people think feeding is. - I always thought that light was the primary zeitgeber, the primary light- - Yeah, but a lot of people think it's food. A lot of people even sometimes mentioned social interaction. - Have they read the literature? - I agree with you. I totally agree with you. - I mean, my understanding is that light is the most powerful driver- - Absolutely. - Of the things we're talking about. - That's why I think we need to regulate this first and everything else fits. And you know, the nice thing is that your sleep-wake cycle and exercise tell you really bluntly if you're doing it right or not. - Tell me more about that. - I'll tell you more. When I shifted my exercise, honestly, things fell apart like never before. - When you moved from exercising early in the day to late in the day? - In the morn, yeah. It completely fell apart for me. I didn't enjoy exercise at night. My pain tolerance for exercise wasn't as good. I'm talking with N equals one and I'm aware of this. I've never tested this empirically, but at least to me, it really messed up everything. I started having problem because my body temperature would go up and that will affect my sleep. I possibly was running in the gym with a lot of lights. So maybe the light was a component, but for me, exercising in the morning, it's so much better for me. But a lot of people can't even think of exercising in the morning. So it depends on when you feel comfortable in your sleep-wake cycle and your exercise. I think that tells you if your system is in synchrony with one another. - That's really interesting. We're good friends, our friend, Pat Dossett, that we both know. - Mm hm, oh, absolutely. - He did nine years in the Seal Teams. And he's one of these people he says, he's happy to go for a run or a swim anytime between 4:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.. And he'll train in the afternoon too 'cause he's a Seal Team guy and they'll do whatever anytime, that's part of the phenotype, but he feels best doing that, right? I like to exercise mid-morning. - Interesting. - And I'm happy to skip eating until 12 or 1:00. - Great. - And I like to go to sleep around 11:30, 12:00, 'cause I'm a normal human being rather than you who goes to bed at 9:00 p.m. - What about Pat actually? I've never asked him what time. - Pat? So, Pat's ideal to sleep time, I've asked him this, would be around 8:30 or 9:00 except now- - Oh, so I'm like Pat! - Yes, but he has two young children, two years old and a newborn. And so, the cycle is disrupted, right? - Yeah, but that's known, right? I mean the effect of childbearing. - Right. - And I think that we could talk about this, that's more complicated- - Right. - But that's pretty much. - Yeah, I mean, I think we need to come up with a new name for chronotype because- - I agree, I agree. - Chronotype implies that it's just about sleep and wake; being an early bird or a night owl. And what we're also talking about is how exercise and eating match onto those. - The the phase relation between them. - Right. - And the phases between different components, as you said. - 'Cause they interact. - Because they interact. - Right. - And they don't have to be in the same phase. Like let's say my light and food could be very close to each other. Your light and food could be different, right? The phases don't have to be, they can be plastic. So you have to find this for yourself. You maybe you're a person who eats late at night, exercises late at night, or you may be a person who exercise early, eat later. So, as long as the phase is good, that's what you have to find out. - Okay and if I understand correctly, when you're talking about phase relationship, it means you want to lump exercise, feeding and light for- - And sleep. - And sleep in a way that as a coherent and total system makes you feel really good. - Temporally in a great order. - Uh uh. - Absolutely. - And I think that- - And I could tell you to me is literally getting exposed to sun clearly in the morning, clearly at noon, I go out, I keep my windows in the office completely open, eating mostly in the early time of the day and exercising. And literally at the end part of the day, I'm not really in a more thoughtful vegetative state. Like I really can't like after 5:00, I tell my students, if you want to tell me anything complicated, you're wasting your time. My brain just doesn't function. So even though I only sleep at night, but I'm really starting to shut off, ramp down. Really I mean, I could send email, talk about brainless stuff, but my power, my energy to do powerful stuff really drop tremendously. So all my students who know me very well, they put the meetings with me early in the morning 'cause they know this is when I'm... So, everything for me and for me, it's very tight. So it could be different for... It's very clustered in the morning. It's all tied together. And literally the remaining part seems to be just a vegetative state. - Mm hm. Yeah, you and my bulldog, Costello, who unfortunately passed away recently. - Oh no. - Yeah. - I did not, that's so sad. - Yeah, Samer and Costello were good friends. Yeah, sorry to break it to you here. Yeah, he had a good long life and he went easy, but he had a circadian clock that basically would just sleep around 24 hours a day, minimal activity interspersed every third day or so. You do have this morning vigor. - Yes. - And I think other people are going to have more of an afternoon vigor. Do you think that this can change across the lifespan? The rumor is that teenagers naturally want to sleep in later and stay up later. Do you think that's social rhythm? Or do you think that that's actually biological? - Yeah, that's a tough question. I mean, it could be both. One thing that worries me is that it seems that if anything, with age this morning rigor gets stronger. - You mean, you want people to become more of morning people. - More of morning people. - Well, why does that worry you? I think that's good. - Because for me, I'm already very shifted morning. I don't want to be one of these 7:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. sleepers at some point. - On the other hand, it's also kind of nice because it's quiet and you can get work done. - Yeah, but honestly from 4:30 till 7:30 when my wife wake up, it can be very long. Yes, you achieved a lot, but it's quiet outside. So, I don't want to be at 1:00 a.m., let's put it this way. - You can tell Samer is more social than I am. - That's right, that is true. - But we should touch on that actually. So, your wife, she follows a different schedule. - Yeah. - So, the social rhythm- - I'm honestly... - Is important I think. What should we do? How should we conceptualize and how should we adjust ourselves according to the social rhythm? - And I honestly love this hypothesis that people came up with and Pat's kids reminded me of. Because kids are really going to disrupt your sleep-wake cycle, it seems like there is a chrono attraction. That's usually people who attract each others have actually different sleep-wake schedule. And the idea being is that this allows them to take care of their kids throughout the day-night cycle. - And have a peaceful marriage. - And have a peaceful marriage in a way, right? So, I mean, we didn't have kids, me and Rejji. So maybe this is, but it seems like evolutionary it makes sense that if you want to protect your kids, you don't want everybody to be morning vigor, and then the kids don't have. So you want it distributed across. I mean, it makes sense. - It's a reasonable argument. - Yeah. - I've heard that one of the reasons that people think that the clock is not exactly 24 hours, but it's 24 hours plus or minus 20 minutes or so, is because we believe that we evolved in clans or groups, villages, whatever, that were about 100 to 200 people. And in order to have protection around the early morning hours- - Interesting, same idea. - When we're vulnerable to predation and in the late night hours, that you would want some individuals of our species to be naturally more like night owls and some more like early people. So your theory of parenting is similar in that way. - Right. - The social rhythm is a powerful rhythm though. Meaning if I go out and I'm tired, let's say I'm tired at like 9:30. I don't want to go out, like I'm to need- - So can I just say something about that? I think the social rhythm is powerful at the obvious levels. Like it affects your sleep, it affects how much you wake up or eat, but I'm not so sure it's as powerful as people think on the clock. Now, eventually it will mess up the clock because now if you're doing a lot of social at night, getting enough light, eating at the wrong time of the day, eventually you're going to have an effect, but I don't think just the social interactions themselves have been shown to affect your clock very strongly for some reason. - Yeah, that's good to know. Well, for people hearing this, they're probably getting the impression like I'm the night owl, and then Samer is the one that's in bed at 9:00 and then wakes up at 4:00. But having attended many meetings with Samer, I can tell you that he's the party animal. So let's talk about that. I mean, let's talk about the fact that you're the partier, who's up until 2:00 dancing at these various meetings, which I've seen. - Yep. - He's actually a good dancer I'm told, but what should we do when we do stay up very late, for whatever reason; could be because we had to take a midnight trip to the hospital, an unfortunate reason, or it could be because you're in the presence of people that you don't see very often and you go out for a really nice night out on the town and you get to sleep around 2:30 or 3:00 in the morning. How should one get back on schedule? Do you force yourself to then get up and view light at the normal time that you would get up and view light? Or do you allow yourself to sleep in? What what's the optimal protocol? - I would allow myself to sleep in, and remember this is a long-term effect. This is something that you live with for a long period. And remember I told you about the experiments we did with the mood, these required two weeks of that light schedule to cause mood disturbances. So these don't happen just in a single day. - So this is the way you justify staying out late every once in a while. - Well, in the meetings you've seen me in, I've done this for five or six days continuously, but what you didn't see that when I came back to my home, it took me two weeks as if I did a jet lag. So I really do suffer for two weeks after doing a six crazy night of staying up at night, drinking at the wrong time of the day. So it's not that I'm completely okay with it. When I go back, everything goes back. It takes me actually literally two weeks to recover from the circadian rhythm meeting that you've seen me partying at some point. - Which is kind of ironic that the circadian rhythm- - I know. - Meaning people are totally disrupting their circadian cycle, but scientists are human beings too. - Right, so I think if you do it at very little occasions, I think you should not worry too much that this will have lasting impact. And the good news is that if you readjust your schedule, you could come back to it. The problem is when you maintain this wrong schedule for a prolonged time and it becomes chronic, prolonged periods of time, that's when you have the problems and the accumulation of the problems. So when you have sleeping problem, you produce metabolic problem. When you have metabolic problems, you produce lack of exercise. And you could see how things can spiral out very quickly. And then it would be hard to come back to it. - Well, certainly sleep disruption is both a symptom of and- - Yes. - A cause of almost all- - Absolutely. - Mental health disorders. - Absolutely. - And certainly the metabolic syndromes that people are talking about nowadays and all of this, it all funnels back to light. This is what's so remarkable. - Eventually, yeah. - And so we have these devices, and I use my phone and I use my computer. But do you think that the mere dimming of the screen or not interacting with screens, say 90 minutes or two hours before bedtime, according to what we're saying today, this should have a profound effect on all these factors. - And it does. And I really believe it does. And, again, I think as Pat did these inventions where you get a pouch where you put your phone in a pouch. - Mm hm, so, what Samer's referring to is our friend, Pat, this former Seal Team member, who's also very impressive person in the landscape of business and family, et cetera. A real superhuman by any regard has this habit of taking his phone and putting it into a sealed pouch in the evening. - Yeah. - So it's basically walled off- - And in his program he sends you actually these sealed pouches. And so that I think is a great idea because not only it will take away the light from you, but it also take away the distraction because you want to repair and recover, and sleep does that. And if you have your phone dinging all the time, or the light flashing from it, you're just not getting enough sleep and you're causing yourself major problems. - I never asked you this, but I realized now that I should have long ago, but I'll ask you now. Why and how did you get into all this stuff? - Yeah, I mean, honestly, first of all, I wanted to study genetics and I knew I wanted to do PhD in genetics. But I only got accepted in one university at the time. And I joined the Learning and Memory Lab. And I liked learning and memory at the beginning, I worked on the snails on Aplysia californica, and started looking at learning and memory. But then the same lab was looking at these daily variation. I was really struck. Like you never think about it outside of science. It's really struck me that organisms can measure day biologically. That was very shocking to me. And I just really got attracted and I wanted to see why does this happen? What is the effect of different times of day? And I just stuck with it. It just, it was mind blowing for me who was in medical school, that I've never heard about it before. You know, it's really amazing medicine, I think still now we are very good at looking at stuff spatially, but we're very bad at looking at temporal aspects. So we always like to see images, static images, spatial information. - Right, take an x-ray, measure a temperature- - Yeah, exactly. - Measure a blood pressure. - But we don't think of temporal. And you talk to John Hogenesch right now, and he's telling you the importance of chronomedicine or chromo pharma... Whatever the word is. And it really just getting the drugs at the right time of the day is going to be essential for our health. - Do you think that's going to come from using better trackers, like Oura rings, WHOOP straps, these kinds of things? - I love the trackers, but I think there's even more exciting discoveries. Now you could take a single blood sample and measure many biological components and figure where you are in the circadian clock. Something that was very hard to do before. So if you have a marker to know where you are in the clock, you could actually understand more the effect of everything; exercise, feeding, light input. - What is the marker? - So there are some papers from what's her name? Phyllis Zee and from Achim Kramer where they measure multiple RNAs that are known to tell you what phase of the clock is, or multiple proteins or biological reactions. And depending on a combination of factors, not a single factor, you could tell where you are in the circadian clock. So they could instead of just measuring temperature or melatonin, just one measurement. And melatonin specifically, is also complicated by the fact that melatonin is affected by light. And temperature, your temperature and sleep can be easily dissociable, right? When you travel up those different timezone, you sleep at different times in the temperature cycle. So having multiple components measured will give you a better determination of your circadian phase, and understanding your circadian phase in humans will telling you what is the effect of giving certain drugs at certain times of the circadian phase. So, in the future, this is going to be studied at a much higher level when you can determine the phase in relation to all the other stuff. - It's striking to me that in all animals, besides humans, if they deviate too much from the appropriate exposure to light and light-dark cycle, they essentially don't mate and/or die and/or get killed off. But in humans, we are able to override that at least to some extent, but the ways in which we suffer appear to be things like obesity, metabolic syndromes, reproductive syndromes that are accompany the other syndromes, you know, endocrine syndromes, and mood and depressive disorders. Is there any effort at the level of the nationally or laboratories that you're aware of to try and use light in order to improve mood and mental health? - I mean, honestly, this is my mantra. This is the thing that I think people, because I say, don't take a pill, take a photon. And not, I mean, you take pills. That's important. I'm just making it that really we have an opportunity right now with the incredible advances of LED lights, of changing spectrum of light, of regulating intensities. And just for simple changes, you could really improve sleep-wake cycle, productivity, and still you could actually get more done because as we've talked about, when you have all these messed up, now you have to sleep more, but your sleep is fragmented. It's not very good. - And you can't focus when you do sit down- - And you can't focus or you don't have alertness when you need the alertness. So having all these could allow you to do even more actually at the end than less. And that's the exciting part it. - One of the questions I get asked most often about is about ADHD. I think there's a lot of self-prescribed as well as clinically prescribed ADHD. People are having a tremendously difficult time focusing and not just because they're sleepy, they just can't seem to anchor their attention. And there could be multiple reasons for this, but there are now several clinical trials ongoing using light to try and anchor people's attention and mood and wellbeing for sake of focus. And I think that while I love this saying that you mentioned, "Take a photon, not a pill." And with due respect to the need for pharmacology for some certain people, I think most people just haven't really dialed in their relationship to light in a way that allows them to rule out whether or not they need medication. - Absolutely, absolutely. That's the best way to put it. I can't add to that. - Let's talk about jet lag. - Mm hm. - But not in the context of, okay, if somebody's traveling from Europe to Japan or from the east coast, because that varies tremendously, right? I mean, there's as many different variations on travel as there are individuals out there with roles- - Right. - And jobs, et cetera. But rather, let's talk about what are the two or three things that people can do to adjust their schedule quickly? Yesterday, I called you and said, "Look, I know somebody who's traveling six hours. I won't even mention in which direction, 'cause I don't want people to anchor to that example. And you described some very simple tools of viewing light a little bit earlier than normal and getting on the local food schedule, et cetera, that would allow them to shift more quickly. - Exactly. - And the reason I want to have this conversation is yes, for the travelers, and for the shift workers, but mostly because of the fact that you've proven again and again that people are disrupted in their circadian behavior at home. So, aside from what we've already talked about, how can one adjust quickly to a new schedule? Like let's say, fall classes are starting, you start a new job or you have a baby or a puppy or whatever, what is the best way to shift the clock quickly? - So, it's very simple as we've talked yesterday. So imagine you're in the outside with no industrial light. If your body thinks you're in early evening and you see a bright light, what does this tell you? Oh, wait, this is not early evening yet. It's still early afternoon or late afternoon. So I have to delay my clock to go back to late afternoon. So if you get light early in the evening, it delays your clock. So what does that- - Meaning that makes you want to go to sleep later? - Yes, it delays your clock. So, you're in New York, right? People in Italy have an advanced clock because they are six hours ahead of us. So if you're in New York and you get light early in the evening, you delay even further from Italy. So now you're delaying away from Italy. Now the same thing happens. Let's say, you thought dawn came up and you thought it's already dawn, but it was let's say three o'clock in the morning or four o'clock in the morning. And then you get to bright light and you say, "Oh, wait a minute. Dawn is not the up yet." So I should advance my clock. Or I'm at night, but I'm getting bright lights, so I should run because dawn is already up. So then later in the night, later in your night, and actually it just happens that in humans you get a temperature nadir later in the night, low temperature in your body. After that, lights start advancing your clock. So if you want to go to Italy, instead of getting light early in the evening, you want to get light after the temperature low. So you could advance your clock even before you go to Italy, and you're catching up to the Italians just by using light. It's as simple as that. - Great. - So you could do it for every region. You could calculate how much they are advanced of you. You could know how much these light shifts happen per day, and you can calculate what you need to do, very simple math, to adjust either in direction of delaying if you're going from New York to California, you want to delay your clock or advancing if you're going from New York to Italy. - So, in order to make that a visual and because a lot of people are listening to this, not looking at it on video, we will put a zero cost downloadable figure of this on the HubermanLab.com website related to this episode. But I think I can summarize it in language as well. If I understand correctly, what you're saying is if your typical wake up time is say, 7:00 a.m., then your low point in temperature probably occurs somewhere around 5:00 a.m.. - Yeah. - And if you view light right around then it's going to essentially advance your clock. - Yeah. Because then your body thinks, oh, it's seven o'clock, so advanced your clock by one to two hours. - But if I were to view light, say at 3:00 a.m., then it would probably delay my clock? - Yeah. - Okay. Yeah, so, and then let's say I land in a new schedule. I want to adjust to a new schedule. Let's say I didn't manage to do anything with my light viewing before I went. And I didn't anticipate the trip. Suddenly I'm on a new schedule, okay? I was told that one of the ways to help shift the clock and to avoid gastrointestinal issues is to eat on the local schedule. - Mm hm. - To start basically behaving like a local. - Mm hm. - Even though your circadian clock will take a little bit of time to catch up. - Right, absolutely. But you have to remember the light, right? So, now that we explained it very simply, let's take a very simple example, right? New York to Italy, that's a simple example. New York time, Italy time, six hour difference, right? So let's say you fly from New York at night. You reach Italy at eight o'clock in the morning. What is the time in your New York time although you- - Six hours back. - Six hours back. - It's 2:00 in the morning. - It's 2:00 a.m.. So when you land Italy, you want to avoid light like the plague. Yeah, you could eat, but you really don't want to get the light. - Right, 'cause otherwise it's going to delay you. - It's going to delay you, it's going to send you to California instead of sending you to Italy. - Right, and so this is such a key point. If anyone's confused about this, we will put some diagrams up. But what Samer is saying is so crucial. Just because getting bright light in your eyes early in the day is really beneficial when you're at home, when you travel to a new time zone, you have to take into account what your body thinks. Excuse me, you have to take into account where your body thinks you are. - Exactly. - And so if you're looking at the Italian sunrise, having just flown from New York to Italy and you didn't prepare for that trip by waking up a little bit earlier in anticipation- - Multiple days, yeah. - And you view light at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. Italian time, beautiful Italian sunrise, you are going to delay your clock. You're going to basically throw yourself back to California, but you are in Italy. You're going to throw your biology back to California and you are going to be up in the middle of the Italian night. And you're going to be miserable- - Miserable. - I'll tell a brief anecdote 'cause I called Samer in desperation. A few years ago, I traveled to Abu Dhabi, NYU Abu Dhabi to give a seminar, 12 hours out of phase. It's a 12 hour flip. And I thought I could just muscle it. I thought I'll get up, just view sunlight when the sun comes up and I fell apart mentally and physically. And Samer came to my rescue. I called him, I said, "I don't know what to do." And he said, "Go to the gym at the local dawn, workout, eat and then view sunlight starting the next day." And that basically got me on the schedule. So I used food and exercise to adjust myself because my light viewing activity was just completely out of whack. - Yeah, I mean, and we talked about other details, so you have to calculate it, but you're absolutely right. I mean, it's very important to avoid getting the wrong light information when you're trying to adjust your body because otherwise it shifts you to the other cycle, absolutely right. - Well, you are one of these people that has such vigor. It's one of these things where having known you all these years, you have a tremendous capacity for work and for soccer, and for arguing, respectful arguing. And sometimes, you know- - It's getting worse with age. - Yeah, well, we could talk about that offline, but I think a lot of your vigor and a lot of your ability to work hard and focus and really do so many things at an impressive level is because you think about these issues and you think about when you're going to be optimal for focus, when you're going to be optimal for exercise, and the when is the key. - Right. - And I think a lot of people live in the landscape of feeling like there's something broken inside them because they can't focus- - It's subconscious. - Or they get too- - It's subconscious, right? Remember it's all subconscious. These effects and, Andrew, you're absolutely right. Now, honestly, joking aside about age, I really agree with you that I think part of the reason I'm continuing to be able to do this, that I really think about it. And I make sure that I keep everything aligned. And that actually helps me a lot. Like I don't suffer in sleep. I don't suffer in waking up. I never use a timer to wake up. I mean, people say, aren't you scared? Like you have to give a lecture at 8:00 or 7:30. Honestly, I was like, there is no way I'm going to go beyond that. It just, even if I try, I can't sleep beyond 6:00 a.m. in my regular times, it's just, it's not going to happen. By 4:30 my eyes are wide awake and I'm in bed. It's just system is so aligned, it works. - A lot of times people will say, how come I go to sleep, I fall asleep fine, but then I wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning and can't fall back asleep. Is it possible that those people were supposed to go to bed at 8:00 p.m.? - It's possible. I mean, it is possible. It is also possible that sometimes people will wake up and go back to sleep. But yeah, I mean, it is possible. Or it's possible that their clock is completely misaligned, that they are getting maybe a nap time at night when they are supposed... And then they possibly feel so sleepy in the day. So, all these are possible combination. - Well, that's an interesting idea I hadn't considered. So, that what they think is their sleep, their body is so out of whack with the light-dark cycle, that it's actually a nap. - A nap. Or the weaker part of the sleep. I mean, you see this when you traveled to different time zone before you adjust. You go to sleep really well, but two hours later, you're fully up. Two hours. If you were so tired and this is your regular sleep, there's no way you're going to wake up in two hours. So, then you feel very sleepy later in the day or something like that. So it depends of how your whole system is aligned to the environment. - That's a very interesting idea. I think that's going to resonate with a lot of people. I wake up every morning around 3:00 or 4:00, I generally use the bathroom and then I fall back asleep very deeply. It doesn't seem to disrupt my daytime wakefulness. And I think a lot of people obsess over that waking up and worry there's something wrong. - Absolutely. - Provided they can go back to sleep it's okay. - Exactly. If you can go use the bathroom, go back to sleep, that should not be a problem. Maybe with some people, when they go to use the bathroom, they use very bright light and then they get an alerting signal. So, maybe it could be as simple as that, that affects you. Maybe when you wake up, you put tons of light or you start reading your iPad. So there's all these combination that we still don't know about that could be affecting their sleep-wake rhythms and their sleep maintenance. - Do you take melatonin? - I don't need it to be honest. In my case, there is no reason to use it because I could guarantee you that by maybe eight o'clock, my melatonin has already started to go up. And by the time I sleep, my melatonin is very high because I don't use a lot of lights after sunset. - And light inhibits melatonin release. - And light really blocks melatonin level. - You hear this myth that the pineal gland calcifies as we get older. Do you know anything about that? - I mean, I've heard about that, but I don't know... I mean, there is not very clear evidence that it affects the sleep. I don't know much about it, to be honest. - Yeah, the evidence that I've seen is that yes, there's some calcification around the pineal, just because of where it sits in the brain. It's close to some bony structures. - I see. - But I don't think there's any evidence that it has negative effects. - I mean, if you still have, you could measure melatonin and that should tell you if it has any, it's such an easy thing to do. - Yeah, I think this is more of a internet wellness thing that got outside the cage. - That's possible. I think you're absolutely right. - Yeah, it sounds terrible, calcification of the thing, right? - Yeah, exactly. Like the heart thing, right? - Yeah, exactly. Let's talk about seasonality a little bit. I learned, and I don't know if this is still true, but that most suicides occur in April, in the spring. I think there's a poem that says, "April is the cruelest month," I think as the poem begins. Are there data that suicides are more frequent at particular times of year? And if so, is the spring that time of year? - Yeah, a lot of people talk about this. And one of the hypothesis is that the winter month that are very bad for mood, make people not wanting to do anything. And they get into such deep level of depression that when the sun comes up, they get actually the energy to act on their depression, which sounds really terrible. And it's just terrible. - Sounds just terrible. It's terrible. - So that's the idea that the lack of light throughout the winter caused them to go into such depression that they don't feel like doing anything. Then when the light comes in with rigor in the spring, it gives them that after all the depression they suffered, it gives them that push to take that sad, final act I guess. - What other seasonal effects have been demonstrated in humans? - Yeah, I mean, I think in humans, it's not very clear because we don't think about seasonality, but if you start thinking about us, I think we go through major seasonal changes. I really do. I think our eating pattern changed across the year. I could tell you that me thinking about this, there is a clear changes that happens to me across the year. But for animals, this is really essential because for animals they have to time their mating behavior was when they deliver their progeny in the most abundant amount of food and artificial light is causing major disruption. Because if you change the way these animals are receiving the light information, they either start mating much earlier or much later and their numbers dwindle. And they get into the dangers of really completely getting eliminated or extinct. - Well, human birth rates are definitely going down. - Right, in some- - I mean, in the US in particular, yeah. - In some areas, not others. - Not others, right. But are there other effects of seasonality on humans that we are aware of? - Honestly, you could see it perfectly, I think, in Scandinavia, I mean, you could talk to people who live in- - Sure, they get seasonal depression. - Well, seasonal depression is one, but actually when you start asking them questions, they tell you like in the winter they barely could wake up. They barely have the energy, before even depression. Even people who don't get seasonal depression, they will tell you our energy level is lower. Our ability to go to work is not the same. And in the summer, most people actually sleep very little. They tell you, we really can feel like we're manic, we have all this energy and not in a negative way, in a funny way, right? I mean, but if we want to sleep, we have to put this curtain. And I think in these situations, you could really appreciate the seasonality of humans. I think we kind of destroyed our seasonality because we don't get exposed to that much natural light. We have all this artificial light, but I think honestly, one of the thing that is going to happen if they follow your recommendations about giving light at the same time, giving food, giving exercise- - Wait, let's be clear, those are your recommendations. - Well, I mean- - No, I mean just in fair attribution. - What I'm saying is that this is going to cause them to also experience some changes across the season, because now they're going to see the sun differently. If you're going to go out in the morning in the summer, you're going to get a much brighter... That's why I don't like the change in time. I know people think, oh, because you're biased, 'cause I think- - Wait, wait, wait, wait. Sorry, the change in time, are you talking about daylight savings? - Daylight savings. It's such a bad idea because it disrupts that rhythm that you're having. 'Cause I think your body, if you keep that rhythm, you will see the whole seasonality. And I look at it from a different aspect than other people. And people say I'm biased because I'm a morning person, and it may be true, but there are situation- - Secret conspiracy about morning people. - Yeah, but if you think about it, Andrew, there is a situation where you're getting light perfectly well and then all of a sudden they delayed by one hour because... And then even though it's the summer, your body now, if you're still not adjusting think, "Oh wait, what happened? What kind of happened?" - Well, I'm glad you're bringing this up because I always thought what's the big deal, one hour? Right, one hour shift. Spring forward, fall back. - It's so hard to adjust to one hour actually. - But this goes back to the beginning of our discussion. It's not just one hour. - Right. - Because it's one hour across that one day. - Right. - But there's this cumulative effect on the clock and these three elements of your tripartite model. - Yeah, exactly. - Right, the homeostatic, sleep and the light, direct effects on mood. - Exactly and when it's so close, it's sometimes hard to figure out how to adjust it perfectly because we're already sleep deprived in our society. And then you shift it by... So it just, it all accumulates and it has no benefit. - Well, you work at a major government organization, National Institute of Mental Health. - Yeah. - Why don't we campaign for- - Honestly, I have no idea. I mean, it makes no sense. - No, I'm saying why don't we go campaign? - Yeah, I would love to. I mean, it makes no sense to have the summer light goes up at 9:00 p.m., the light goes down where I live in Baltimore at 9:00 p.m. And then all of a sudden, when you really want to see the light longer in the day, you now shift the other way. And now it goes all of a sudden at 6:00 p.m.. Why do you do these drastic changes? Let it blend across the whole season, you know? Yes, later, earlier at night, but it's at least consistent. It goes in a very consistent manner. I just don't understand why they do this. It makes no sense. - Well, I think that the reason they do it is because they don't understand the biology. - Exactly, absolutely. - Because one hour seems trivial unless you understand- - It's not. - That the repercussions of that one hour shift, because what's also clear now based on what you're saying, is that that one hour shift taking you out of alignment with the natural light-dark cycle in exactly the wrong direction. - It's pushing people to get even later. - Yeah. - In the summer, when light is going to push you later anyway. It doesn't make sense. You put it beautifully, I just rambled and this is really- - No, no, you made it clear. - I mean, it's like literally it it made people who are having problem having an advanced sleep rhythm because they are delayed, now you give them this hour to make them even more delayed. You push them even later in the day-night cycle. It just doesn't make sense at all. - I think 2022 should be the year that we abolish daylight savings. - Oh, man. That would be the day for me honestly. - Well, also, if it has a positive effect on what is essentially an epidemic of mental health issues and other issues related to improper interactions with light, that I think is a well worthwhile cause, and we can explore it. - Absolutely, absolutely. - [Andrew] So for once we're going to fight with another group. - Common, I would do to do that. - [Andrew] A common battle as opposed to with one another. - I mean, the circadian people honestly, to give them credit, have been trying for years to abolish daylight saving. - Yeah, the problem is they all go to sleep at 9:00 p.m. and wake up at 4:00 a.m., so we never see them. - That's right, that's right. - No, the circadian community has done an amazing job of figuring out what we need. - Right. - And then the challenge of course, is making sure that people get what they need. - Right. - And making sure that at a societal level, we're not vaulting ourselves into the wrong direction. - And the biggest problem is that the late waking people, they think that really, and I'm going to try to put it in a better way now, they think, oh, because you're a morning person, you want to see the sun early. So you want me to suffer it dropping late, but that's not the case. Because what happens is when they shift it back after the daylight saving, now they're going to make you suffer really badly because now it's going to be earlier. - Right, in the fall. - In the fall when there is not enough light. - Yeah, that's right. - And they keep it the same way. So to try to convince them that actually this at the end causes more trouble when you need the light for your late schedule in the fall, when they shift it back. Then they say, keep it daylight saving all the time. And that has been proven that it's very bad. Like people have done studies that literally two areas close to each others and areas that were the whole year on daylight saving has much more problems even in cancer rates and depression. So you don't want to do that. So that's what trying to convince people that you need to prevent that switch, and you don't need daylight saving at all. That's where the problem happens. - Interesting. I had not thought about that, but yes, you late risers that in the fall, when it's the fall back, as they say, spring forward, fall back, you dial back the clock, it's really compounding the problem that already exists. - Exactly. And it's really nice if you think, if you keep it consistent in the spring, you get the equinox and then the day starts going up, and then even in the summer it start going down, and then the fall you get the other equinox and go back. So it's very symmetrical, right? It goes into short day, longer, long, long, long, long, and then short day again. But now you're getting these bumps in both sides of the spring and fall. Why would you do that? Something that is beautifully symmetrical, beautifully smooth, you're putting bumps into it. - Well, and not just beautiful because it's there, but it evolved. I mean, essentially this is the system- - It's natural. - We evolved in for hundreds of thousands of years. - This is the seasonality. The most even apart from the exact equator, every part of the earth has seasonality. - I want to briefly touch on something which is individual and genetic variation in the sensitivity to light. - Yeah. - So not chronotype, but first of all, a very basic question. Do people with light eyes, light colored eyes, are they more sensitive to light than people with darker pigmented eyes? - I mean, honestly, it makes sense they will be more because if you think of my dark pupil, it's blocking more light. So, if you have light pupil, yes, for vision, it may not be very obvious, but for something that is measuring the amount of light, you're getting more light than me. So you would probably need less light to be effective as somebody who's darker. And that maybe could explain why sometimes lighter people say, I don't want to go into very bright conditions because it's really bright. - Yeah, I can't even be at a cafe with one of these reflective tables, like a metal table. - Right. - Unless I have very dark sunglasses on. - Exactly. - It's so bright it's painful for me. - Right, right. - Whereas some people like you, we've sat outside and had meals and you're like fine. I assumed it was kind of Jordanian toughness versus- - No, no, no, it's really the pupil blocks more light. So I think it is possible that it's as simple as the pupil blocking more light can have sensitivity, but your question is also goes deeper. Are there more sensitivity differences? And my understanding would be I would think that it may be, depends on how effective your cells are in responding to light, how healthy your ipRCGs are. But there's not many studies to show that. What is really clear that is happening is that patients with bipolar, they seem to have different sensitivities to light. So it seems that at least people who have psychological changes, they may have differences to the sensitivity of light, so. - Are those differences in a particular direction? - I don't remember the exact data. - We can look it up, yeah. - Yeah, yeah. - And people have heard me say this at nauseum to the point where they actually roll their eyes, but that these are the only two pieces of brain, I'm pointing to my eyes, folks, that are outside the cranial vault. - Absolutely. - They are two pieces of brain that it basically inform the brain about whether or not to be alert or asleep. - Absolutely. - But you can imagine that those two little pieces of brain that we call eyes would have genetic variations. - Right. - Of course eye color is genetically determined, that there would be genetic variations based on whether or not your ancestry evolved near the equator or further from the equator, right? I mean, you see more blue eyes in Scandinavia, than you do at the equator. - Absolutely, I mean, it's the lack of light that said you need less inhibition because there's not enough light, right? So that's the idea of the changing color. So, yeah, I totally agree with you. I mean, I think this is an area that will be studied later and will be empirically determined. The problem we have in this field right now, which I think is the biggest problem, is we don't have a way to measure the ipRCGs sensitivities in humans. So we still like, it's easy to measure your rod cone function if you go to an optometrist, they measure all the details, right? Contrast detection. - You look at the chart, you get out the Snellen Chart. - Yeah, exactly. - You look at the letters of the DMV. - Yeah. - Yeah. - But for the non subconscious, we still don't have a good measuring systems to figure out what is Andrew's sensitivity? What is Samer's sensitivity? What is this person's sensitivity? And I think we're starting to work on something like that to hopefully develop these techniques. But till we develop them, it's going to be very hard to figure out if there is a sensitivity difference? How do they relate? And on men and woman? Dark and light? And all that, normal versus psychologically affect, and stuff like that. - Fascinating. And every time you talk, I learn so much. It's in the best way, the best sense of the term, it's a waterfall of knowledge. As a final question, I have a question about sensitivity of a whole other kind, and that's the sensitivity to spicy food. Now, the reason I'm asking this question, what seemingly out of the blue is that I made the mistake once of having Samer cook for me. And I said, "Not too spicy." And he said, "Okay, not too spicy." He actually said, "Okay, not too spicy." And it almost killed me. Like it was like two or three days. So you know a lot about biology outside the visual system, light, et cetera. You've been around a while. Are there known genetic or inherited of any kind sensitivities to spicy food? To things like red peppers and capsaicin? Because what you call mild, my friend, almost put me into the hospital. - I think this is similar to you swimming in the ocean and I need to go develop the pain tolerance to do it. - Okay, true, true, I like cold water swims and Samer's not a fan. - Yeah. - But that's going to change. It's adaptable. - These are adaptable. - That's going to change. - That's my belief. Before I met Rejji, I was like you. And once I started eating a lot of spicy food, I lost touch of how spicy my food is. So I nearly killed you, Andrew, and I apologize for that. - I forgive you. So, basically what you're saying is that marriage toughened you up? - Toughened me up, exactly. - [Andrew] Maybe that's the solution. - That's what you need, yeah. - Samer, this has been an amazing march through the importance of light, not just for regulating sleep and wakefulness, but also for food timing, the interactions with mood, the interactions with exercise. I'm certain that people are going to start thinking about how to change their relationship with light as a way to anchor everything that they do. And that's important to their health. And I just on behalf of all of them, and just directly from me as your friend and as a colleague for many years now, I just want to say, thank you for the incredible work you're doing and for sharing it with us. - Thank you so much. And I actually now thinking about all of this, and you said, I should write a book. I should write a book and call it "The Tripartite Model." I think that would put all these components together, it would be very interesting to do at some point. - You should write a book. They'll probably try and change the title to like, "Food, Mood and You," or something. But you can put in little print The Tripartite Model or whatever, but regardless of what it's called, you absolutely should write a book. And so if you'd like Samer to write a book, or if you'd like to learn more about him, let's talk a little bit about where people can find you. Your laboratory is at the National Institutes of Mental Health. He is Head of the Chronobiology Unit, all these things as I've mentioned earlier, but you are active on Twitter and Instagram. - Right. - So, what is your Twitter handle? - It's @SamerHattar. - And we will provide a link for that in the show notes. - Yes, the Twitter @SamerHattar, and I think the same for Instagram. Yeah, actually. - And Samer has been coaxed onto Instagram, so he does post from time to time, mostly pictures of food that is incredibly spicy, but also information about chronobiology. He comes on for an Instagram Live every once in a while with me. So, definitely give him a follow there and on Twitter. And I'm sure that he'll be happy to answer questions and entertain any and all discussions about chronobiology. - Absolutely, yeah. And light, yeah. - Great, thank you, Samer. - Awesome, thank you, Andrew. - Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Samer Hattar. I hope you found it as interesting and informative as I did. If you're enjoying this podcast and/or learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. In addition, please leave us comments and feedback in the comments section on YouTube. A great thing to do there would be to make suggestions about future topics you'd like us to cover or future guests you'd like me to host on the Huberman Lab Podcast. In addition, please subscribe to our podcast on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. Please also check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. And we have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. For those of you that are interested in supporting scientific research, you can support the research in my laboratory on stress, on sleep, and human performance and other related topics, by going to HubermanLab.stanford.edu/giving. And there you can make a tax deductible donation at any level that you like. If you're not already following us on Instagram, please follow us @HubermanLab on Instagram and also on Twitter. Both those places I teach neuroscience and offer information that's not always covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [light music]

========================================

--- Video 305 ---
Video ID: E7W4OQfJWdw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E7W4OQfJWdw
Title: Nutrients For Brain Health & Performance | Huberman Lab Podcast #42
Published: 2021-10-18 12:00:13 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe science-supported nutrients for brain and performance (cognition) and for nervous system health generally.

I describe 10 tools for this purpose, including specific amounts and sources for Omega-3 fatty acids which make up the "structural fat" of neurons (nerve cells) and allow them to function across our lifespan. I also review data on creatine, phosphatidylserine, anthocyanins, choline, glutamine and how they each impact brain function in healthy people seeking to reinforce and improve their cognition and in those combatting cognitive decline. I describe both food-based and supplement-based sources for these compounds, and their effective dose ranges based on peer-reviewed literature.

Then I review the 3 factors: gut-brain signaling, perceived taste, and learned associations that combine with the metabolic and blood-sugar-elevating effects of food to determine what foods we seek and prefer. Amazingly, it's not just about what tastes good to us. Next, I explore how we can leverage the neural circuits of learned food preference toward seeking and enjoying the right foods for brain health and performance. I also review new data on non-caloric sweeteners and why consuming them with glucose-elevating foods can be detrimental,  in some cases rapidly leading to insulin dysregulation. This episode covers more than 10 actionable tools for those seeking to improve and/or maintain brain function, and it explains modern neuroscience underlying of our sense of taste, our food seeking preferences and brain metabolism.

#HubermanLab #Diet #Brain

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com -- code: "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

RETHINK EDUCATION: The Biology of Learning Featuring Dr. Andrew Huberman:
https://youtu.be/Oo7hQapFe3M

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Review on Anthocyanins & Cognition - https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/24/23/4255
Review on Creatine & Brain Health Studies - https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/13/2/586
Review on "Rethinking Food Reward" - www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-011643

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Food & Brain Function Introduction
00:02:08 Summary: Critical Aspects of Time Restricted Feeding/Fasting
00:04:19 Sponsors: Roka, Athletic Greens, Headspace
00:08:24 Neuroplasticity Super Protocol (Zero-Cost Tools) Online
00:09:22 Eating to Enhance Brain Function & Foundational Aspects of Brain Health 
00:13:00 Eating Fats for Brain Health, EFAs Phospholipids (Tool 1: 1-3g EPA Omega-3/day) 
00:20:35 Phosphatidylserine (Tool 2: 300mg/day)
00:22:15 Choline, Egg Yolks (Tool 3: 1-2g/day Threshold)
00:28:26 Hydration & Electrolytes (Tool 4)
00:29:50 Liquid Fish Oil/Capsules (2-3g EPA per day; 300mg Alpha GPC 2-4X/week)
00:32:22 Creatine for Cognition (Tool 5: 5g/day) 
00:36:28 Anthocyanins, Dark Skin Berries (Tool 6-10mg/day (Extract), 1-2 cups Berries) 
00:41:19 L-Glutamine (Tool: 1-10g/day) & Offsetting Apnea & Inflammation
00:49:23 Neural Basis of Food Preference, Yum, Yuck, Meh; Taste, Guts, & Beliefs
00:55:25 Taste is 100% In your Head
00:59:50 Gut Neurons Controlling Food Preference: Neuropod Cells; (Tool 7: Fermented Foods) 
01:06:14 Capsule Probiotics, Brain Fog 
01:07:16 Learning to Like Specific Tastes: Sweetness & Brain Metabolism
01:12:11 Hard-Wiring & Soft-Wiring
01:13:25 Artificial & Non-Caloric Sweeteners: Safe or Harmful Depends on (Glucose) Context
01:18:15 Non-Caloric Sweetener & Insulin; (Tool 8: Don’t Have w/Glucose Elevating Foods)
01:22:17 Beliefs & Thoughts; The Insula; (Tool 9: Pairing-Based Reshaping Food Preferences) 
01:30:42 Liking Neuro-Healthy Foods & Bettering Brain Metabolism (Tool 10); Food Wars
01:36:05 Food Reward & Diabetes, Obesity; Important Review Article (See Caption)
01:38:28 Synthesis, Zero-Cost Support, Future Topic Suggestions, Sponsors, Supplements

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat rock music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are talking all about food and the brain. We are going to talk about foods that are good for your brain in terms of focus, in terms of brain health generally, and the longevity of your brain, your ability to maintain cognition and clear thinking over time. We are also going to talk about why and how you prefer certain foods to others. And I'm going to talk about the three major signals that combine to drive your food choices. I'll give you a little hint of what those are. One of those signals comes from your gut and is completely subconscious. This is not the gut microbiome, per se. These are neurons in your gut that are sending signals to your brain that you are unaware of about the nutrient contents of the foods that you're eating. The second signal is how metabolically accessible a given food is, meaning how readily that food can be converted into energy that your brain, not your body, but that your brain can use. And the third signal is perhaps the most interesting one. It's the signal of belief. It's the signal of what you perceive and believe the food that you're eating to contain, and what you think it can do for you health-wise and energy-wise. And that might sound a little wishy-washy or vague, but we're going to provide mechanistic data to support the fact that you can change what you eat so much so that you can drive your brain and your body to crave foods that are good for you, or at least better for you than the foods you might currently be eating. This is an incredibly powerful mechanism that we all have. It's one that I think is very underappreciated. And today, I'm going to review the data from both animal models, and fortunately, more recently, human studies, that really do underscore the fact that you can control your desire for particular foods. Before we dive into today's topic, I just want to briefly touch on some key takeaways from a previous episode, which is the episode on time restricted feeding, also called intermittent fasting. The key elements of time restricted feeding that will benefit your health the most, in terms of weight loss or maintenance, fat loss, organ health, quality sleep, and cognition, are that the feeding window begin at least one hour after waking. You could push that feeding window out to begin later, but at least one hour after waking. And that it end at least two, and ideally, three hours before going to sleep. Some people can end that feeding window much further away from the beginning of sleep, meaning they're finishing their last bite of food, for instance, at 6:00 PM, and they're not going to sleep until midnight. But many people struggle to get quality sleep if that feeding window is set too early relative to when they go to sleep. So begin the feeding window at least one hour after waking. End the feeding window at least two hours before going to sleep. And a key feature based on the scientific research, is that the feeding window itself fall more or less at the same period of each 24 hour day from day to day. Meaning, if you are going to eat over an eight hour period, that's your feeding window, you wouldn't want to start that feeding window at 10:00 AM one day and end it at 6:00 PM, and then the next day, start at noon and end it at 8:00 PM, and the next day, start it at 2:00 PM and end it at 10:00 PM, and so forth. As much as is reasonably possible, if you want to extract the maximum benefit from time restricted feeding, the idea is to keep that feeding window at, more or less, the same phase, as it's called, of each 24 hour day. If it slides around a little bit for social reasons or whatever reasons, it doesn't seem to be a big deal, but you don't want it sliding around by many hours from day to day, because of the way that that feeding window impacts other genes called clock genes that regulate a bunch of other processes in the body. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a career working on the visual system, and one of the key problems that ROKA sunglasses has solved is, if you've ever worn sunglasses, and you've gone from a very bright region to, say, a region with shadows, oftentimes, you have to take the sunglasses off. They've designed their sunglasses in a way, that no matter whether you're standing in the shade or in bright sunlight, you always see things with absolute crystal clarity, which is wonderful. Their eyeglasses as well are designed so that you can move from one region of brightness to another without noticing it at all. The other thing that's really terrific about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses, is that they are very lightweight. Most of the time, you don't even remember that they're on your face. And you can wear them whether or not you're exercising or working, because they won't slip off, even if you get sweaty. The other thing that's really wonderful, is that the aesthetic is terrific. Unlike a lot of so-called performance glasses out there that make people look like cyborgs, or frankly, just look rather strange, ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses have a terrific aesthetic. You could wear them to dinner, to work, running, exercising, and they'll work for all those situations. If you'd like to try ROKA, you can go to ROKA.com. That's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code: Huberman to save 20% on your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to cover your foundational supplementation and health needs. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started using Athletic Greens, and the reason I still drink Athletic Greens once or twice per day, is because it covers all of my vitamin mineral basic needs, and because of the probiotics. There's now ample data supporting the fact that probiotics support a healthy gut microbiome, and that the gut microbiome is important for keeping inflammation low, which is good, as well as for supporting the immune system, and for supporting brain health through the so-called gut brain access. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to Athleticgreens.com/Huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs. So these packs make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens when you're on the road, in the car, et cetera. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3/K2. There's now a lot of data pointing to the fact that vitamin D3 and K2 are important for hormonal health, for cardiovascular function. And so if you go to Athleticgreens.com/Huberman, you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs, and a year supply of vitamin D3/K2. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app backed by 25 peer-reviewed published studies. I think by now, most people have heard of the benefits of meditation. Reduce stress, improves sleep, better cognition, et cetera. I've been meditating for a long time, but I have to admit, it's been sort of an on and off thing. There are periods of time over the last 10, or gosh, even 20 or 30 years, that I've meditated consistently, and then I'll stop meditating. One of the terrific things about Headspace is that it has meditations of different duration and different type. And so I found, that as soon as I started using Headspace, that I was meditating far more consistently. One of the great things about meditation is that it works the first time, and it works every time. And the more consistently I do it, the more positive benefits I seem to derive. If you'd like to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial with all of Headspace's full library of meditations. This is the best deal offered by Headspace right now. So if you're interested, go to headspace.com/specialoffer. I'd like to point you toward what I think is a very valuable zero cost resource online. Recently, I took part in an event called Rethink Education that was put on by Logitech. And there, I gave a 20 minute lecture where I describe the classic and modern neuroplasticity literature in both animal models and humans. The neuro-plasticity literature is, of course, the literature that describes how to rewire the brain in order to learn. During that 20 minute talk, I describe that literature, but I also spell out what I call the neuroplasticity super protocol, which is nine-plus steps of things that teachers can apply in the classroom to teach any sort of information, music, math, sports, anything, and that students of any kind in any age can use to enhance the speed and depth of learning. You can find that talk on YouTube by following the link in the caption to this episode, or by simply going to YouTube and entering the search terms: Logitech Huberman. Some of the most frequent questions I get are about food and the brain. Everybody seems to want to know what they should eat and what they shouldn't eat in order to have peak brain function, to be able to focus, and memorize things, and so forth, and in order to maintain brain health over time, because nobody wants to lose their memory or have troubles with cognition. Fortunately, there are a lot of data now from really good quality peer-reviewed studies that indicate certain things that we can do, including certain foods that we should eat, and perhaps, even some foods that we should avoid, in order to enhance our brain function. And, of course, when I say, brain, what I really mean is nervous system function, because how we are able to move, and remember things, et cetera, doesn't just depend on the neurons, the nerve cells that are in our head, it also depends on our spinal cord, and the neurons that connect to all the organs of our body. So in general, there are two categories of things that are going to improve brain health from the perspective of nutrition. The first category is the general category of things that we eat and avoid, and things that we do and avoid doing, that will modulate brain health and function. What do I mean by modulate? Well, getting quality sleep on a regular basis. Making sure that you're socially connected. Making sure that you're not depressed. All these things are vitally important to our overall health , and, of course, they will impact brain function, but they do it, more or less, indirectly, okay? There are a few things that happen in sleep which directly benefit brain function, and repair, et cetera. But today, I really want to concentrate, not on the things that modulate our overall health, but rather, the things that mediate brain health directly, and in particular, how certain foods enhance brain function. And we are going to talk about how we can change our relationship to food. Literally, how we can start to prefer certain foods that are better for us than others. So just briefly, I want to touch on the modulatory components, because they are vital. First of all, getting quality sleep on a regular basis and ample sleep on a regular basis is the foundation of all mental health and physical health. There's no question about that. We've have done several episodes, including the Mastering Your Sleep episode, which is episode two of the Huberman Lab Podcast. And we've done a lot of other episodes that are all about sleep, and how to get better at sleeping. So I just want to make crystal clear, that unless you're sleeping well on a regular basis, your brain will suffer. You won't be able to focus very well, learn very well, and indeed, there are data linking poor quality sleep to dementia, or at least exacerbating pre-existing dementias, and things of that sort. So get your sleep in order. The other, of course, is cardiovascular health and exercise. The general prescription that's out there in the literature, and I think is well supported, is to get somewhere between 150 and 180 minutes of cardiovascular exercise per week. If you choose to also use resistance exercise, that's great. But the 150 to 180 minutes minimum per week of cardiovascular exercise is crucial for heart health, and heart health directly relates to brain health, because the brain consumes a lot of oxygen, glucose, and other factors that are delivered via the blood. So if your arteries are clogged up, and you've got poor vascular supply to the brain in any region of the brain, your brain will suffer. So get cardiovascular health in order. Now, with those two modulatory elements set forth, so that we're all aware that they're there and they are vitally important, now, I'd like to turn to the elements that have been shown to be vitally important for directly controlling, for mediating neuron function. Neurons, of course, are nerve cells in the brain, and there are other cell types, too, of course, that will impact brain function. The most prominent of which are the so-called glia. Glia means glue. But even though, for a long time, people thought that these cells were just kind of holding things together passively, the glia play a very active role in the metabolism neurons in brain function, and probably, also, in cognition, in thinking, and so forth. So what are the things that directly impact brain health, and what are the foods that we can eat that will support brain health? Generally, when we think about neuron function and brain function, we default to a discussion about fuel. The fact that neurons use glucose, which is blood sugar, and that they require a lot of it. In some cases, they'll use ketones, which we will talk about a little bit later, especially in people that are following a low carbohydrate or ketogenic diet. But before we can even consider the fuels that neurons use in order to function, we have to talk about the elements that actually allow those neurons to be there and to stay healthy, what actually makes up those neurons. And that brings us to, what I would argue, is the most important food element for brain function, and that is fat. And that may come as a surprise, but unless one considers the water content of the brain, which is very high, a lot of our brain, and a lot of the integrity of the nerve cells, the so-called neurons in our brain, and the other types of cells comes from fat. And that's because nerve cells and other cells in the brain have a external layer. It's what's sometimes called a double-layered membrane. It's essentially two thin layers that serve as a boundary between those cells, and that boundary is important, because how things pass across that boundary actually regulates the electrical activity of neurons, which is the way that neurons fire, and communicate, and keep you thinking, and acting, and doing all the good things that those neurons allow us to do. And those membranes are made up of fats, but they're not made up of the fats that are around our belly, around the other organs of our body. They're not made up of storage fat. They are made up of structural fat. And maintaining the so-called integrity of that structural fat, meaning the health of those neurons, is going to come, in large part, from the foods that we eat. Now, this needs to be underscored. What I'm saying is, that the foods that we eat actually provide the structural basis, the building blocks, of the very neurons that allow us to think over time. And as I mentioned earlier, the fat that makes up those neurons and other nerve cells is different than the other types of fat in the body. So what type of fat is it, and what should we eat in order to support that fat and those neurons? And the answer is the so-called essential fatty acids and phospholipids. Now, those are, more or less, the same thing, but I just want to make a very large literature very crystal clear. Essential fatty acids can include the so-called EPA variety or DHA variety. You hear about omega-3s and omega-6s. Most people are getting enough omega-6s from their diet. Not everybody, but most people are getting enough omega-6s. However, most people are not getting enough omega-3s in their diet to support healthy brain function in the short and long-term. I've talked before about the benefits of elevating the levels of omega-3s in one's diet for sake of offsetting depression and for enhancing mood. And indeed, there's a wealth of literature now pointing to the fact that ingesting at least one, or two, or even three grams per day of EPA form of essential fatty acid can have effects, positive effects, on mood and wellbeing that are at least on par with some of the major antidepressant treatments out there, but without similar side effects to those antidepressant treatments. And that for people that are already taking antidepressants, that supplementing with one, to two, to three grams of EPA essential fatty acids can actually allow a lower dose of antidepressant treatment to be used, and still be effective. So that's depression. But just in terms of maintaining normal cognitive function in people that aren't depressed, the EPAs and omega-3s seem to play a very important role. Of course, you can supplement EPAs through various fish oils, and it could be liquid fish oil, or a capsule fish oil. Some people, if they're not interested in eating fish for whatever reason, they're allergic, or for ethical reasons, they can take krill oil. And if they don't want to use krill oil, they can use algae and other forms of EPA. However, I think it's clear, that one can get a lot of EPA from the proper foods. And it turns out, that those foods, not surprisingly, don't just contain high levels of EPA, but they also contain other things that are beneficial for brain health. So what are foods that are high in omega-3s that we should all probably be consuming, at least on a daily basis? The number one is fish. So things like mackerel, and salmon, and herring, and oysters, and sardines, and anchovies. And perhaps, the heavyweight champion of EPAs per unit volume is caviar. Now, I don't know about you, but I'm not eating a lot of fish. I'm not eating a lot of caviar. I don't think... I can't remember the last time I had a caviar, unless it was sprinkled on a little bit of sushi. I'm not a big fish eater personally. I will from time to time. But that's one reason why one might want to supplement with EPAs from another source. But also, EPAs are found in chia seeds, in walnuts, in soybeans, and other plant-based foods. You can look these up online, and you'll immediately see that there are a lot of sources of EPAs. And many of the foods that I listed off might be appetizing to you, some of them might be unappetizing to you, or some of them you might be sort of neutral about. But it's very clear, that eating foods that are rich in omega-3s, and/or supplementing with omega-3s, to get above that 1.5 grams, and ideally, up to two, or even three grams, per day of EPA can be very beneficial for cognitive function in the short and long-term. Later in the episode, I'm going talk about how to actually change your relationship to particular foods, so that foods that you don't particularly like, you can actually start to like more, and that might be important for those of you that are thinking, mackerel, sardines. I'm making this face, 'cause, frankly, those are not foods that I naturally like. But again, I want to emphasize, that you don't have to consume fish and animal products in order to get sufficient EPAs. You can get them from plants. But I do believe, based on the quality peer-reviewed research, that everybody should be striving to get a minimum threshold of at least a gram and a half of EPAs per day one way or the other. The great thing about omega-3s is that they are also thought to be beneficial for things like cardiovascular health. And although there's some controversy there as to whether or not two grams, or three grams, or six grams is ideal for cardiovascular health, I think the bulk of evidence points to the fact that getting sufficient omega-3s in the diet is going to support cardiovascular health. Certainly not the only thing people should be doing to support their cardiovascular health. Aerobic exercise, and so forth, being important also. But it does seem to support cardio vascular health, and in doing so, supporting brain health. However, what I'm emphasizing is, ingestion of omega-3s to support the very cells within the brain that make up our cognition, that allow for cognition, and for movement, and memory, and all the other marvelous things that the brain does. The other compound that has been shown to be directly supportive of neuronal function is phosphatidylserine, which is abundant in meats and in fish. So here we are again back to fish being an important source of brain supporting food. Phosphatidylserine is something that, nowadays, people are supplementing. It's a lipid-like compound that, at least in three studies, have been shown to improve cognition. These weren't huge effects, but they were statistically significant effects. And as well in more than three, at least five studies, to reduce cognitive decline. And this is interesting. In every case, it was 300 milligrams supplemented phosphatidylserine, but one, again, doesn't need to supplement phosphatidylserine. Phosphatidylserine can be derived, as I mentioned, from meats and fish, and to some extent, from cabbage of all things. So I don't know how much cabbage people are ingesting. But later, when we talk about gut health, and the relationship between gut health and brain health, I'll mention fermented foods. And, of course, one of the most readily available fermented foods out there that at least many people find appetizing is sauerkraut, which is, of course, made from cabbage. It's fermented cabbage. So for those of you that do consume meat and fish, provided you're getting enough fish, you're probably getting enough phosphatidylserine. For those of you that are interested in supplementing phosphatidylserine to get these effects that were reported in these various manuscripts, which, by the way, I've read, and looked solid. I mean, I don't think we've seen the landmark study showing that supplementing with phosphatidylserine at 300 milligrams per day is going to create a huge offsetting of a massive cognitive decline, or a massive increase in brain function. These seem to be modest effects, but the effects do appear to be real. For those of you that are interested in supplementing with phosphatidylserine, it's a relatively inexpensive supplement that, again, is lipid-like. So it's mimicking some of the same things that you would get from food, but in a higher concentration. Now, after EPA, fatty acids, and phosphatidylserine, I would say, third on the list of things that come from food that can readily support brain function would be choline, and that's because of the relationship to choline in the biosynthesis pathway for a acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neuromodulator, not a neurotransmitter, but a neuromodulator in the brain. A neuromodulator is a chemical that modulates the function of many brain circuits, and also, circuits within the body. I'll mention what those are in a moment. But acetylcholine, as a neuromodulator, tends to enhance the activity, the electrical activity and chemical activity, of certain sets of neurons, and downplay the activity of other neurons. So it's sort of a conductor of sorts leading to enhanced function and activity in certain brain areas and circuits, and not in others. For instance, the brain areas that are involved in focus and alertness. We have multiple clusters of neurons in our brain that make acetylcholine. Two of the most prominent and well-known are the so-called nucleus basalis, which is a cluster of neurons deep in the basal forebrain that highlight particular areas of our brain. Highlight meaning when acetylcholine is released from those neurons at their nerve endings in particular areas of the brain, those particular areas of the brain can undergo enhanced levels of activity relative to surrounding area. So it's kind of a electrical highlighter pen, if you will, by analogy. That is the basis of much of what we call focus, or our ability to concentrate on a particular batch of information that's coming in through our eyes, our ears, our nose, or even things that we're just thinking in our head. So having ample choline for production of acetylcholine allows for focus through, of course, many intervening steps. There are also regions of the brain in the so-called back of the brain, the hindbrain, that release acetylcholine that are involved in general states of alertness. And not surprisingly then, many of the treatments for Alzheimer's disease, which is an inability or challenges with remembering things and focusing, are drugs that impact the acetylcholine pathway, and are aimed at enhancing the amount of acetylcholine that's available to neurons. And it can do that through a number of different mechanisms. You can do that by enhancing the amount of acetylcholine that's created, or you can do that by taking a drug that can reduce the amount of enzyme that gobbles up the acetylcholine, and in doing so, leading to more net acetylcholine. But outside of the scenario where somebody has cognitive decline due to Alzheimer's, all of us are able to focus to some degree, or not, or are able to be alert to some degree, or not, based on the amount of acetylcholine that we have. Now, other processes, of course, are involved. But what this means, is that making sure that we have enough of the substrates to create acetylcholine is vital if we want to be able to focus, and that's why dietary choline is so vital. And the primary source for dietary choline would be eggs, and in particular, egg yolks. And this, again, has a very interesting relationship to our evolution as well. We're always referred to as hunter gatherers, but when one hears hunters, we often think about meat and animal sources. And indeed, as a species, we hunted many, many other species of animals to consume them, and still do. But we also fished. We talked about that earlier. And consumed a lot of fish, and we consumed a lot of eggs. Eggs are an incredibly rich source of nutrients for the brain, and that's because the egg, actually, if you think about it, contains all the nutrients that are required in order for an organism to grow. You know, a bird that's in a egg shell, it's got the yolk there, and it's using that yolk for a reason. It's using that yolk as a source of fuel. It's using that yolk as a source of, literally, building blocks in order to create its nervous system. Many years ago, I worked on chick embryos, and it was these amazing experiments. You could actually take an egg, and you could create a little window in the top, and these were fertilized eggs, and you'd see, over time, you could peer in there, literally look in with a microscope, or even with the naked eye, and you would see this little chick embryo sitting on top of that yolk growing, and growing, and growing, and growing, and the yolk getting smaller, and smaller. It's really, yeah, incredible. They're using that as a source for all the building blocks of the body, but in particular, the nervous system. So eggs are a rich source of choline. Some people will supplement with choline. However, food sources seem to be the best source of choline. And as with the EPAs and the omega-3s, there are plenty of foods that are non-animal-based that contain choline. So if you're somebody who doesn't eat eggs, or doesn't want to eat eggs, things like potatoes, nuts, and seeds, and grains, and fruit, they don't have as much choline as eggs, but they do contain choline. So you can look up the values of choline that are present in those various foods, and make sure that you're reaching the threshold amount of choline for you. In general, most people should probably strive to get somewhere between 500 milligrams and a gram of choline per day. So 1,000 milligrams. And some people rely on supplementation in order to hit those levels, because they're not eating a lot of egg yolks, or they're not eating a lot of other foods. Certain fish contain choline, for instance, and the other foods I listed off a few minutes ago from plant-based sources. So some people will supplement with 50 to 100 milligrams, or whatever amount is necessary to get them up to that one gram, or even a two gram, dose per day. So we have three things that we know can support nerve cells. EPA, in particular, omega-3 fatty acids, phosphatidylserine, and choline, those three things I would list off as the top three things for enhancing neuron function, and the integrity of neurons in the short and long-term. And this, again, is setting aside the vitally important factors of hydration and electrolytes. I've said it before on other podcasts, but if you're not ingesting enough water, and you're not getting enough sodium, and magnesium, and potassium, then, obviously, your neurons can't run, because a lot of the brain is water. You need to maintain proper hydration. And sodium, potassium, and magnesium are important in order for nerve cells to function. In fact, they are actually the components, the ions, that pass across those lipid membranes, those little fatty membranes that we were talking about earlier, that allow the neurons to generate electrical activity and communicate with one another. So definitely, you want to hydrate enough. We will do an entire other episode all about hydration and electrolytes. But omega-3s, the EPAs, phosphatidylserine, and choline, it's obvious are going to improve brain function. How much they will improve brain function probably depends on how well your brain was working previously. In fact, many of the studies that have looked at the effectiveness of these compounds have looked in people that are suffering from mild or even severe cognitive decline. And while the outcomes of those studies vary, given the interest in maintaining brain function, given the fact that we don't make new neurons throughout our entire life, and given that everybody has to eat, these are quality healthy foods that we should all be ingesting anyways. And it's clear that they can support brain function to some degree or another. Many people will ask what I do in light of this information. And while I can only talk about what works for me, I choose to ingest fish oil mainly in liquid form, because that turns out to be the easiest way and the most economically affordable way to do it for most people. So there are various forms of liquid fish oil out there. Some of them include some lemon flavoring, so it doesn't taste like fish oil, because frankly, fish oil, to me, is sort of noxious tasting. And I'll take a tablespoon of that, or two, per day. If I'm traveling, I'll use the capsule form in order to hit that threshold. For me, about two, sometimes even three, grams per day of EPA. So not just two or three grams per day of fish oil, but two or three grams per day of EPA. Now, if I'm eating fish, which as I mentioned earlier, is not often, then I might reduce the amount of fish oil that I take. But that's my major source of fish oil. Currently, I do not supplement with phosphatidylserine. A number of people that I know and trust, and indeed, several colleagues of mine, do take phosphatidylserine. I don't have any good explanation for why I don't take it yet, but I have not tried supplementing with it yet. Maybe if some of you have, you can place your experience in the comment section. It would be of interest. And then in terms of choline, in order to get choline in my diet, I do pay attention to the various foods that contain choline, and I try and get those foods on a semi-regular basis. I do supplement with something called alpha-GPC, which is, essentially, in the acetylcholine pathway, or biosynthesis pathway. I don't take it very often, but I will take 300 milligrams of alpha-GPC from time to time. From time to time, I mean anywhere from two to three times per week. I'll generally do it early in the day, 'cause it, for me, can have a little bit of a stimulant effect. Although, it's not nearly as stimulating, say, as a double espresso, or triple espresso. But that's one way in which I enhance my choline function. And some people choose to get it from supplementation, because it's straightforward. There are a lot of supplements out there that contain alpha-GPC. Some people are taking dosages as high as 900 milligrams per day. That sounds very high to me. The studies of offsetting cognitive decline using alpha-GPC did use quite high dosages of 600 to 900, or even 1200, milligrams per day. So it has been used at those much higher concentrations. But because, fortunately, at least, not yet, or not to my awareness, I'm not suffering from any cognitive decline, I will supplement with 300 milligrams every now and again. Next on my list of compounds that have been shown in peer-reviewed research to improve neuronal and brain function is creatine. Creatine can be derived from meat sources. It can also be supplemented. Some of you are probably familiar with creatine or have heard about creatine from the context of the health and fitness world, where creatine is used to bring more water into muscles, which can enhance the strength of those muscles, as well as bring water into other tissues. It doesn't just draw more water into muscle, it can draw more water into the body generally. Creatine has also been shown to have an important role in brain function. And once again, this is something that came up during the discussion about depression a few episodes back. Creatine can actually be used as a fuel source in the brain. And there's some evidence that it can enhance the function of certain frontal cortical circuits that feed down onto, or rather, connect to, areas of the brain that are involved in mood regulation and motivation. And that's where creatine plays a role in depression, or rather, where creatine supplementation seems to be able to assist in some forms of mild depression. That's an emerging literature. It's still not well-established. However, there is now ample evidence that creatine supplementation can enhance brain function in certain contexts. And if you're interested in learning more about what those contexts are, there's an excellent review that just came out. The first author is Roschel, R-O-S-C-H-E-L. We will provide a link to this study, rather, this review, excuse me, in the caption. This was published just very recently in 2021. And one thing to make clear, is that creatine supplementation has been shown to be especially useful for people that are not consuming any meat or other sources of foods that are rich in creatine. What is the threshold level of creatine to supplement in order to get the cognitive benefit? It appears to be at least five grams per day. Now, the most typical form of creatine is so-called creatine monohydrate. There are other forms of creatine as well, some of which are thought to not draw as much water into non-muscle tissues, and for some people, that's attractive to them. They don't want water sitting below their skin, et cetera. I should emphasize, that the responses to creatine in that sense can differ. Some people get a little bit of water retention. Some people experience more. There's some evidence that creatine can impact some of the hormonal pathways, that it might enhance levels of so-called dihydrotestosterone, DHT, and therefore, because DHT is involved in hair loss, there are these theories that creatine can cause hair loss. And indeed, for people that are very DHT sensitive, it might. There's going to be a lot of variation person to person in terms of how much creatine impacts DHT, and how many DHT receptors they have on their scalp, and therefore, whether or not they experience hair loss. I'm just giving you all this information, so that you're aware of the various things that creatine can do. But nonetheless, I think it's interesting that creatine supplementation of five grams per day, that's creatine monohydrate, has been shown to improve cognition in people that aren't getting creatine from animal sources. And there's some evidence detailed within the review that I just described, that creatine supplementation can also enhance cognition in people that are also eating animal products. So I personally take creatine five grams per day, and have for a very long time. I can't say that I've noticed a tremendous benefit, because I've actually never really come off it, and so I've never done the control experiment. I take it more as kind of a baseline insurance policy. For me, I'm probably losing, I'm certainly losing some of my hair. Whether or not that's due to creatine or not, I've never done the analysis. But what I can say is that, I generally consume these things like EPAs, creatine, alpha-GPC to set a general context of support for my neurons, for my brain. And, of course, I also pay attention to the foods that contain these various compounds. So I don't actively eat additional meat just to obtain creatine. I eat a fairly limited amount of meat. I don't restrict it, and I do eat meat, but I don't actively seek out creatine in my diet. Rather, I use supplementation in order to hit that five grams per day threshold. Next on the list of foods that are beneficial for brain health is one that you've probably seen pictures of online, because there seems to be a practice of putting pictures of blueberries and other dark berries next to any title that says, "Foods that benefit your brain". There are a lot of foods out there that have been purported to improve brain function. The interesting thing about blueberries and other berries, blackberries, dark currants, any of these thin-skinned berries that are purpleish in color, is that they contain what are called anthocyanins. Anthocyanins actually have some really nice data to support the fact that they improve brain function. Now, whether or not it is direct effects on neurons, or whether or not it is by lowering inflammation, or some other modulatory effect, isn't quite clear. But I think by now, there's enough data to support the fact that eating a cup or two of blueberries pretty often, every day, or maybe you have blackberries, or maybe it's black currants, that these anthocyanins are good for us, that they are enhancing our overall wellbeing at a number of different levels. And just to give you a couple examples of where there are actually peer-reviewed studies to support those statements, the anthocyanins of which blueberries and other dark berries are rich in have been shown to reduce the amount of DNA damage, has been shown to reduce significantly, although, albeit, slightly, excuse me, cognitive decline. And that particular study was supplementation of a blueberry extract. I'll talk about the difference between extract and actual blueberries in a moment. But supplementation of blueberry extract in offsetting cognitive decline in elderly people. So what constitutes elderly is always a little bit of a debate and a discussion. But in this case, what they did, is they supplemented with somewhere between 428, I don't know why they selected 428, and 598 milligrams of anthocyanins daily for 12 weeks was associated with improvements on verbal learning and memory. And they had some other beneficial changes that were within the bodily organs, and blood glucose regulation, and so forth. Positive changes. But that's one study. In this case, elderly meant 65 or older. That study, and a number of studies like it, looking at things like mildly enhanced memory, reduced insulin levels, reduced oxidation of LDL, these sorts of things, have basically created a situation where anytime you Google or look up foods that enhance brain function, you're going to see a picture of a blueberry or some other berry, because of these anthocyanins. I personally don't supplement anthocyanins. I do like blueberries. I eat blueberries when they're in season. I love them. I'm what you would call a drive-by blueberry eater. Like if there are blueberries in a bowl on a table, and I'm walking by, I just have to scoop them up, like some sort of bear, or other animal, and pop them in my mouth. So blueberries don't last long around me. One of the issues with berries, like blueberries, and blackberries, and so forth, is that quality sources of them can be pretty expensive. And then, of course, when they're not in season, they're hard to get, and so that's why some people will supplement with them. So that range of about 400 to about 600 milligrams per day seems to be the minimum threshold for getting a cognitive effect in these elderly patients. In that case, they were patients. A good review about the anthocyanins potentially contributing to offsetting cognitive decline in things like Alzheimer's, and also enhancing brain function in people that don't have Alzheimer's, is a review by Afzal, A-F-Z-A-L, that was published in 2019. We will also provide a link to that study in the caption. When one looks across the total batch of studies that are out there on this, it appears, that if one is going to supplement with blueberry extract to get the anthocyanin effect on cognition, dosages of somewhere between 5 1/2 or about 11 grams seem optimal with the higher end, closer to 10 or 11 grams being more beneficial. The blueberry eaters out there like me, who prefer to get their anthocyanins from the actual berries, it appears that somewhere between 60 to 120 grams of fresh blueberries each day is the way that you can get sufficient anthocyanins to at least shift your system, or bias your brain towards these enhanced cognitive effects. So we've got EPA fatty acids, we've got phosphatidylserine, we've got choline, we've got creatine, and we have the anthocyanins. And the last item that I'd like to place in this list of food-derived things that can enhance brain function is glutamine. Glutamine is a very interesting amino acid. I've talked about glutamine on here before. There's some evidence, although, somewhat scant, there's some evidence that glutamine can enhance immune system function. So people will supplement with glutamine, or people can get glutamine from foods. Foods that contain a lot of glutamine are things like cottage cheese. There are also other sources of glutamine. Glutamine is rich in protein rich foods, things like beef, chicken, fish, dairy products, eggs. But also, for you non-animal food consuming people out there, vegetables, including beans, cabbage, once again, spinach, parsley, things of that sort. So those foods contain glutamine. For people that supplement with glutamine, generally, they will take anywhere from a gram, as much as 10 grams, per day. Why would they want to do that? Well, there's also some evidence starting to emerge that glutamine can help offset sugar cravings, and I've talked about this on the podcast before. We're going to talk more about the basis for this a little bit later. But in brief, we all have neurons in our gut that sense the amino acid content, the fat content, and the sugar content of the foods that we eat, and signal in a subconscious way to our brain whether or not the foods that we are eating contain certain levels of certain amino acids. And so we actually have glutamine-sensing neurons in our gut that actually have their little processes, their little axons and dendrites, as we call them, in the mucosal lining of the gut. They're not just sensing glutamine, but when they do sense glutamine, they respond, and they send signals to the brain that are signals of satiation, of satisfaction. And in doing so, can offset some of the sugar cravings that many people suffer from. Now, here, we're talking about glutamine for sake of enhancing cognitive function. And this is interesting, because it's been shown that glutamine supplementation can offset some of the negative effects on cognition caused by altitude and oxygen deprivation of other sorts. Yeah, okay, well, that's kind of a strange and unique situation. If you're going up to altitude, should you supplement with glutamine in order to be able to think more clearly? Well, it appears that there's good rationale for doing that. But the reason I bring this up, assuming that most people, including me, are not going up to high altitudes very often, is that it's been well-established that apnea, failure to breathe properly during sleep, can contribute to age-related, and even non-age-related, cognitive decline. There are a lot of reasons for apneas, ranging from obesity to obstruction of the airways, for other reasons. There are tremendous number of underlying causes of apnea, and it's something to be taken seriously. I mean, heart attacks, all sorts of metabolic issues, are caused by apnea. Apnea is a serious issue that disrupts the depth of sleep, and it's a serious health issue in general. In any event, apnea is associated with cognitive decline and cognitive dysfunction, even in young people, and it does appear that glutamine supplementation can offset some of the cognitive deficits that are associated with reduced oxygenation of the brain. If you'd like to learn more about how apnea can negatively impact cognition, there's an excellent paper that was published on this in 2018. The first author is Sharma, S-H-A-R-M-A. It should be easy to find. The title of the paper is "Obstructive Sleep Apnea Severity Affects Amyloid Burden In Cognitively Normal Elderly". This was a longitudinal study. Amyloid burden is a correlate of Alzheimer's and other forms of neurodegeneration and cognitive decline associated with memory deficits. So obstructive sleep apnea [clears throat], excuse me, is a very serious issue for which glutamine appears to be able to offset some of the negative symptomatology. So how is it that glutamine, either from food or through supplementation, can offset some of these so-called hypoxic effects caused by sleep apnea? Hypoxia being a lack of oxygen for the brain that relate to cognitive decline. It appears to have this positive impact by way of reducing inflammation. So if you want to look more deeply into the various biological pathways and the supplementation regimes for this, the paper that I think is really spectacular is a paper, last author is Quaresma, Q-U-A-R-E-S-M-A. That's Q-U-A-R-E-S-M-A. It's a review. "The Possible Importance of Glutamine Supplementation to Mood and Cognition in Hypoxia from High Altitude". And even though paper is about high altitude-induced hypoxia, it does seem to have direct relevance to the sorts of apnea that are related to Alzheimer's and other forms of cognitive decline. Now, I've been taking glutamine as a supplement, gosh, since I was in college, mostly because I felt, either by superstition or by reality, that it protected me from various flus and colds, and things of that sort, because of the purported immune-enhancing effects. Again, those immune-enhancing effects have some data to support them, not a ton. However, I got into the habit of taking glutamine, and now that I've learned that glutamine seems to also have some cognitive-enhancing effects, possibly, it's a supplement that I continue to take. I take very small amounts of it, but I do take it on a regular basis. So that, more or less, completes the list of things that, at least by my read of the literature, are things that are supported by at least three, and in some cases, as many as hundreds of studies, in various populations, that have been explored in mouse studies often, but also in a number of human studies. I want to emphasize again, that all of the things I listed out, whether or not it's EPAs, whether or not it's phosphatidylserine, whether or not it's choline, whether or not it's the various compounds that are in berries, et cetera, all of those can be extracted from food. There is not any law that says that you have to get them from supplementation. Supplementation can help you get to the very high levels of those things, if you want to work on the higher end, if that's right for you. Obviously, check with your doctor before taking anything or removing anything from your diet or supplement regime. But in general, you can get these things from foods. It's just so happens, that for some of these compounds, the foods that they're contained in, like fish, are not foods that I particularly enjoy, and so I rely on [clears throat], excuse me, I rely on supplements in order to get sufficient levels for me. But again, you can get these levels from food. And the reason I made this list, the reason that I emphasize these things in this particular order, is that they support the structure of neurons. They support the structure of the other cells of the brain that make up our cognition and that are important for our focus, and our ability to remember things, and so forth. And they are less so in the category of so-called modulatory effects. They will also have modulatory effects on sleep, on inflammation, or reducing inflammation throughout the body, on cardiovascular function, all of which I believe are positive affects. At least what the literature tells us, is that none of these compounds are harming other systems of the body, provided they are taken at reasonable levels. But everything in this list is directed towards answering the question, what can I eat, what can I ingest by way of food, and/or food supplement, that can support brain function in the short-term and in the long-term? So I hope you find that list beneficial for you. If not for use, at least for consideration. So now, having talked about some of the foods and micronutrients that are beneficial to our immediate and long-term brain health, I'd like to shift gears somewhat, and talk about why it is that we like the foods that we like. We've all heard before that we are hardwired to pursue sugar, and to like fatty foods, and that calorie-rich foods are attractive to us for all sorts of reasons, you know, surviving famines, and things of that sort. And while that is true, the actual mechanisms that underlie food seeking and food preference are far more interesting than that. There are basically three channels in our body and nervous system by which we decide what foods to pursue, how much to eat, and whether or not we will find a particular food attractive, whether or not we will want to consume more of it, whether or not we want to avoid it, or whether or not it's just sort of so-so, what I refer to as the yum, yuck, or meh analysis. And indeed, that's what our nervous system is doing with respect to food. It's trying to figure out whether or not, yum, I want more of this, yuck, I want to avoid this, or meh, it's so-so. Now, while that may seem like a overly simplified version of food seeking and food preference, it's actually not that far from the truth. It actually correctly captures much of the biology of food preference. So let's talk about what these three channels for food preference are. The first one is an obvious one. It's taste on the mouth. It is the sensation that we have of the foods that we eat while we're chewing them, and those sensations, which are literally just somatosensory, touch sensations, you know, the palatability of food as it relates to the consistency of food, that's important. And as you've all heard before, we have sensors on our tongue and elsewhere in our mouth that detect the various chemicals contained within food, and lead to the senses of taste, which we call bitter, sweet, umami, salty, and sour. Now, most of us are familiar with the sense of bitterness that comes from something like a raw radish, sweet, which comes, obviously, from sugars of different kinds, fructose, glucose, et cetera, salty, salty, and sour, think lemon or lemon juice, for instance. And then I mentioned umami. The umami receptor is a receptor that responds to the savory taste of things. So that's what you might find in a really wonderfully rich tomato sauce. For those of you that eat meat, and like meat, a really well cooked ,not necessarily well done, but properly cooked, I should say, steak, if that's your thing. And umami is present in both plant and animal foods, and gives us that sensation of savoriness. It almost has a kind of little bit of a briny taste to it, or braised taste to it. And indeed, brazing of meats and brazing of vegetables is done specifically to activate that umami receptor. So we have those five basic tastes. Those are chemical sensors on the tongue that, what we call, transduce those chemicals. Those chemicals, literally, in food bind to those receptors, and it is transduced, meaning the binding of those chemicals to the receptors is converted into an electrical signal that travels in from the tongue along what's called the gustatory nerve. The gustatory nerve then synapses, meaning it makes connections in our brainstem in the so-called nucleus of the solitary tract. There are other nuclei back there. Nuclei just aggregates of neurons. And then it sends information up to the so-called insular cortex, to the insula. I want to highlight the insula this episode, because we are going to return to the insula again and again in this episode, and later. The insular cortex is a incredible structure that we all have that mainly is concerned with so-called interoception, or our perception of what's going on inside our body. So it could be the amount of pressure in our gut because of how much food we've eaten. It could be the acidity of our gut, if we're having a little bit of indigestion, for instance. It can also be the case, that neurons within the insula are paying attention to how stressed you are, or how alert you are, or how tired you are. So it's really an inward focusing structure. It focuses on how we feel internally. And not surprisingly, the taste system sends information up to the insular cortex to give us a sense, literally, of what we've ingested, whether or not what we're tasting tastes good or not. We will return to insular cortex in a few moments. A very important thing to understand, is that the neurons in the areas of the cortex, your cortex and mine, that respond to particular tastes are providing an internal representation of an external sense. What do I mean by that? I don't want to be at all abstract. We take these foods, we break them down in our mouth by chewing them, or sucking on them, whatever it is the food happens to be, those chemicals bind to those receptors, and electrical signals are sent into the brain, but they are just electrical signals, just like notes being played on the keys of a piano. There's no unique signature for salty or sweet. It is the relative activation of one set of neurons that was activated by sweet, or another set of neurons that was activated by umami. It's that relative activation traveling into the brain in, essentially, the same form, the same electrical signals. This is really incredible, right? Electrical signals are sent into the brain, and you say, aha, that's sweet and I want more of it, or that's bitter, or I want less of it, or that's umami flavored, and I really, really like that, really like savory foods, as I happen to. That should immediately strike you as incredible, because it means that your representation of what you want more of or less of is electrical in nature. And to really tamp this issue down, studies that were done by Charles Zuker, Z-U-K-E-R... He's a absolutely phenomenal neuroscientist at Columbia University in New York. Studies done by the Zuker Lab have shown that, first of all, they could identify the neurons in the cortex deep in the brain that respond to a sweet taste or to a bitter taste. It turns out, they are non-overlapping populations of neurons. And then using some molecular tricks, they were able to either silence or activate the neurons that, for instance, respond to sweet. When they do this, they see incredible consequences on perception that, indeed, occur in your brain, and my brain as well, all the time without these kind of manipulations. Here's the experiment. They have a subject drink water that contains sugar, or drink water that contains a salty substance, or drink water that contains a bitter substance, for instance. Okay, I'm sort of paraphrasing a large amount of work. They identify the neurons that respond to sweet tastes. They see, as many researchers have seen, that subjects prefer sweet taste to other tastes, and certainly, sweet tastes to bitter, or sweet tastes to nothing, so to plain water. And then they go in, and they are able to selectively silence the neurons that represent sweet. And when they do that, they eliminate the preference for that sweet taste. Now, that might seem obvious, the neurons respond to sweet, and you silence those neurons, they no longer seek out sweet. But that should strike you, also, as incredible, because they're not actually changing what's happening on the tongue or in the deeper layers of the brain. Conversely, they can have subjects drink bitter water or plain water while activating, selectively activating, the neurons that respond to sweet. And what they find, is that then subjects will actively prefer bitter or plain water to actual preferences, such as sweet. So what this means is that, your perception of what you like is a central, meaning deep within the brain, phenomenon. It's not about how things taste on your mouth. Now, of course, under normal conditions, where there aren't these experimental manipulations being done, those things are positively correlated. Sweet tastes trigger the activation of sweet neurons, for instance. Neurons in the mouth that respond to umami, trigger the activation of neurons in the brain that respond to umami, and so forth. So they're correlated in a way that makes you seek out the things that you like, and avoid the things that you don't like. But as we'll see in a few minutes, turns out, that that is not a direct relationship that is hardwired. You can actually uncouple the preference for a particular taste with the reward systems in the brain in a way that, for instance, would allow you to eat, or I should use myself as an example, 'cause I don't particularly like fish. I've had a few meals that include a fish that were pretty good, but none of them were memorable in the kind of positive way, that like some other events in my life were memorable. But by way of these circuitries, and the way they link up with one another, it's actually possible to rewire one's sense of taste and preference for particular foods. If this is seeming at all vague to you, just hang in with me a little bit longer, because I will provide you with the information, tools, and resources with which to navigate this process. But the most important thing to understand is that, like with our hearing, like with vision, like with smell, taste is an internal representation that has particular goals for you. Your sense of what tastes good is related to particular things that are occurring in your brain and body, and that are likely to give your brain and body the things that it needs. It is not simply a matter of what you, quote/unquote, "like", or what tastes good, or what doesn't taste good. Let me give you a relatively simple example of how your body and your brain are acting in a coordinated way to make you prefer certain foods, and indeed, to pursue certain foods more. As I just mentioned, you have neurons on your tongue that respond to different tastes. But, of course, your digestive tract isn't just your tongue, it's also your throat. It goes all the way down to your stomach, and, of course, your intestines. It's a long tube of digestion. All along that tube there are neurons. Some of the neurons are responding to the mechanical size of whatever portion of the digestive tract it happens to be. So for instance, how distended, or empty, or full, rather, it doesn't have to be distended, it depends on how much you ate, but how full or empty your gut happens to be, whether or not something you just ate is temperature hot, you know, is hot in the sense of hot to the touch, or whether or not it's spicy hot, whether or not it's soothing, whether or not it's kind of hard to swallow, this kind of thing. So you have neurons all along your gut that are responding to the mechanics related to food and digestion, and that are related to the chemistry of food and digestion. There's a population of neurons, nerve cells in your gut, that are exquisitely tuned to the chemistry of whatever it is in your gut. And these are neurons called neuropod cells. They were discovered many, many years ago, but really defined with and classified with modern tools by Diego Bohorquez. I hope I'm pronouncing your name correctly. Diego, we've spoken many times, but I can't ever seem to quite capture the proper pronunciation just right. But Diego Bohorquez at Duke University, who discovered that these cells reside within the gut, and place little processes, they're little axons and dendrites, within the mucosal lining of the gut. And there, they are paying attention to, meaning they respond to, amino acids, sugars, and fatty acids. So as your food is digested, as food lands within your gut, neurons there are sensing what types of foods are available, and what types of things are making their way through the gut environment. Now, those neurons aren't actually taking those foods and doing much with them. What they're doing, is they're essentially surveying what qualities of food are there. And these particular neurons that Diego and his group discovered, send electrical signals up into the brain through a little passage that we call the nodose ganglion. The nodose ganglion is a cluster of neurons that then send up their own process into the brain, and trigger the release of dopamine, which is a molecule that inspires motivation, reward, and more seeking for whatever it is led to their activation. These are super interesting neurons, because what they're essentially doing, is they are providing a subconscious signal about the quality of the food that you're eating, what it contains, and then triggering the release of a molecule within your brain, dopamine, that leads you to go seek more of those foods. Now, this has profound impact on a number of things. First of all, there's the consideration of so-called hidden sugars. Dr. Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist at University of California, San Francisco, has been among the most prominent researchers to talk about the fact that there are these so-called hidden sugars in foods. Now, these are not just sugars, that they sneak in just to be sneaky, these are sugars that are literally snuck in in a way that you can't taste them. That's why they're called hidden sugars. It's not that they just put them in there for fun. These are sugars that are placed into processed foods that are designed to trigger activation of these mechanisms to lead you to want to eat more of these foods, but not because they necessarily taste sweet or delicious, but because they are activating these subconscious mechanisms that are driving you to pursue more of these foods. It sounds like a very diabolical strategy, and indeed, it is somewhat of a diabolical strategy. However, these neurons are also involved in signaling to your brain when, for instance, you are eating a food that is rich in omega-3 fatty acids, the fatty acids that we were talking about earlier. So why is it that you don't crave salmon? Why is it that I don't sit around daydreaming about mackerel? Well, because there's also the influence of the actual taste on the mouth. Under normal conditions, it's a combination of the taste of the thing on the mouth, plus the subconscious signaling from the gut. And while this isn't a discussion about gut microbiome, I should just mention, that it's very clear that having a healthy gut microbiome allows these neurons to function in a way that serves our seeking of healthy foods in positive ways. And without getting into a lot of detail about this, the best way to ensure a healthy gut microbiome that I am aware of is not necessarily to take supplemental prebiotics or probiotics. There are actually some reasons why you might not want to do that. But rather, to ingest two to four servings of fermented foods that are low in sugar each day. There is a recent study published in Cell showing that the ingestion of fermented foods, two to four servings each day, can enhance the quality of the mucosal lining of the gut that allows certain gut microbiota to flourish, and the gut microbiota that are not good for us to not flourish, 'cause that's the environment that they settle down into. This is work that was carried out by my colleagues, Justin Sonnenburg, which is in the laboratory upstairs from me, as well as Chris Gardner, and others at Stanford. They are certainly not the only researchers exploring this. But it does appear, that two to four servings of fermented foods each day, so these would be things like natto, sauerkraut, low sugar fermented foods, is great for the gut microbiome. And separate studies, not their study, but separate studies have shown that the correct gut microbiome conditions allow these neurons that signal to the brain to signal the right, at the right times, and in the right ways to promote healthy food seeking. Many people opt to supplement with capsule form probiotics. There are some data that suggests that maybe those don't contain the correct prebiotics and probiotics for setting the correct gut microbiota conditions. That's a little bit of a controversial issue. Nonetheless, getting probiotics from fermented foods is probably the simplest and most straightforward way. It's also the way that we evolved to do that over many, at least hundreds, and probably, thousands, or even tens or hundreds of thousands of years, people have been ingesting fermented foods, not just for their tastes, but for their health benefits as well. So now I've mentioned two of the three mechanisms by which we prefer certain foods. One is from the actual taste that we're familiar with, the taste on our tongue, and in our mouth, in the sensations that make us go mmm, or ugh, or eh, the yum, yuk, meh responses, as I referred to them earlier. And then there's this subconscious signaling coming from the gut that's really based on the nutrient content of the foods. There's a third pathway, which is the learned association of a particular taste with the particular quality or value that a food has. And this is where things get really interesting, and where there's actually a leverage point for you to rewire what it is that you find tasty, and that you want to seek more of. The work I'd like to talk about next has been carried out in mouse models, and has been carried out in parallel experiments in humans. This is largely, not exclusively, but largely the work of Ivan de Araujo and Dana Small. Ivan de Araujo is at Mount Sinai School of Medicine. And Dana Small is at Yale. And they, and others in their field, have done incredible experiments exploring how taste and food value, the nutritional value of food, and the impact of that food on metabolism in the brain drives our food choices, and allows us to change our food choices for the better. Their groups have done some really amazing studies involving ingestion of a particular substance that either contains sugar, and thereby, can elevate glucose, blood sugar, or not. And varying, meaning changing the taste associated with that ingestion of sugar. So let me just give you a simple example where they have subjects, these could be mice or these could be humans, 'cause they've done both sets of studies, drink sweet water as an alternative or a choice to non-sweetened water, or bitter water, or some other flavor. And what they find, is that mice and humans will prefer to consume the sweet beverage. Now, it's not always sweet water. Mice like sweet water, but humans will prefer, for instance, a milkshake, a fatty sweet drink. They'll consume more of that, and not surprisingly, dopamine levels in the brain increase in response to that. So the taste and the nutrient content of what it is that they're ingesting are aligned. They are matched. They've also done experiments where they have no taste, but subjects are being infused with sugar directly into the gut. And not surprisingly, based on everything I've told you up until now, subjects will pursue more of that thing relative to some other taste, either neutral or negative taste, because that sugar in the gut is triggering the activation of the neurons I mentioned earlier, which is signaling to the brain to pursue more of that thing. So this tells us something important. It tells us that we are driven, meaning we have mechanisms in our brain that make us motivated to pursue more of what brings both a taste of sweetness, but also that brings actual changes in blood glucose levels up, okay? So we are motivated to eat sweet things not just because they taste good, but because they change our blood sugar level. They increase our blood sugar level. This is important, because it needn't be the case. It could have been that we were just wired to pursue things that taste good. But what this tells us, is that we are actually wired to pursue things that increase our blood glucose, so much so that when the small lab... It's not a small lab. It's actually a big lab. But when Dana Small's lab, and/or Ivan de Araujo's lab, have done experiments where they use a compound called 2-deoxyglucose, this is a compound that can prevent glucose from being metabolized by neurons. So blood glucose is going up, but neurons can't use it. What they find, is that the reinforcing or the rewarding properties of a food or taste are eliminated. Put simply, it is not sufficient for a food to taste good consciously. It is not sufficient for a food to increase blood sugar. You need blood sugar to go up, and that blood sugar glucose has to be utilized by the neurons, even if it's not associated with a good taste. And to make it even simpler, if this isn't sinking in, this should make it very clear. What your brain, meaning, what you are seeking when you eat, is not taste, is not dopamine, is not even a rise in blood glucose. What you're seeking, even though you don't realize it, because it's subconscious, is you are seeking things that allow your neurons to be metabolically active. And this is fundamentally important for understanding why you eat, why you eat particular foods, and how you can change your relationship to those foods. Now, earlier, I referred to circuits that are wired for a particular outcome. And in biology, and in particular, neuroscience, we refer to things that are either hard-wired, meaning immutable, and unchangeable, or soft-wired. A good example of soft-wiring would be the areas of your brain that are responsible for speech and language are always, more or less, in the same place in your brain and everyone else's brain. However, they are not hard-wired to speak French, or to speak English, or to speak Chinese, or to speak German, because depending on where you were born, and the parents that you're born to, you need to be able to speak one or maybe even more languages. The taste system, and this general system of seeking particular foods, similarly is hard-wired to obtain certain types of nutrients. It tends to like sweet things. Most children naturally like sweet things, some more than others. But naturally, most people from childhood onward don't particularly crave very bitter substances. Maybe mildly bitter, but not very bitter. So there's some hard-wiring of preference, but there's also some soft-wiring in the system that allows it to change. The groups I mentioned earlier have done some really beautiful experiments looking at how artificial sweeteners interact with the actual sweet sensing system. And this gets right down to a number of issues. First of all, it gets to the issue of how we can rewire our taste system in ways that serve us for better or for worse. Second of all, it gets right down to the issue of whether or not artificial sweeteners are good for us or bad for us. And indeed, as of just this last year, we know an answer to that question, and turns out, it depends. And I will tell you in a few minutes when it is okay to ingest artificial sweeteners, and when it is very detrimental to ingest artificial sweeteners of any kind. Regardless, I'm not going to name off brand names, but there are different forms of these artificial sweeteners nowadays. And there are various forms of non-caloric plant-based sweeteners for which the same information that I'm about to tell you applies. Okay. So the experiments that were done beautifully illustrate that you seek out particular foods because of the way they taste, because of their impact on blood glucose levels, but also on their impact on the dopamine system, even if your blood glucose levels don't change. So here's the experiment. One group of subjects is given a sweet taste of a substance that also raises blood glucose levels, blood sugar, and dopamine goes up, not surprisingly. The second condition, separate subjects consume an artificial sweetener or a non-caloric sweetener. It is not preferred much over other substances, but it is sweet, so it's preferred somewhat. And it does not cause an increase in blood glucose levels, and not surprisingly, dopamine levels don't go up. So initially, we don't tend to like artificial sweeteners that much. That's the simple way of putting it. However, if subjects continue to ingest artificial sweeteners, even though there's no increase in blood glucose level, and therefore, no increase in brain metabolism, dopamine levels eventually start to rise. And when those dopamine levels eventually start to rise, you've essentially conditioned or reinforced that artificial or non-caloric sweetener, and then subjects start to consume more of it, and they actually get a dopamine increase from it. So that's interesting. It says that, consuming more of these artificial sweeteners, or consuming them for a longer period of time, can start to tap into the dopamine system, and lead us to seek out or consume more of these artificial sweeteners. Many people are probably familiar with this, because we tend to, or I should say, people report, that when they ingest these artificial sweeteners, at first, they don't taste very good, but then, over time, they seem kind of tolerable, and then maybe even pleasureful, and then some people feel, quote/unquote, "addicted" to various diet sodas, and things of that sort. Now, there's another condition that's been explored, and that's the really interesting condition, and it's the condition where an artificial sweetener is paired with a substance that can increase blood sugar, but not because it tastes sugary, like a normal sweet substance. So now, there's an artificial sweetener that's coupled with an actual increase in blood glucose. The natural world scenario where this would happen would be drinking a diet soda which contains no calories, and therefore, would not increase blood glucose, but is sweet, with a food that increases blood glucose. And when that happens, what you're essentially doing, is tapping into the dopamine system. This non-caloric sweet taste is paired with it, and there's an increase in neuron metabolism. So you have all of the components for reinforcement. And as a consequence, you get in a sort of Pavlovian conditioning way, a situation where, later, when you ingest that artificial sweetener, you actually get not only the increase in dopamine, but you get alterations in blood sugar management. Now, blood sugar cannot go up if you don't ingest something that makes blood sugar go up. So it's not as if you ingest artificial sweetener with some food that contains calories or sugar, and then later, you remove the food, and you just drink the soda, and your blood glucose goes up. Rather, it's a much worse situation. I'll make this in the natural world context. If you ingest an artificial sweetener, say, drink diet soda while consuming foods that increase blood glucose, then later, even if you just drink the diet soda, it's been shown that you secrete much more insulin, the hormone that regulates blood glucose, in response to that diet soda. Studies have been done in both adult humans and in human children. In general, when we say children, we mean human children, but just to be very clear what we're talking about. Exploring consuming diet soda with or without food, then later, consuming just the diet soda. And what they found was, having previously consumed diet soda with food, and then later, only consuming the diet soda, of course, there isn't an increase in blood glucose, because they're not bringing in any calories when they just drink the diet soda, but there is a significant increase in insulin release, and that is serious in a terrible way, because increased release of insulin, and so-called insulin sensitivity, is the basis for type 2 diabetes. So much so, that in the study with the children, consuming non-caloric beverages in this way, first with food, and then on their own, led to increases in insulin that made them pre-diabetic, and they actually had to halt the study. So I want to zoom out from this, and just really illustrate the major findings, and then talk about how this can be applied in the positive sense. I also want to mention what this means in terms of your consumption of artificial sweeteners of any kind. So first of all, the direct takeaway about artificial sweeteners. Artificial sweeteners are not bad for you. I'm not going to say that. What I am going to say, is that whether or not you ingest them alone, or you ingest them in combination with food, or as part of foods that raise blood glucose, is vitally important for your insulin management. And the simple extractor tool from this is, if you are going to consume artificial sweeteners, it's very likely best to consume those away from any food that raises blood glucose levels. So if you're going to enjoy diet soda, be my guest, but do it not while consuming food, in particular, foods that raise blood glucose. Because what these studies show, and I will provide references for these, is that they can vastly disrupt blood sugar management by way of the insulin glucose system, okay? And actually, I'll just give you the reference now. This is a paper from Dana Small's lab. The first author is Dalenburg, D-A-L-E-N-B-U-R-G. And the title of the paper is "Short-term Consumption of Sucralose With, nut Not Without Carbohydrate, Impairs Neural and Metabolic Sensitivity to Sugar in Humans". This is a paper published in "Cell Metabolism" in March of 2020. I think it's a very important paper. And similar findings have been addressed in mice, and in other studies. And now, because of this paper, there's now a bunch of other groups working on this issue. There's some evidence previously published in "Nature", an excellent top-tier journal. Sort of among the Superbowl of top three journals, being "Nature", "Science", and "Cell". A paper published in "Nature" a few years back showing that particular artificial sweeteners can disrupt the gut microbiome, and have deleterious health effects. That result, I think, stands, although, there are some results that may not agree with that, depending on whether or not the artificial sweetener is saccharin, or sucralose, or aspartame, or stevia. That's the gut microbiome. But what we are talking about here is independent of the form of artificial or non-caloric sweetener, because it has everything to do with whether or not there is a match or a mismatch between the perceived taste, and the effect of the thing that you are consuming on blood sugar and metabolism. So the first takeaway from this is, if you're going to consume artificial sweeteners, it's really important that you do that not in conjunction with foods that increase blood glucose. Second of all, it points to the fact, that the foods that we prefer, and the activation of the dopamine system, both through the gut, and at the level of conscious taste, in other words, what we like, is very plastic. It's mutable, and we can change it. How can we change it? Well, earlier, I mentioned a structure in the brain called the insula, this incredible structure that's involved in interoception, and interoception of all kinds. In fact, just as an aside, a year or so ago, my lab published a paper showing that activity within certain compartments of the insula of humans is responding to a heightened state of anxiety in the body. It can respond to changes in our respiration, changes in our heart rate. So this is... Again, it's a readout of our internal state, not just of taste, but of many, many different aspects of the mechanics and chemistry of our internal milieu within our body. All of the work that I was describing previously has also been addressed at the neural level. And using a broad brush to explain these results, what we can say is, when there is dopamine increase, one sees activation of the so-called nucleus accumbens, which is part of the so-called mesolimbic reward pathway. If you'd like to learn more about the mesolimbic reward pathway, and dopamine in general in humans and in animal studies, and all the various incredible and challenging things that dopamine can do for us, there's a episode all about dopamine that you can look up. It's easy to find at Hubermanlab.com. The increases in dopamine associated with sweet taste and/or blood glucose elevating foods and drinks, cause activation of the nucleus accumbens. That's not surprising. Also in the circuit is activation of the so-called arcuate nuclei within the hypothalamus. These are areas of the hypothalamus that respond to hormones from the body, and respond to hormones and neuropeptides in the brain, as well as neural signals in the brain, to drive us to eat more, or to stop eating. So it's hypothalamus, nucleus accumbens. These are sort of the... Hypothalamus and the arcuate being the motivating to eat, or motivating to stop eating. Both sets of neurons are contained there. There are other areas like the lateral hypothalamus as well. But hypothalamus is sort of the accelerator and the break on eating. And then the nucleus accumbens and dopamine release can be thought of as kind of a nitro boost, if you will, like the kids say. Do the kids say that anymore? Anyway, a nitro boost to increase what we call the gain or the volume of how much you want more of something, okay? When dopamine is present, it's this kind of generic signal to go seek out more of whatever caused that release. And then there's the insula. This very thoughtful, rational... Not really. It's not thinking. It's a brain area. You're thinking, but it's part of the areas of your brain that are interpreting what's going on in your body. Whether or not you feel good or not good. Whether or not you feel anxious, excited, or fearful. It's integrating all that information. And fed into this entire circuit as well are the inputs from your prefrontal cortex, which is your thinking, rational, neuronal structure, if you will, informing you, for instance, ah, well, I don't really like salmon very much, or I'm not so crazy about kale, but it has omega-3s, or it's rich in these polyphenols that are good for me. And if one decides that they are going to eat these things, not just because they are good for them, but believe it or not, if one takes the perception or adopts the perception that they are both good for you, and that in being good for you, they are good for your brain metabolism, and that you desire to be healthy, as crazy as it sounds, those subjective signals of what you tell yourself about the foods that you're eating can actually impact how those foods will taste, maybe not immediately, but eventually, and can impact the way in which your body utilizes those foods. Now, that might seem like a absolute pipe dream. If I just imagine that I like mackerel, mackerel will start to taste good. I'm not saying that. I didn't say that you could override yuck signals with this mechanism. I didn't say that you could take a food that would be absolutely noxious to you, or make you want to vomit, and override that. However, foods that are somewhat neutral to you can take on a different value based on the activation of the dopamine system. And now, knowing what you know, there are a couple ways that you could imagine doing that. First of all, you could, in this so-called gedanken, or thought experiment, you could, for instance, swap out sucralose, because sucralose is just a taste, right? It's an artificial sweet taste. You could swap that out, and insert kale, but eat the kale with something that raises blood glucose to some degree or another. Now, I'm not encouraging anyone to run out there and spike their blood glucose glucose like crazy. And in fact, blood glucose isn't really the goal. If you recall, the goal is to get neurons to be metabolically active with that blood glucose, okay? That's what's actually rewarded at a sub-sub-conscious level, meaning at a deep subconscious level. But consuming these foods with other foods that increase blood glucose, and thereby, brain metabolism, or I suppose, if you're ketogenic, here in the ketosis, I don't know what the range of foods that are allowed on ketosis are, so I don't want to misspeak here, and say, cracker, which would probably be a sin in the context of ketosis, and no knock against ketosis. I'm offering this, in part, because I think that there are a number of people that have and can positively benefit from a ketogenic diet. But for instance, if there's a food that you want to consume more of, but that you find somewhat meh, or mildly yuh, yuck, even pairing it with ketones, if indeed, you are using ketones for your brain metabolism, 'cause that's what happens on the ketogenic diet, over time, that food will be reinforced by the dopamine pathway. We know this from these studies where sucralose was the substance paired with the glucose elevating. In other words, metabolically elevating the food substance, or liquid substance. So how does one go about doing this? Well, first of all, I want to emphasize, that this experiment actually has been done in a slightly different context. Studies by my colleague, Alia Crum, in the Psychology Department at Stanford have explored the bodily response, in terms of insulin release, and the release of other food and eating-related hormones, as well as overall feelings of satisfaction, et cetera, in groups of people that drink a milkshake, and are either told that it's a low calorie shake that contains various nutrients that are good for them, or a higher calorie shake that has a lot of nutrients, et cetera. And what they found, was that the different groups, and here, again, I'm being very general with my description of these studies, but what they found, is that the physiological response, the insulin response, the blood glucose response, and the subjective measures of whether or not people enjoyed something or not, were heavily influenced by what they were told were in these milkshakes. So blood glucose would go up. Insulin would go up when people were told it was a high calorie shake with lots of nutrients. Less so when people ingested a shake that was, you know, that they were told had less nutrients, and so forth. When in reality, it was the identical shake. This is incredible. This is a belief effect. This is not placebo, right? A placebo effect is different. Placebo effect is in comparison. It's where the control condition actually influences outcomes to a same, or to some degree, just like the experimental condition. This is not a placebo effect. This is a belief effect, where the belief and the subjective thoughts about what a given food will do has a direct impact on a physiological measure, like blood sugar and blood glucose. Okay, so let's zoom out from this for a second, and think about how we can incorporate this into adopting consumption of healthy foods that serve our brain health in the immediate and long-term. And if you're wondering what those are, I listed them out at the beginning of the episode, and their justification for being on that list. What this means is, obviously, you want to consume foods that you like, but because brain health is very important, and many of the foods that promote brain health, perhaps, are not the most palatable to you or desirable to you, the key would be to ingest the foods that you want to ingest more of simply because they're good for you, and not because they taste good to you, alongside foods that increase whatever fuel system you happen to be relying on. I think that's the most nutritionally politically correct way to say it. So if you're keto, that would mean ketones, okay? If you're not ketogenic, and I think most people probably are not in ketosis, or trying to maintain ketosis, but for instance, people that are on a purely plant-based diet, that would be one set of foods. For people that are omnivores, a different set of foods. And for people that are carnivores, yet another set of foods. If you want to eat more of a particular food because it's good for you, pair it with something in the same meal. You don't have to hide it physically, or in the flavor sense. You don't have to hide it within that other food, but pair it with that other food that provides you a shift in brain metabolism, because that's really what your brain and you are seeking, even though you don't realize it. How long will this take? Well, according to the data in humans on sucralose and the conditioning for sucralose to have these effects, which, in many cases, were detrimental, right? Because they were increasing insulin. But in this case, you're trying to hijack this conditioning of food preference for healthy purposes, not with sucralose, but by ingesting things that are good for you, then the data really point to the fact that even within a short period of time of about seven days, but certainly within 14 days, that food will take on a subjective experience of tasting at least better to you, if not good to you. Now, I believe this has important implications for much of the controversy and food wars that we see out there. Food wars being, of course, these groups that ardently subscribe to the idea that their diet and the things that they are eating are the foods that are good for us, and that are the most pleasureful, and the things that everyone should be eating. We see this with every community within the nutrition realm. Now, of course, there are studies that point to the fact that certain foods and food components are healthier, probably for us and for the planet, but you really see it on both ends of the spectrum. You've got people who are on a pure carnivore diet who are arguing with a lot of biomedical evidence that that's what's best for us and beneficial. And then you've got people that are arguing the same general sets of arguments, but for a purely plant-based diet. And then I think most people fall into the omnivore category. What's very clear, however, is that what we consume on a regular basis and what leads to increases in brain metabolism leads to increases in dopamine, and thereby our motivation to eat them. So what this really says, is that what we tend to do regularly becomes reinforcing in and of itself. And I think, in large part, can explain the fact that, yes, indeed, for certain people, a given diet not only feels good, but they heavily subscribe to the nutrient and kind of health beneficial effects of that diet. And they often will provide evidence for that, whether or not you ask them for it or not. But that's true of every subcategory within the nutrition realm. Again, this is not to take away from some of the beautiful data emphasizing that certain foods, and micronutrients, et cetera, are better for us, or worse for us, and for the planet. That's not a debate I want to get into right now. What this emphasizes, is that foods impact our brain and its health, but they also impact how our brain functions and responds to food, and that is largely a learned response. We can't completely override, for instance, that certain foods evoke a strong, [grunts] yuck component. Certain foods are truly putrid to us. I should just say, certain things are putrid to us, and we should not consume them, right? At the far end of the spectrum, it's hard-wired for us to avoid those, because they can be dangerous for us. They can make us very, very sick. But it's also true, that if we continue to eat foods that are progressively sweeter and sweeter and highly palatable, it shifts our dopamine system, because it activates our dopamine system to make us believe that those foods are the only foods that can trigger this reward system, and make us feel good, and that they taste good. But after consuming foods that perhaps are less sweet or even less savory, that are not what we would call highly, or I would say, nowadays, it's super palatable foods, we can adjust our sense literally of what we perceive as an attractive and rewarding food, and indeed, the dopamine system will reward those foods accordingly. I can't emphasize enough how much this learning of associated food reward is important for not just understanding why we like the foods that we eat, and how to eat more of foods that are healthy for us, and enjoy them, but it also speaks to the fact that our brain, as a whole, is a perceptual device trying to make guesses or estimations about what certain foods are going to do for us. So put simply, we don't just like sweet foods because they taste good, we like them because they predict a certain kind of metabolic response. This is important also, because Dana Small, and Ivan de Araujo, and others have been exploring whether or not people, for instance, that have type 2 diabetes, or that suffer from any number of different metabolic disorders, whether or not somehow these food reward systems are permanently disrupted, and through a beautiful set of experiments that have been done by mainly by Dana Small's group at Yale, but also by the de Araujo group and others, exploring how the reward pathways are altered in various metabolic disorders, et cetera, people suffering from type 2 diabetes. We don't have time to go into all those data now, but the takeaway is, that food preference, and the ability to reshape these circuits is not disrupted in these people to the point where it can't be rewired, and that's very encouraging, because what it means is that, for people that are suffering from these syndromes, through some simple alterations in dietary choice, provided those are carried out over time and in the correct way, by pairing with the foods that will appropriately shift metabolism of the brain, one can actually rewire what they consider not just palatable, but attractive as foods. If you want to learn more about food reward and food reinforcement, 'cause it turns out, those are slightly different things, there's a wonderful review written by Ivan de Araujo. They have a middle author, Mark Schachter, and Dana Small. It's called "Rethinking Food Reward", and it was published in the "Annual Reviews of Psychology". You can find it very easily online. It was published in 2019. And it's a beautiful, deep dive, although, quite accessible to most people, about how different foods, and the way that we perceive them impacts our brain and body, and why we like the things we like, and how to reshape what we like. So once again, we've done a fairly extensive deep dive into food and your brain, focusing first on how particular foods and compounds within foods that are available also through supplementation can impact immediate and long-term brain health. Came up with a relatively short list of what I would call super foods, only because there are ample data to support their role in enhancing short and long-term cognition, and neuronal health, and so on. And we also talked about food preference, and why particular tastes, and particular events within the gut, and particular events within the brain combine to lead us to pursue particular foods, and to avoid other foods, and how you can leverage those pathways in order to pursue more of the foods that are going to be good for you, and good, not just for your brain, but for your overall body health, and to enjoy them along the way. If you're learning from, and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero cost way to support us. In addition, please leave us suggestions for future topics and guests you would like us to host in the comment section on YouTube. As well, please subscribe to the Huberman Lab Podcast on Apple and/or Spotify. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you're not already following us on Instagram, we are Huberman Lab at Instagram, and there, I do neuroscience tutorials that sometimes have overlapped with the podcast, but often, are original content altogether. We are also Huberman Lab on Twitter. Another terrific way to support us is by checking out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the episode. we also have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's podcast, and on many other previous episodes, we talked about various supplements. One of the major issues with supplements is that supplement companies don't always have the highest quality standards, and/or the amounts of the supplements that they list on the bottle aren't what actually are contained in the capsules, and pills, and powders of those supplements. For that reason, we partner with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of the supplements they use, and the quantity of the supplements they use. They partnered with all the major sports teams, and with the Mayo Clinic, and we have tremendous confidence in the quality of their supplements. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. There, you can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate into the main site through that portal of thorne.com/u/huberman, you can also get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. And last, but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat instrumental music]

========================================

--- Video 306 ---
Video ID: 9tRohh0gErM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9tRohh0gErM
Title: Effects of Fasting & Time Restricted Eating on Fat Loss & Health | Huberman Lab Podcast #41
Published: 2021-10-11 12:00:10 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss the science and practice of fasting also called time-restricted feeding. I review the data on how limiting food intake to specific portions of every 24-hour cycle (or fasting longer) impacts weight loss, fat loss specifically, liver health, mental focus, muscle, longevity and more. I explain how "fasted" is contextual, and relates to blood glucose levels and their downstream effects, and how the depth of fasting can be adjusted with behaviors such as different types of exercise, or with glucose disposal agents. I also discuss the optimal fasting protocol: and both the absolute (non-negotiable) and variable (contextual) features of a fasting/time-restricted-feeding protocol that will allow you to get the most benefits. I also discuss what does and does not break a fast, the effects of fasting on hormones like testosterone and cortisol and on fertility. I also review how different feeding windows of 8 or 10 or 4 hours differentially impact the effects of fasting, and why the classic 8 hour feeding window came to be but also might be ideal. I discuss mechanisms and offer tools to discern the optimal fasting duration and timing for you.

#HubermanLab #Fasting #FatLoss

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

RETHINK EDUCATION: The Biology of Learning Featuring Dr. Andrew Huberman
https://youtu.be/Oo7hQapFe3M

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Comprehensive Review On Fasting In Humans: https://bit.ly/3BwIyd7

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction, Blood Glucose & Mortality, Mice Vs. Humans
00:06:02 Sponsors: Roka, InsideTracker, Helix
00:09:42 Neuroplasticity Protocols & Online Lecture https://youtu.be/Oo7hQapFe3M
00:11:20 Feeding, Fasting, Performance
00:13:50 Calories-In, Calories-Out (CICO); Perfect Diets
00:19:48 Feeding-Induced Health Conditions 
00:25:33 Time Restricted Eating: When We Eat Is Vital
00:29:45 The Eight Hour Feeding Window 
00:31:26 Feeding Deep Into the Night Is Bad (In Humans)
00:36:33 Liver Health
00:39:45 Time Restricted Feeding Protocol: Rules
00:41:35 When to Start & Stop Eating
00:45:38 Gastric Clearance, Linking Fasting to Sleep &
00:52:35 Effects of Specific Categories of Food
00:55:40 Precision In Fasting: Protocol Build
00:59:30 4-6 Hour Feeding Windows
01:03:08 Protein Consumption & Timing for Muscle
01:08:13 How to Shift Your Eating Window
01:13:20 Glucose Clearing, Exercise & Compounds
01:22:37 Blood Glucose: Monitoring, mTOR & Related Pathways
01:27:40 Gut Health: Fasting, Clock Genes and Microbiota
01:29:15 Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver 
01:32:00 Effects of Fasting on Hormones: Testosterone, Cortisol
01:38:40 Fertility
01:41:50 8-Hour Feeding Window: Weight Loss Without Calorie Counting
01:43:20 Eating Every-Other-Day 
01:45:29 Adherence
01:47:15 Mental Focus & Clarity
01:49:12 Enhancing Weight Loss from Body Fat: Hepatic Lipase
01:53:15 What Breaks a Fast? Rules & Context
01:58:50 Artificial Sweeteners, Plant-Based Sweeteners
02:01:42 Glucose Clearing II, Cinnamon, Acidity, Salt
02:06:42 My Circadian Clock, Zero-App 
02:08:20 Odd (But Common) Questions
02:09:23 Effects of Sauna & Dehydration on Blood Glucose
02:11:12 The Ideal Fasting Protocol 
02:24:00 More Resources, Ways to Support Us, Supplements

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 307 ---
Video ID: 77CdVSpnUX4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77CdVSpnUX4
Title: Dr. Craig Heller: Using Temperature for Performance, Brain & Body Health
Published: 2021-10-04 12:00:03 UTC
Description:
This episode I am joined by Dr. Craig Heller, Professor of Biology at Stanford University and world expert on the science of temperature regulation. We discuss how the body and brain maintain temperature under different conditions and how most everyone uses the wrong approach to cool off or heat up. Dr. Heller teaches us the best ways and in doing so, explains how to offset hyperthermia and hypothermia. He also explains how we can use the precise timing and location of cooling on our body to greatly enhance endurance and weight training performance. He describes how cooling technology discovered and engineered in his laboratory has led to a tripling of anaerobic (weight training) performance and allowed endurance athletes to run further and faster, as well as to eliminate delayed onset muscle soreness. Dr. Heller explains how heat impairs muscular and mental performance, and how to cool the brain to reduce inflammation and to enhance sleep and cognition. We discuss how anyone can apply these principles for themselves, even their dogs! Our conversation includes both many practical tools and mechanistic science.

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com -- code "huberman"
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Support Research in Huberman Lab at Stanford:
https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Dr. Heller's Website - https://profiles.stanford.edu/h-craig-heller
CoolMitt Technology - https://www.coolmitt.com

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Craig Heller, Physiology & Performance
00:02:00 Sponsors: Roka, Inside Tracker, Athletic Greens
00:06:45 Cold Showers, Ice Baths, Cryotherapy
00:10:45 Boundary Layers 
00:11:55 Cooling Before Aerobic Activity to Enhance Performance
00:14:45 Anaerobic Activity Locally Increases Muscle Heat
00:16:45 Temperature Gates Our Energy Use 
00:19:00 Local Versus Systemic Fatigue: Heat Is Why We Fail
00:22:10 Cooling Off: Most Methods are Counterproductive
00:26:43 Exercise-Induced Brain Fog
00:27:45 Hyperthermia
00:31:50 Best Body Sites for Cooling: Palms, Foot Pads, Upper Face 
00:38:00 Cooling Your Brain via The Upper Face; Concussion
00:41:25 Extraordinary (Tripling!) Performance by Cooling the Palms
00:45:35 Enhancing Recovery, Eliminating Soreness w/Intra-workout Cooling
00:50:00 Multiple Sclerosis: Heat Sensitivity & Amelioration with Cooling
00:51:00 Enhancing Endurance with Proper Cooling
00:53:00 Cool Mitt, Ice-Cold Is Too Cold, 3 Minutes Cooling
00:58:20 How You Can Use Palmer Cooling to Enhance Performance
01:01:15 Radiation, Convection, Heat-Transfer, Role of Surface Area
01:04:40 Hypothermia Story, Ideal Re-Heating Strategy
01:11:40 Paw-lmer Cooling for Dog Health & Performance
01:12:45 Warming Up, & Varying Temperature Around the Body
01:17:35 Cooling-Enhanced Performance Is Permanent
01:19:55 Anabolic Steroids versus Palmer Cooling
01:24:00 Female Athletic Performance 
01:25:18 Shivering & Cold, Metabolism
01:26:55 Studies of Bears & Hibernation, Brown Fat
01:31:10 Brown Fat Distribution & Activation In Humans
01:34:18 Brain Freeze, Ice Headache: Blood Pressure, Headache
01:37:50 Fidgeters, Non-Exercise Induced Thermogenesis
01:39:44 How Pre-Workout Drinks, & Caffeine May Inhibit Performance
01:43:42 Sleep, Cold, Warm Baths, Screens, & Socks
01:48:44 Synthesis
01:49:30 Supporting the Podcast & Scientific Research 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [energetic rock music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Craig Heller as my guest on The Huberman Lab Podcast. Dr. Heller is a professor of biology and neurosciences at Stanford. His laboratory works on a range of topics, including thermoregulation, down syndrome, and circadian rhythms. Today we talk about thermoregulation, how the body heats and cools itself, and maintains what we call homeostasis, which is an equilibrium of processes that keeps our neurons healthy, our organs functioning well. And as Dr. Heller teaches us, thermoregulation could be leveraged in order to greatly increase our performance in athletics and mental performance as well. Learning to control your core body temperature is one of the most, if not the most powerful thing that you can do to optimize mental and physical performance, regardless of the environment that you're in. He also dispels many common myths about heating and cooling the body, including the idea that putting a cold pack on your head or neck is the optimal way to cool down quickly. And in fact, as Dr Heller tells us, it actually can be counterproductive, and lead to hyperthermia. It's a fascinating conversation from which I learned a tremendous amount of new information, and we didn't even get into the other incredibly interesting work that Dr. Heller does on down syndrome and circadian rhythms and sleep. So we hope to have him back in the future to discuss those topics. As you'll soon see, Dr. Heller is a wealth of knowledge on all things human physiology, biology, and human performance. It's no surprise then that he's been chair of the biology department at Stanford for many years, as well as director of the human biology program. So if you're interested in human biology and how to improve your performance in any context or setting, athletic or otherwise, I think you'll very much enjoy today's conversation. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and I can tell you that the visual system has to go through a lot of work in order to main clarity of what you see when there are shadows, when you go into different types of indoor lighting, and so on, and a lot of glasses don't work well because you put them on and then you're in bright light and you can see fine, but then you move into a shadow and then you have to take them off and they don't adjust, or they don't adjust quickly enough. With ROKA, their eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed with the visual system biology in mind. So you always see things with perfect clarity. The glasses are also terrific, because they're very lightweight and they won't slip off your face if you're exercising, if you're running or biking. In fact, they were designed for the purpose of being able to be worn while you're engaging in those sorts of activities, or simply working at your desk. I happen to wear readers at night when I drive or when I work and I love their sunglasses, 'cause I can wear them anywhere. And also the aesthetics of their sunglasses and eyeglasses are terrific. Unlike a lot of other performance glasses that frankly make people look like cyborgs, the aesthetics on ROKAs are really terrific. You could wear them anywhere you'd like to go. If you'd like to try RAOKA glasses, you can go to ROKA.com. That's R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code HUBERMAN to save 20% off your first order. That's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com. Enter the code HUBERMAN at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also analyze your DNA to see what you ought to be doing for your immediate and longterm health. We hear a lot these days about optimization, optimizing hormones, optimizing your metabolism, optimizing this, optimizing that, but unless you know the measurements of metabolic factors, hormones, and other things that are in your blood and DNA, you don't know what to optimize. With InsideTracker, it makes all of that very easy. They can come to your house to take the blood and DNA test, or you can go to a nearby clinic. They send you the information and you take those results. And unlike a lot of laboratories doing blood work out there and DNA tests, they have a simple platform, a dashboard that walks you through your results and helps you identify what sorts of nutritional or behavioral or other types of practices you might want to incorporate into your life in order to positively impact your immediate and longterm health. It's a very easy system to use, and you will gain a ton of information simply by doing that test, whether or not you end up making changes to what you're doing or not. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started using Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day is because it covers all of my nutritional bases. In fact, if people asked me, and I often am asked, what supplements should I take? I always recommend Athletic Greens. And in fact, if you were to take just one supplement, I recommend Athletic Greens for the simple reason that the vitamins, minerals, and probiotics, and adaptogens cover all your nutritional bases. And the probiotics optimize gut-brain health, which we now know is essential for mood, for immune system function, for metabolic function. It's just got so many great things in there. I really do feel better when I'm drinking my Athletic Greens. I mix mine up with some water, a little bit of lemon juice. And as I mentioned before, I'll drink it once or twice a day. If I travel, I might even drink it a third time, just because of the additional stress on my mind and body. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs. So these little travel packs that make it really easy to mix up athletic greens if you're on the plane or in the car. And they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. There is now ample evidence that vitamin D3K2 is supportive of the immune system and a bunch of other biological functions and K2 has been shown to be important for cardiovascular health. So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs and the year's supply of vitamin D3K2. And now for my discussion with Dr. Craig Heller. Great to have you here. - It's good to be here. - Yeah. It's been a long time coming. I know that I and many people have a lot of questions about the use of cold. So one of the things that's happened in recent years is that for many reasons, people have become interested in things like taking cold showers and taking ice baths for many different purposes. Sometimes this is introduced as just a general health tonic, but other times people get specific about how it can improve resilience or it can improve one's metabolism. Could you just tell me a little bit about what happens when I get into a cold shower or an ice bath? What are some of the basic responses at the level of metabolism? Obviously psychologically, we don't know exactly. It'll vary from person to person, but what happens when I submerge myself into an ice bath if I've never done it before? - Well, first of all, you get a tremendous shock. And what that's going to translate into is a bit of a shot of adrenaline. And I think this is really the so-called benefit, but I wouldn't call it a benefit, of the cryo chambers. You go into a cryo chamber and it's a shock. So you get a shot of adrenaline. So, sure. You're going to feel different when you come out. You've had a shot of adrenaline. But it doesn't necessarily translate into any benefit in terms of your physiology or performance, and so forth. Now if you take a cold bath or a cold shower, a couple of things are happening. One is you're going to stimulate vasoconstriction. So if anything, it's going to make it a little bit more difficult for your body to get rid of heat, because you're shutting off your avenues of heat loss. If you're in a true cold bath, the overall surface area of your body is so great that it doesn't matter if you're vasoconstricted, you're still going to lose heat. - Okay, so vasoconstriction, the constriction of, is it capillaries, vessels and arteries all constrict or just one or two? - Well, this is an area of controversy. In general, when people talk of vasoconstriction, they talk of the overall skin surface, and that is not true. The primary sites of heat loss, which we're going to get into, are the palms of your hands, the soles of your feet, and the upper part of your face. And the reason these are avenues for heat loss is they're underlain by special blood vessels. And these blood vessels are able to shunt the blood from the arteries, which are coming from the heart, directly to the veins, which are returning to the heart, and bypassing the capillaries, which are the nutritive vessels, but high resistance. So you can tell when you shake someone's hand what his or her thermal status is. The hand's hot or it's cold. - Do you think that's part of the reason why humans evolved this practice of shaking hands? [Craig chuckles] Assessing each other's level of anxiety? We all know that a limp shake is pretty indicative of something and a firm handshake is indicatives of something, as is the crushing handshake for that matter, right? - Yeah, I really don't know what the evolutionary origin of handshaking is, other than to get your hand away from your weapon, [chuckles] perhaps. - Right, a couple of questions before we get into these specialized vascular compartments on the soles, the palms and the upper face. You mentioned whole body immersion, like into an ice bath or very cold water up to the neck versus a cold shower. Is there something fundamentally different about those two, besides the fact that they both provide their release of adrenaline? Is there anything that's really important to understand about the difference in the physiological response evoked by cold shower versus immersion in cold? - Well, there are differences that are more physical than anything else. So if you are in a cold bath and you're still, you develop a boundary layer. If you're in a shower, you can't develop a boundary layer. - Could you explain what a boundary layer is? - Yes, it's best to explain it in terms of a hot bath, 'cause everybody's experienced that. You get into a hot bath and, oh my God, it's really hot, almost painful. And then you sit down and eventually it doesn't feel so hot anymore, because the still water, which is close to your skin, is coming into equilibrium with your skin. So it's like having a blanket on you or an insulator on you. And then if you move around, you disturb that still water layer. You feel the hot temperature again. - I see, so if I were to get into a cold ice bath or very cold body of water of some kind and stay still, I'd likely feel warmer at least until I- - You're not going to be losing as much heat. - I see. - Right. - And then when I move in- - If you flail around, if you flail around, then you're going to lose more heat. - Got it. - Yeah. But I think getting back to your original question about benefits, you have to keep in mind whether you're talking about aerobic activity or anaerobic activity, if you're referring to performance and exercise, and so forth. So if you're doing aerobic activity that you can sustain for a long time, your production of heat is rising gradually and is being distributed throughout your body. So eventually your body temperature is going to come up to a level that's going to impair your performance. So the benefit of a cold bath or a cold shower before aerobic activity is that you increase the capacity of your body mass to absorb that excess heat. - I see, so could you say that, in a rough sense, that a protocol that one might use if they're going to head out for a long run? - Yep. - Even on a reasonably warm day, not super hot, or maybe it is super hot, would be to take a cool shower before they go run. Would that be beneficial? - Sure, it'll take them longer to get to the sweat point and to heat up. - And what will that translate to in terms of a performance benefit? - Well, could increase your speed, or it depends on how you use that benefit. Some people are pacers. They will go at the same pace and then they will go farther. Or some people are, I'm going to say pacers and regulators and, no, no. Pacers or forcers. They will take that advantage and use it up as fast as they can. So they will go faster, but not necessarily farther. - I see, as far as I know, not many athletes, at least not the ones that I know, are getting into cool bodies of water, taking cold showers before they head out to train. But it sounds like there could be a real performance benefit there. - It could be a benefit. I know we're going to talk about our technology for cooling, but at one point our, I don't know if they're using it now, but our cross-country team, when they would go to compete in a very hot place, they would do their warm-up exercises, their stretching. Then they would extract heat before the beginning of the race. So I like to think of it as you have greater scope for heat absorption. - Interesting, about how long would one need to take one of these showers or cold immersions before heading out for a run? Roughly speaking, we don't have to get into details, because everyone's performance level and regimen is going to be different, where they live is going to be different, et cetera. - It's not as long as you think. It's minutes. - Couple minutes? - Yeah. Because what's going to happen is as your core temperature goes down, you will eventually shut off your heat loss. And that keeps it from going below normal. So if you've warmed up and your temperature has risen by half a degree, let's say, it doesn't take more than a few minutes to extract that heat if you're vasodilated. - Interesting, and what about for the anaerobic athlete? The strength athlete. - Right. For the anaerobic athlete, and let's say they're doing several sets and how many reps, whatever they're doing, their core temperature's not going to rise that fast, because it's only certain muscles which are being used, but the temperature of those muscles will go up. - So it's a local effect. - It's a local effect, right. - Okay. So let's say, for sake of today, maybe for this discussion, if we assume that the basic workout, even though people do variation on this is 5 sets of 5 or 10 sets of 10. So for those listening, it would be 5 sets of 10 of 5 rep repetitions, or 10 sets of 10 repetitions, 10 by 10, 5 by 5. Yeah, so if somebody, let's say, is doing a large body compound movement, like barbell squats where there are a lot of large body movements, hip hinging, et cetera. But for instance, the biceps are not, they're involved, but more or less indirectly. - Right. - So the effect is going to be to heat up the quadriceps, heat up the hamstrings, heat up the glutes, this kind of thing. - Right. - I see. - And then during rest, that heat will leave the muscle, but it's not fast. And certainly the heat can't leave the muscle very fast while you're working out, because when the muscle contracts, it squeezes the blood vessels. And the only way heat gets out of a muscle is in the blood. And your muscle metabolism can go up 50 or 60-fold during anaerobic activity. That means the heat production in the muscle goes up 50 or 60-fold. The blood flow to that muscle cannot go up 50 or 60-fold. So you literally have the capacity to cook your muscles. [Craig chuckles] - So this is probably an appropriate time to just mention briefly what the underlying mechanism of this is. We will return to the specifics of what one can do to mitigate this heating up, but could you just explain the relationship between energy production ATP and pyruvate kinase and the role of heat there? - Sure. We don't get something for nothing. So like a steam engine, most of the energy in our food is lost as heat. So we are roughly about 20% efficient. So of the energy that we take in in our food, about 20% of that can go into doing work, and the rest of it is lost as heat. Now we're mammals. We use that heat to keep our body temperature considerably above the environment. But if you raise body temperature a few degrees higher, you're in trouble, that's hyperthermia. So individual muscles can reach hyperthermic limits before you might experience it in the whole body. So to keep you from damaging your muscle by hyperthermia, we have fail-safe mechanisms. And one of those fail-safe mechanisms is an enzyme which is critical for getting fuel. In other words, the results of metabolism of glucose, getting that fuel into the mitochondria, which is making our major coinage of energy exchange, ATP, okay? So that particular enzyme is temperature-sensitive. So when the muscle temperature gets above 39 or 39.5, it shuts off. And that essentially shuts off the fuel supply to the mitochondria. That's when you cannot do one more rep. - So failure, could we say that- - Muscle failure. - One component of muscular failure is overheating of the muscle locally? - Right. - There're probably other things too. - Well, if you, yeah, if you lack oxygen, but our oxygen delivery is pretty good to the muscle. If you run out of glucose, yeah. That's going to impair you. But the most immediate, the most immediate impairment of muscle activity, muscle fatigue, in other words, is the rise in temperature of the muscle. - Interesting, I want to talk about how that muscle fails locally, but I have this burning question in my mind that I cannot seem to answer for myself. I'm hoping you can answer it for me. So let's say I'm doing five sets of five with squats. I hit fit muscular failure at a given weight. And according to what I now know, it's my quadriceps and the muscles associated, I mean, with the squat that have failed because of this heat triggering, this mechanism triggered by heat that shuts off the muscle. But my biceps are nice and cool, you're telling me. They're not doing too much work. It's only indirect work. So why is it that I can't set the bar down in the squat rack, walk over and do barbell curls with the same intensity that I could if I were to do those barbell curls fresh, not having done anything prior? - Well, you will still have a fatigue curve with your upper body, okay? And that will be influenced by any rise in temperature that has been generated by your lower body exercise. - So temperature in both cases is the limiting factor? - It's one limiting factor. It's one limiting factor. - I find that amazing. I find that amazing because I always thought naively that the reason muscles fail is because, quote, don't have the strength to do another repetition. That you lack glycogen or some ability to access that glycogen. But of course, we still have glycogen. It's naive for me to think that, because if I wait three minutes and go back, I can do those repetitions again. So the glycogen wasn't restored in that three minutes, obviously it was there. - Right. - So I realized there might be other mechanisms involved. Sounds like heat is, if not the dominant mechanism that prevents more work. It's one of them. - It's one of them. And it's a quick one. It's a fast one. So it can happen with, let's say you are a really experienced weightlifter, okay? You may be doing very, very high weights with sets of five or six. - Yeah, to be clear for the audience, I'm not doing very high weights for sets of five. [chuckles] [Craig laughs] I'm not particularly strong. I'm not super weak, but I'm not particularly strong, but Craig's referring, in the general sense, to you. So why is it that if I finish a set of squats, I can't simply cool off my quadriceps by throwing a nice cool towel on my quadriceps. Why is that not the best way to go about it? - Because your body surface is a very good insulator. Okay, we think we don't have fur, and therefore we're not insulated, but the skin, the fascia, the muscles underneath, they're all very good insulators. And that's why I said earlier that the way the heat gets out of the muscle is in the blood. - So I want to step through a couple other portals by which one might think that heating and cooling would be ideal. And then get back to these. - Sure. - Specialized surfaces on the hands, the feet and the face. - [Craig] Yeah. - So if throwing a cold towel or even ice cold towel on my quadriceps isn't going to work or standing in front of the fan, because I'm insulated from that cool, I can't cool off my blood fast enough. What about drinking 16 ounces of ice water? - Sure. You can do that. But you can calculate how much heat that can absorb, okay? And you can't continue drinking liters of ice water. You're going to dilute your blood and have other problems. But yes, it'll help. Sure, it will help. But it doesn't have the full capacity you will need. - What about an ice pack to the back of my neck or to my head or squeezing the cold sponge over the head? I'm deliberately moving through these options, because these are the ones that we see most often. We were actually just watching the Olympic track and field trials last night up in Oregon. I'm a huge track and field fan. And there were a lot of sponges on the backs of necks before, in between, and after events. And how good is that or how poor is that as a strategy? Since now we know that being overheated locally and systemically throughout the body is a serious limiting factor on performance. - Well, you have to understand something about our thermoregulatory system. We have a thermostat just like you have a thermostat in your house. And that thermostat is in the brain, okay? - Do we know the specific site? - Yes. - Yes. - It's called the preoptic interior hypothalamus. It does many things in terms of physiological regulation, but it serves as a thermostat. Now that thermostat has to have information. It has to have input. Where does that input come from? It comes from our overall body surface where we sense temperature, okay? So one of the things that can happen when you're overheated is that you can send in a cold stimulus to your thermostat and that sort of like wanting to cool your house by putting a wet washcloth over your thermostat, it's doing the wrong thing. So we've actually had experiences where we've had people exercising, getting overheated, and then cooling the body surface, and they say it feels great. This is fantastic. And their core temperature is going up. - Well, I think this is such an important point. First of all, I was weaned in a laboratory where there were always battles over the temperature in the lab. So people were always putting ice packs on thermostats or putting fans towards thermostats and trying to play this game. Good to know we were all being foolish, even though we were neurobiologists. Putting a cold towel over my torso or putting ice on the back of my upper back, you're saying could actually heat up my core? - It'll at least decrease your heat loss, your rate of heat loss as you're going to raise the issue a little later, I know, and that is our natural portals for heat loss. So you can think of the natural portals for heat loss as our air conditioners, okay? The thermostats in the brain and the information to the thermostat is coming from the overall body surface. So what can happen if you, let's say, cool the torso with an ice vest, you can actually cause vasoconstriction of your portals, your heat loss portals. So that's what impairs the rate at which you're losing heat. It feels good. Now back to the head, that's really interesting. The major blood flow to the brain comes up four arteries through the neck. There's the carotid arteries and there's the vertebral arteries. So when you put a cold towel around the neck, you're going to be putting a cold stimulus into the brain. And that's great for protecting the brain. You want to protect the brain, but it's also going to make you feel cooler than you are. So you will think you're ready to go again quickly when you've just essentially cooled the thermostat. - This is an important point. And there's a lot of interest nowadays, and people doing marathons, and even some people do these ultras, ultra running, which I guess is everything longer than a marathon. And last man standing, last man, last woman standing kind of things. So you're saying that if somebody's hyperthermic, they could trick themselves into subjectively thinking that they are cooling off by putting a towel and that they can go further, but their brain could cook? - Well, if they stop the cooling, then that hot blood from the body core is going to go to the brain. - Interesting, well, it's a bit of a tangent, but many people report after long bouts of exercise, or even just very intense bouts of exercise, feeling a kind of brain fog or mental fatigue. I assumed that that was due to lowered brain oxygenation post-exercise, but is it possible that there is some post-exercise effects on heating and cooling of the brain that might impact cognition, or I should say negatively impact cognition? - It's certainly possible because we know that rise in temperature decreases cognitive capacity. I mean, you can experience that yourself. You can get on a treadmill, and follow your temperature, and then just do a simple activity like adding and subtracting. You get to about 39 degrees, you can't do that anymore. You can't just calculate how long you've been on the treadmill. - So the phrase cool, calm and collected is- - Cool, calm and collected. - That's the goal in all pursuits. - That's right. - So I want to talk about these portals, because you've mentioned them a few times. Before I ask about what the portals are exactly and how they work and how they can be leveraged for performance, there's a question that my neurobiologist self can't resist, but ask. We have this thermostat in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus, which is interesting to me, the medial preoptic area is also one that's known to be sexually dimorphic, depending on testosterone exposure early in life, or et cetera. Although people should just note that it's not actually testosterone that creates these sexual dimorphism, these differences. Actually testosterone converted into estrogen. It's actually estrogen is the effector, which is fascinating. Nonetheless, we've got this area that acts as a thermostat. And you said it's collecting information from the whole body. Does that mean that there are pathways, as the neuroscientists like you and I refer to them, as these afferent or input pathways from the body to the preoptic area, is there a map of our body in the preoptic area? 'Cause I have to imagine that you can't have the information just coming from the left shoulder, just from the right toe. It sounds like you need a pretty, probably a pretty crude map, but that you need a complete map of the body surface there. - Well, you don't need a complete map in the hypothalamus. I mean, that thermal afferent information that you've mentioned, it also goes to the somatosensory cortex. So you know if an ice cube has touched you on the back, but that doesn't necessarily translate into a change in, let's say you're shivering or sweating. So the information that's going to the hypothalamus is more integrated representation of body temperature. - So it's sort of an average of what's happening- - It's an average. - Across the body. So if I were to, let's say I get hot on a hot day and Popsicles, when we were in summer camp, I went to a sports camp near here actually, and we'd run around like crazy. And then we'd get into the shade if we could, but we were, Popsicles. It was all about Popsicles. - Brain freeze. - Or the kids were putting ice cubes down each other's shirts or something. But that's an average, because other parts of the body aren't exposed, the mouth is exposed to the ice in the Popsicle case or the cold cubes are in the hands. As you said, it feels really good. - It feels good. Yeah. - But it sounds like it feels deceptively good, because in reality could still be quite warm internally. - Absolutely. Yeah. - Interesting. - Yeah. You can feel great and have a dangerously hyperthermic temperature, but I should say that when you get into the danger zone, things get bad fast. - What are some of the symptoms that people could be on the lookout for for hyperthermia? - Essentially, it's almost ironic that if individuals are transitioning into heat stroke, they actually vasoconstrict and they stop sweating. And that's a pathological situation. I couldn't begin to explain it. But essentially you are just feeling exhausted. You're feeling miserable. The heart rate is very high. Your heart rate goes up as your core temperature goes up, called cardiac drift. So you just feel rotten. But that's why since it's not a danger signal that you can translate immediately into, oop, I'm going into heat stroke, that's why people can overcome their bad feeling with motivation to continue going, to work harder. So there've been a number of high profile athletic deaths due to heat stroke that were during practice. Not in competition when people are really trying to do it, but in practice, which shows they were just motivated to push. - So let's talk about these magnificent portals that not just humans, but other animals, mammals are equipped with. So if putting cold on the neck or on the head or on the torso is not optimal, what is optimal? And maybe walk us through a theory as to why we would have these portals located where they are. And then we can talk about how one might leverage them for performance. - Okay, where the portals are, are in the glabrous skin, big word, okay? Glabrous just means no hair. So it's the hairless skin. You say, well, most of my body is without hair. No, most of your body has hair follicles. We are mammals, mammals have fur. We've lost the fur, but we still have that hairy skin phenotype all over our body, except, except for those skin surfaces where our mammal relatives didn't have fur. So the pads of the feet. And for the primates, upper part of the face. For rabbits, no portions of the ears, the inner surfaces of the ears- - Ah, never thought about that. For bears, the tongue. Bears have big tongues, huge tongues. [chuckles] - I didn't know that either. I haven't been that close to a bear yet. - Haven't had a leaking match with a bear. - Not yet. No. - So anyway, our mammalian relatives can't lose heat over their overall body surface. So probably very early on in mammalian evolution, they evolved these special blood vessels in the limited surface areas that don't have fur. And as I said, what these blood vessels are are shunts between the arteries and the veins. Arteries and veins are both low resistance vessels. So you can have high flow rate. Capillaries, which normally are between arteries and veins are high resistance because they're very tiny, okay? - Is it fair to say that what I was taught is that blood flows from arteries, then to capillaries, and then to veins, and then back to the heart. So it's sort of like from the heart through arteries, then through these little capillaries, which are like little estuaries and streams and then to the veins, back to the heart. Is that generally true? - Yeah, absolutely. - Okay, so what I learned in basic physiology is still? - Is still- - I wouldn't get an F in your class? - No. - Maybe a D or C, but not F. - So that's excellent. - Okay. And so you're saying that in this glabrous or beneath the glabrous skin. - There are these shunts. - And those go directly from arteries to veins? So you skip the capillaries- - Capillaries, yep. - And is it actually, as long as I'm, say that in the skin, when I feel the pads of my hands, how deep to the surface do these vessels reside? - They're below the, obviously the epidermis. So if you are warm and you look at the palms of your hands, they are fairly red and the backs of your hands aren't. You don't have these vessels in the backs of your hands. Now if you take a glass, like a water tumbler, right? And you grab it, you can see if you squeeze a little bit, the hand goes white. That's because you've shut off that blood flow. - Oh, interesting. I'm going to do that little home experiment. - So if you're bicycling on a hot day, you don't want to to be grabbing your handlebars all the time. You want to periodically. [chuckles] - Well, this is important. I know you're privy to some really amazing results that we're going to talk about, but I actually heard you say this during this lecture recently that Stanford held about human performance that we were both part of. And you mentioned this, that if you're cycling and you're working hard and you want to be able to do more work, we now know why you want to remain cool in order to continue to do work, and if you get too warm, that's bad, that gripping the handlebars too tightly will actually limit your performance. - Right. - And that's probably also true on the Peloton or any other kind of device or the skier or anything like that. - Right. - So loosen the grip, or if you safely can, you want to actually expose your hands to the world? Now what about for people wearing gloves? What about the, to me that just seems crazy based on everything you're telling me. - Well, gloves definitely impede heat loss from the hands, just as socks impede heat loss from the feet, okay? So if you want to maximize your heat loss, you want to have as thinner protectors as possible on your hands. And of course the feet are more problematical, because you have to be using them in certain ways. - Some people run barefoot. - Yeah. Well, yeah. - Yeah. That's become somewhat popular. It seems like it kind of came and went. They had those toe shoes things, but they looked so ridiculous that I think most people just were willing to take the performance hindrance of regular shoes. - Actually we had a track coach here at Stanford who for a while was famous for introducing training without shoes, running. - Interesting. - And he thought it was because it changed the posture of the runner. And I think it was just due to the fact that he was increasing the capacity of his runners to lose heat. - Interesting, yeah, so heating up at the level of the hands obviously is going to hinder performance. So how about with running? I noticed, I ran cross country briefly in high school, and not particularly well at that, but that we were told to run as if we were holding crackers in our fingers or something like very lightly, and to keep hands kind of loose. So running like this would actually be more beneficial performance than, or gripping a phone, which is probably what most people are doing nowadays, right? - Right. - Interesting and- - Once, I'll tell you a experience I had once. I was in Alaska in the winter and I went out running and I absentmindedly forgot gloves. And I realized this after a short period running, because the backs of my hands were aching from the cold, the palms of my hands were sweating and were hot. - Oh, amazing. Amazing. So these compartments are a real thing. And you mentioned the upper half of the face- - The upper part, that's where our primate ancestors don't have fur. - And the bottoms of our feet. So let's just take a moment and talk about some of the more amazing results that have been associated with proper cooling of these glabrous skin surfaces. - Let me introduce one more thing. - Sure. - Because you asked earlier about the pouring of water on the head, okay? One of the things which is not appreciated fully is that the blood which is perfusing these special blood vessels in the face above the beard line, that's the non-hairy skin, that blood then returns in the venous supply to the heart, but it actually does it in a very strange way. It actually goes through what are called, I'm blocking on the name now. - Take your time. - These are blood vessels that go through the skull, okay? And that's why the scalp bleeds a lot if you cut the scalp. And these blood vessels which are called, I want to say emergent, but it's not emergent. It's a word that means leaving. These blood vessels were primarily thought to be ways that blood is leaving the brain. But when you're overheated, the direction of flow in those blood vessels reverses. So the cool blood that's coming from your facial region goes into that circulation and actually is a cooling source for the brain. So you can cool the brain. You can have a cooling effect on the brain by pouring water on your head. - Interesting, so that practice, which we, at least for me, I most commonly associate with combat sports, where the fighter goes to their corner. They usually sit down on a stool, unless they're trying to do some mental warfare from the corner, in which case, they don't even take a seat. And their corner crew will squeeze a glove, excuse me, a sponge full of cold water over them, that you're saying is somewhat effective in cooling the brain? - Yeah, it's one of the natural mechanisms for cooling the brain. - I want to return to this at some point as well, but is there any known benefit to cooling the brain in terms of offsetting physical damage, offsetting the negative effects of concussion. Because one of the reasons why fighters will often get, on the back, a cold item on the back of the neck or on the head is not just to cool them down, but the theory is that it might offset some of the damage of neurons. - I just can't comment on that. I'm aware of those ideas, but they're controversial. One of the things that you want to do for injury to the brain is to decrease swelling. And one of the ways that you decrease swelling in many parts of the body is to cool. It decreases inflammation. It decreases the blood flow. So I think it's a really interesting topic and it's something that should be investigated. It's kind of hard to investigate. - Yeah, interesting. Okay. So I hear these stories. And I've seen the data. So I believe the stories. Maybe tell us a story about an observation that your group has made with respect to anaerobic exercise and proper cooling of these glabrous surfaces. And we can talk about the technology. Maybe give us the dips example first. - Okay. - So of course, I think most people are familiar with dips. You're supposed to, I guess- - Raise and lower your body. - Yeah, raise and lower your body, raise and lower your body mass usually with your legs dangling down. Sometimes people strong enough to attach a weight there and they'll do, it's essentially a compound upper body exercise. - Right. - One dip would not be particularly impressive for most people. 100 would be very impressive. 20 would be impressive for some, et cetera. What happens when a skilled athlete comes in and does dips for multiple sets. And then what happens when they cool properly using the glabrous skin surface? - This was a story that occurred early on in our investigations when we first made the discoveries that cooling has a benefit to increase your work volume, your capacity to do more reps, okay? So the word got over, I think, to the 49ers camp. And one of their players, Greg Clark, who was a tight end at the time. He had been tight end at Stanford. He decided, or I don't know if he was asked, or what, to come over and check it out. So Greg came over and we said, "Greg, what are you good at? What activity do you like to do?" He said, "Dips. I can do a lot of dips. I can do 40 dips in a first set. And I can probably do five sets. That's a usual workout for me." And we said okay. So he came over to the gym one day and that's exactly what he did. He did 40 dips the first set, and then maybe 25 and 15 and down, down- - Do you recall roughly what kind of rest periods he was taking between sets? - Yeah, we standardized the rest period to three minutes, because that's what we had set on for cooling as the injure- - That's a good long rest period. - Yeah. It is. - It's still a lot dips. - Yeah, it's actually a longer rest period than many people would prefer during workouts. They want to make the most of the time- - Not me. I prefer to take as much rest as I possibly can, yeah. - So several days later he came back and his first set, he did, I think, maybe 42, a little bit better, but now people were standing around and watching. So there was a little impetus there to show off. So then his second set was, I don't remember the numbers, but very much above the second set on the control day. This was after we cooled his- - Okay, so when is he doing the cooling? - He's sitting down and putting his hands in the devices that we had built, which were cooling the palms of hands. - For how long does that cooling take? Can he do it inside of a three-minute rest period? - Yeah, that's what we were doing. We standardized the interval for resting or cooling to three minutes, okay. But the point is he got to his fifth set and all of the sets were above what he had done on the previous day. And he said, "I'm not tired. I can do another set." And then I can do another set. I can do another set. I can do another set. So from one day to two or three days later with cooling, he doubled the total work volume. He doubled the total number of dips. - By adding more sets and more repetitions to each set? - Right, so then he kept coming back for four more weeks, twice a week. And by the end of that month, he was doing 300 dips. - Wow. So what percent- - So he tripled. - He tripled. - Tripled, and so here is a professional athlete at peak physical conditioning, and he triples what he can do. - Amazing, and in terms of his ability to recover, was that explored or discussed at all? Because my understanding is that if we cause enough stress to a muscle during anaerobic training, we provide the stimulus for compensatory regrowth, et cetera, but if we do more work, we essentially scale up the amount of recovery that's needed or the recovery time. I'm very curious about whether or not he needed longer to recover between these super-performing workouts? - That's very interesting. That was a major discovery, which we didn't realize we were making at the time. There is this phenomenon you're referring to as delayed onset muscle soreness, DOMS. And this is due to those little micro tares, and so forth, that are happening as we extend our workout capacity volume, okay? So we've had this experience so many times that an athlete or anyone will come in to the lab and they will exceed what their previous goals were, their previous expectations. And I can always see the words coming out of their mouth, "I'm going to be so sore tomorrow." They never are. - Interesting. - And we've actually demonstrated that with a naive group. We had a class, a physical conditioning class. And we had half of the, the first days of the class, we had to establish their true capacity, what they could do. So these were pretty heavy workouts for these new recruits. And we gave half of them the benefit of cooling and the other half not. And then we had them record their subjective levels of delayed onset muscle soreness. And those that were cool, didn't have significant muscle soreness. - Amazing, and I know there are also published results, and we will provide links to some of these papers for people seeing similar effects, I should say, similar performance enhancing effects, using bench presses, the bench press, or pushups, or other sorts of things. Maybe you could give us an example from the realm of endurance work or aerobic work, running, cycling, things of that sort. - Well, one of the problems with, for us, is that our equipment now is not really portable. I mean, it's portable in the sense that you can carry it to the gym or to the football field. - But you're not going to run or run with it. - But you're not going to run with it, right. - Or equip a bicycle with it. Although when are the cooling handles on bicycles coming? - That would be good, but one itinerant activity is golfing. And people have put it on their golf carts, and- - Do people really heat up that much in golf? - They do. - Not to be disparaging of the golfers, but the way I conceptualize golf, it's like a swing and then a walk and then a cart ride and then a meal. I probably just offended all the golfers out there. - Well, one time we were doing work for the Department of Defense. And they wanted to check it out, whether or not what we were doing was really worthwhile. So they sent out a team of special ops soldiers to be our subjects and test it out. They were here for a week. So they that was a fun week. - Yeah, I do some work with those guys. They're hard driving guys. They also know how to have fun. But yeah, they definitely have, if they have an off or a quit switch, it's buried deep within their nervous system. They don't like to hit that quit switch. - So the guy who wrote the final report, he gave an addendum to the report and he said, "Well, I'll tell you this. After I've gotten home, it's added that technology," they took the technology with them. They wanted to keep it. - Oh, Yeah. That sounds about right. - And using it, it has added 20 yards to every club in my bag. And that's no effin' small deal. - Wow, so it's allowing people to hit further, hit their golf ball further? - Right. [chuckles] - Interesting. All right. So for the golf players out there, that's the reward you get back from Craig for all my little knocks on golf. I don't have any knock on golf. I just don't think about it as a sport where heating up is a limiting factor. So since they're getting more out of their drive, what do you think's going on there? - Well, they can be heating up. - And they wear gloves, right? - They're wearing glove on a hot day, and so forth. But let me just tell you one more serious story about golfers and that is individuals with multiple sclerosis are exceedingly temperature-sensitive. - I didn't know that. - So they may still be mobile, but they have to stay in cool locations and not increase their exercise to any great extent. But we've had subjects with multiple sclerosis who have just essentially put the device on their golf cart and they're back out playing golf in the middle of the summer. - Oh, that's great. - Yeah. - That's great. Anything that allows people to have normal levels of livelihood and recreation is great. We always think about performance at these kinds of like peak and elite levels and pushing harder, but yeah, anything that allows people to be mobile and functional is great. So what's your favorite example of endurance, and feel free to give us the extreme one and then we'll talk about averages to make sure we're thorough about averages versus exceptions. - Right. We haven't done a lot in the field. I mean outdoors. Most of our endurance has been in a hot room with treadmill work, and so forth. So the very first experiment we had, I think, maybe 18 subjects just off the street. Maybe we just recruited people in the hallways, come on in and do this. And what we found is we could, for this group with one trial with and without cooling, we could double their endurance, walking on the treadmill, walking uphill on the treadmill in the heat, like maybe 40 degrees ambient temperature, 40 degrees centigrade. - So what does the experiment look like? You're having people walk on an incline. It's really warm. Some people are just going to hit the quit button and say, I've had enough and get off the treadmill with proper cooling. When are they doing the cooling? - They're doing it continuously. - I see. - Because in the laboratory, we can suspend devices from the ceiling, for example. Now we do have prototype wearable devices. We did them in response to emails from Ebola workers a number of years ago in Sierra Leone. They said, "We've read about your work with athletes. Can't you do something for us? I mean, we're in the personal protective gear, and we can't be in the hot zone for more than 15 or 20 minutes." So that was started us on the challenge of developing wearable systems that could go under the PPE. We've published that work now, but-. - That's great, and I'm guessing the military special operators that are out in the desert and other locations are probably excited about this technology. - Well, once they get it. - Once they get. It's coming, it's coming. Yeah, I think some people might wonder, if there are all these studies and there are these incredible results over the years on why haven't we heard more about it? And I will ask your opinion on that as well. But I'll just editorialize a little bit. Is that the best laboratory work in its practical applications oftentimes requires many studies. And oftentimes there isn't a portal, so to speak, to get that information out into the technology sector. So there is a company that's developing this technology for people to use, to purchase and use. You might as well just tell us now, what is the name of that company? And do they have a website? People are going to want to know where can they get this magical technology? And is there a poor man's version of it as well? - Well, the company is Arteria, A-R-T-E-R-I-A, and the website is www.coolmitt.com. So CoolMitt is just C-O-O-L-M-I-T-T. coolmitt.com - It's a great website. When I went there, it says that right now, the technology is only available to professional sports teams and military. Is that true? - Well, where we stand now is the new version of the technology is sort of in beta test versions. We got it into the hands of people who had used the technology before. So there's NFL teams that are using. There's college teams. There's Olympics. There's the Navy SEALs, Major League Baseball, the NBA, the National Tennis Association. They have locations where now they are trying this out and reporting back, how's it working? How could you change it? How could you improve it? And so forth. So that's where we are. But on the website, you can actually sign up for being one who will be able to get one [chuckles] when they are finally manufactured. They're now being made in fairly small lots, because you want to change things as you realize how it can be improved. - Yeah. This is Stanford after all. You want to get the technology right. I like to joke that one of the reasons I like being at Stanford so much is that, not only are my colleagues amazing and they're so forward thinking, but they're all perfectionists. And so that the perfectionist mindset is it has to be perfect before it can go live, so to speak. Well, I think there will be a lot of interest. Let's talk about the technology in a little more detail for a moment. And then let's talk about whether or not cruder forms of that technology exist either for sake of safety and/or performance. So what is, the CoolMitt, as I understand is it's a mitt, it's a glove. You put your hand into, you hold on to a surface. And that surface cools your hand and thereby through this specialized portal, cools your core body temperature and all the muscles of the body. Subjectively, if I were to do this right now, would I think that it was ice cold or would I think it was just cool? - Just cool. - I see. - Ice cold is too cold. So people always ask, well, why can't you just stick your hand in a bucket of ice water? It's too cold. What that does is that causes reflex, a vasoconstriction of the very portals that you're trying to maximize the heat loss from. So you stick your hand in cold water, and when it comes out, it's cold. - You just sealed up all the heat in your body. - Yeah. Right, so what I sort of recommended to someone at one point, they said, "Well, when I'm running, can't I just carry a frozen juice can, and it will gradually melt?" And I said, "Well, no, because that's going to decrease the heat loss from that hand. But if every couple minutes you switched hands, [chuckles] it might work. - Well, I have a feeling that there are people now doing that as well as trying this. So how long, in the CoolMitt at the proper temperature, how long are people putting their hands into the Mitt? - We, once again, had just standardized them three minutes. And part of the reason for that is that the rate of heat loss is an exponentially declining curve, okay? And three minutes sort of gets the best part of the curve. So you can go longer and get more benefit, but the biggest bang for the buck is in the first two, three minutes. - Okay, you mentioned a number of impressive organizations, sports teams, and military that are using this. This is not something that I typically see on the sidelines of games. Although to be honest, I haven't looked very carefully. I'm guessing that they are probably keeping the technology somewhat under wraps. Where, and how are they doing this? Are they running back to the locker room? I mean, the military special operators are doing their thing, but in terms of the athletes, is it possible, hypothetically, that athletes are doing this somewhat incognito? - It's possible, but I really don't know. People have mentioned here at Stanford, they don't see the football team using it. Well, the football team here at Stanford is mostly playing in cold weather, cool weather. The night games are cool. Even day games are not very hot frequently here. But when they go to a hot place like Arizona or Utah, at least our coach, Shaw, says that they take it with them and that's when they find the benefit. That's when they use it. - Interesting, so is there a poor person's, poor man or woman's version of this? You mentioned the juice can passing back and forth. You mentioned cooling the hands. A number of people said to me after learning a little bit about this science and technology that they've experienced some big effects, positive effects of cooling by, and I confess, I've done this, taking a package of frozen blueberries, and just kind of passing it back and forth between my hands. Now talking to you, I realize I probably didn't do it long enough. I probably was, I was only doing maybe 30 seconds passing it back and forth between my hands and then going back into sets. I did see a performance enhancing effect. Absolutely. But I realized I probably wasn't optimizing the protocol. If you were going to give a crude protocol for it, let's just say for the gym, because with running, it's a little bit tricky, but what would that look like if people wanted to just play with this in some sort of fashion? - Well, it would be experimental. - Sure. Yeah, none of that is very controlled. - Your idea of frozen peas is a good idea. And I think since there's been no actual study of that, it would have to be you working out what is the best for you. But one way to figure it out is that if, after you hold the cold peas in one hand and you switch it to the other hand, if someone then comes in, feels your hand, is it warm or cold? If it's cold, it means you vasoconstricted. If it's warm, it means the hot blood is still going there. Okay. So we do that in the lab. - And the key is for it to not vasoconstrict? - Right. - Okay. So there's a test out there, folks. If you're going to try this in kind of a crude fashion, at least until the CoolMitt is available more broadly to the general public, you want to assess whether or not your palms actually feel cool to the touch by somebody else. And if it does, that means you've essentially shut down the portal. You're sealing in more heat, which is bad. What about putting this cold pack of some sort on the face or- - Or the feet? - Or the feet? I work out at home. I don't often work out barefooted, but I suppose I could, like they did in the 70s. When those guys were walking around without shoes and squatting without any shoes or socks on. Could I put my feet on them? - You could. If you simply had a water-profused pad and you were circulating cool water through it, you could just put your feet on it, okay? Part of the problem is that you don't want, if, let's say you have just a cold pack of something. The problem is back to boundary layers again. If you don't have a convective stream of the cooling medium, the heat sink is not as effective, because there'll be a boundary layer developed between the heat sink material and your skin. So that decreases its efficacy. - I see, maybe we should just for a moment, talk about convection, radiation, and convection, and just make that clear. Like if I put my hands, let's say it's a cold night and I'm at a campfire and I take my hands and I put them out to the fire- - You're getting radiation. - You're getting radiation. - Right. - Okay. - Right. - And then if it's a windy warm night, no, I don't know if that's the best example. Give us a good example of convection. - Convection, sure, is in a cool breeze. The wind chill factor. That's due to convection, okay? But in terms of heat transfer between two objects, if you have convection of the medium, whether it's blood on the inside and water on the outside, you increase the heat exchange if you have conviction on both sides. - Right, so this is why just planting my feet on two packages of froze, my bare feet on two packages of frozen peas, there's really no opportunity for circulation of, and therefore heat transfer. So it's not really optimal, which, and I- - But once again, it depends on the surface area to get any benefit at all. We have a study that we published, which was investigating the standard treatment for hyperthermia in the field. And the standard treatment, as recommended by medical organizations, is you take cold packs and you put them in the axilla, the groin. - The axilla or the armpit. - The armpits, the groin, which is- - Thin-skinned, lots of vasculature. - Right, and the neck. So what we did is we did studies in which we made people hyperthermic. And then we measured the rate at which we cool call them by putting those positions in those heat exchange bags, in the recommended location versus on the glabrous skin versus palms, soles, and face. The cooling rate was double. - Wow. - And we put the same ice packs, the same cold packs on the heat portals, rather than the axilla, the groin and the face. - Wow. - Or the neck. - Wow, so face, hands and bottoms of feet will cool you twice as fast as putting cold packs into your armpits, your groin, or back of neck? - So I like to give the analogy of if your car is overheating, okay? And you have a hose, a garden hose, where should you spray your cooling system? Should you spray the radiator or should you spray the tubes going in and out of the radiator? Well, the rationale with putting these cold packs in the axilla, the groin, and the neck, is that you're getting close to the major arteries, okay? Sure. That's going to be effective. But it's much more effective if you actually increase the heat loss capacity of the radiating surface, the radiators. - So you cool the hot stuff heading toward the core? - That's essentially what the standard operating procedure is. That you hit the arteries. - Amazing. - And the veins. Arteries and veins. - I'm going to just tell a brief story that illustrates how almost everybody gets this stuff wrong. And I'm going to use that as an opportunity to ask you about heating, deliberate heating, as opposed to deliberate cooling. So about four months ago, a friend of mine, incidentally, a guy who did nine years in the SEAL Teams, really skilled cold water swimmer. We went out for a swim in the morning. I'm not nearly even close to the being in the same universe of his output potential. We do these swims. I'm familiar with them. I got enough blubber on me that I stay warm enough in the cold Pacific, no wetsuits. We do the morning cold swim for about a mile or so. And we brought with us up a young kid that I know real well that hangs out with us sometimes and trains with us who's got very little body fat. He's just exceptionally lean, despite eating everything in sight, right? Teenager, great athlete, great kid, great swimmer. So we're out there swimming and at some point we're talking to him and it's clear that he's gone hypothermic. He's slurring his words. He's not doing well. So we get him onto the beach. His teeth are turning yellow. He's quaking. His saliva is taken on that consistency that's clear, like he's hypothermic. We go to the lifeguard station. Lifeguard says, "Okay, let's get his vitals. Let's do all this." Meanwhile, trying stand next to him, and heat him up by heating up his torso. So there we are, pressing against this guy, our friend, trying to heat him up. They get a blanket on him. I'm realizing he was barefoot. His face was exposed. Although we did cover his head with the blanket. And he eventually came back. We got some warm liquids into him and he was okay. He was fine. I don't know whether his mother's ever going to let him swim with us again. If I ever disappear and go missing, it's because of that incident. Anyway, he did great. He recovered. He's back in the water and doing well. But I realized that pretty much everything from the point where we got back on the beach until he was back to normal, we did incorrectly. We heated his torso. We left his extremities exposed. And we assumed we were doing the right thing. And the lifeguard is a skilled lifeguard at a major public beach. So I guess the simple question is, did we get everything wrong? Did we get anything right? And what would have been the better option to heat up a hypothermic person in that, or similar situation? - Well, it's interesting you asked that, because that is the way we got into this area of investigation. I worked on how the hypothalamus regulates body temperature, neurophysiology. And one day we were having a discussion with a colleague in the department of anesthesia. And he jokingly said to my colleague, he said, "Yeah, you guys think you know so much about temperature. I bet you couldn't solve a problem we have in the recovery room." What's that? Well, the patient's come out of surgery. They're hypothermic and it takes us hours to get them to stop shivering. What do they do in the recovery room? Exactly what you suggested. They put on warm blankets, they put on heat lamps, and it takes them an hour or two hours to get these patients to stop shivering, to bring them back up. So we said, "Ah, it's a trivial problem." No. It's a hard problem. It's a hard problem, because when you're under anesthesia, you're vasodilated. When you come out of anesthesia, you're hypothermic and you vasoconstrict, and that makes it very difficult to get heat into the body. So we got the idea that, well, if we could just take one appendage, like an arm, and we put it in a environment wrapped in a heating pad and a negative pressure, suction, that would pull more blood into that limb, that blood would get heated and it would warm the body up faster. So my colleague built a prototype device. You couldn't get such a device into the hospital these days. [Craig laughs] But we were with our anesthesiologist friend, we took it into the recovery room. And the first thing that patient said, "No way, you're not going to put that on my patient." But he prevailed and first patient didn't shiver at all, First patient was back to normal temperature, core temperature in, I think, it was eight minutes. - Amazing. - Eight or nine minutes. - Is this now standard practice in hospitals? - No. No, no. - So this is another example where, I don't get upset about the, although it's upsetting to know that it's not, but I think that it's yet another case where a fundamental problem exists. There's a science-based solution that makes sense at the level of physiology, engineering and practice, and yet it's not being done. - [Craig] Right. - And, I mean, that's a whole other discussion as to what the limitations are. Well, perhaps in, and I know a number of our listeners are in the healthcare and medical profession, as well as military, athletes, and just also standard other types of jobs, civilians doing other types of work. It would be wonderful if people understood this. So once again, is there a homegrown technology that people could use? If somebody is hypothermic, what is going to be the best way for them to warm up? Is it going to be holding a nice warm mug of cocoa or something like that? But not too hot, I guess, is again the idea. - Yeah, well, actually you can go hotter on the glabrous skin. - Oh, because it'll dilate? - Because it takes the heat away faster, okay? But back to the anesthesia, what you can do is you can use warm pads. They have them in all hospitals, they have circulating water, perfused pads. - Hot water bottle type stuff. - Put them on the feet. Put them on the feet. - So typically they'll slide them under your lower back or something like that? - Yeah, put them on the feet. Okay, sure. That will do it. But it turns out that we discovered through this work that it had nothing to do with the whole arm. It was only the hand. And that's when we came to the realization of these special blood vessels. We didn't discover the blood vessels that are described in "Grey's Anatomy," but nobody knew what they were for. - And you mentioned bears earlier and other hairy animals. Do they have these AVAs as well? - Oh, yeah. - And I suppose we haven't defined AVAs. We've been pretty good about the no acronyms rule. AVAs is? - Arteriovenous anastomosis. So a connection between the arteries and the veins. Yeah. - I actually used this technology. I have a bulldog, bulldog mastiff. He has a very high propensity for overheating, because they're terrible at dumping heat. And bulldogs are great at pushing themselves to the point of exhaustion or death. It happens, and so now we do what we call palmar cooling. Sorry, I couldn't help myself. Where I'll take Costello and lower him into a cool body of water. Just the bottoms of his paws, although I think animals instinctually know to do this and will go and stand in bodies of water. They don't often lie down all the way. Some do. But they seem to know that's a great way to cool themselves off. - Yeah. Oh, absolutely, yeah. - And they get the advantage that their palms and their feet are essentially the same thing. - We actually built devices for dogs. Did you really? - And tried them on. I did a lot of sled dogs and it worked beautifully. They had little backpacks with the equipment and pads on all their feet and it worked beautifully. - Amazing, amazing, along the lines of heating, deliberate heating, wearing a knit cap is something that you see more of that on the East Coast: people run around Boston and New England with a knit cap. I've always done that at the start of my runs to try and warm up more quickly. And then I take it off. I shed layers as I go. Is that a rational practice? The way I just described it? - Oh, sure. Yeah. - Yeah? 'Cause warming up is important too. There's a certain amount of quote/unquote warming up that's required to lubricate joints or at least to get the sense that joints are lubricated and to be able to move more easily. - Yeah. - Do you still recommend that people warm up? - Yeah, but I think we're misled by the term warm up as if the major purpose is to raise temperature. I'm not aware of any data on this, but I do think that the major contribution is increasing flexibility. So you're going to avoid having damage of joints and tendons and ligaments and so forth. But also the ability of the mitochondria to produce energy can be impaired at lower temperatures. And you have to keep in mind that we say our body temperature's 37 degrees, but that's not true. - Yeah. It varies across the day. - Well, it varies in parts of your body. I mean, my hands and arms are not at 37 degrees right now. They're much lower, okay? [chuckles] - So that raises an interesting question. What is the best way to measure core body temperature? - Well, the best core temperature is that, what we use is esophageal. So we put a thermocouple up the nose about two feet down the esophagus. So that is about the level of your heart. - Not gym or home-practical, although- - No. - I don't know. Some of those COVID swab tests go pretty far. I can't even imagine going any further. I felt like my brain was getting tickled. - The tympanic is pretty good. - So the ear? - The ear. It's not foolproof because you have to actually have it aimed properly at the tympanum and frequently what you're getting is you're getting sort of a mixture of tympanic plus ear canal temperature. - And for those listening and for those watching, the tympanic is not going to be the pinna, this part of the ear, the outer part of the ear. The tympanic is going to heading towards the tympanic membrane. And yes, I'm sticking my finger in my ear, because that's where the laser would actually have to go to measure your temperature. - Right. - So when we're walking into restaurants and other places nowadays, and they're shining the laser at our forehead, that's probably giving a pretty crude readout of temperature. - It is, but there's much less insulation between your brain and your forehead skin than there is between your biceps and your arm skin. So if you're going to measure a surface temperature, that's where you would do it. And we do temperatures in the infrared. We take infrared videos of athletes and our subjects. And of course the face lights up. - Okay, so if we're not, I imagine there's going to be a technology coming soon where you can point your smartwatch or your smartphone at yourself, and you're going to get a heat map. - Right, right. - If somebody out there hasn't already invented this for the typical folks outside military, somebody please invent that, because I think there's growing interest in temperature based on the work that you're doing. And also for sake of something I do want to touch on, which is sleep and metabolism. Although we don't want to open up those portals all the way, because we'd need several days to cover it. Okay, so putting on the cap, what about some of the helmets and gloves that are used in typical sports? Do you think that those can be improved in order to improve performance in terms of their ventilation ability or keeping palmar surfaces open for instance? - Well, you mentioned about the knit cap in cold weather, especially, and that is significant, because you do lose a lot of heat from your head, but it's a constant heat loss. It's not variable like your glabrous skin. So if you decrease that heat loss, you're going to be warmer. So, sure. That has an impact. Now in terms of helmets, they should be ventilated. I mean, they should have enough space in them and holes in them so that air can circulate. You don't want to insulate, thermally insulate your scalp. That's going to decrease heat loss quite considerable. Just for a resting individual, the brain is about 20% of your metabolism. So that's a lot of heat production. - Yeah, absolutely, I realized there was a question that I failed to ask earlier that is burning in my mind now. And I think is likely burning in the minds of some of the listeners, which is, so if you do this cooling in between sets in the gym, you get this performance enhancing effect. You don't get the delayed onset muscle soreness, which is great. So presumably the body is adapting. You're getting better as a consequence of being able to do more work per unit time or to go harder in some way of course. You get that adaptation. Does that mean that you see a performance-enhancing effect, even when you don't cool, if you've previously done the cooling workouts? So for instance, let's say I can do 10 sets of 10 dips, which I like to think I can. But maybe I need to go try. I dunno if I've done that recently. I do the cooling. I cool for three minutes between sets. And let's say I get to the point where I can do 20 for 10 sets, 10 sets of 20 repetitions. And then I don't cool. Will I be able to match or approximate my new, better performance? - You keep your gains. It's a true conditioning effect. You respond to the increased work volume by all of those mechanisms you mentioned. - [Andrew] Amazing. - You increase the number of contractual elements in your muscles. - Amazing. - The muscles get bigger. - Amazing. - We had an experiment that involved some of our female students. Not athletes, but just regular, they were freshmen actually. And the experiment was 10 sets of pushups to muscle failure with or without cooling. - Same regimen, three minutes of cooling in between sets of pushups? - Right. - Okay. - Some of those young ladies reached over 800 pushups. - Now the total duration of the workout could be getting much longer as a consequence of doing more work. - No. - No, it doesn't take you longer. Well, minor, I mean, a push-up is pretty fast. - Yeah. It's pretty fast. - Yeah. So you do 10 sets, the maximum 45 minutes total. The most- - That's a lot of pushups. - That's a lot of pushups. - Yep. - And so the interesting thing is they came in one day and they said, "Dr. Heller, you cost us a lot of money." "Why?" "Well, we had a formal dance this weekend. We all had to buy new sleeveless dresses." - Nice. [Craig laughs] It's a good problem to have. Good problem to have. Let's talk about steroids, anabolic steroids. We're heading into an Olympics. Every time the Olympics rolls around, you hear about these cases of people getting popped, as they call it, or caught for anabolic steroids. There are some accusations out there. Now they'll be out more. This'll get handled in the press and in the various organizations. Clearly athletes and non-athletes use anabolic steroids. And typically anabolic steroids are of the testosterone variety. There are derivatives, et cetera. And those derivatives do different things in the anabolic versus androgenic, et cetera. But typically the idea is, at least as I understand it, in talking to some of these individuals, is that they allow people to train more, because they recover faster. They are able to synthesize more protein, because they're basically getting a second puberty, because as we all know during puberty, there's a lot of growth of the body. And of course there are a lot of negative effects of abuse of these things and they are banned from various sports organizations, especially, I should mention, in combat sports, it's especially concerning, because in combat sports, a performance enhancement means that you can harm somebody more than you would be able to otherwise as opposed to in other sorts of sports. Just to conceptualize it. And I'm not taking a moral stance on any of this. I just want to ask you, when you compare palmar cooling to anabolic steroids in terms of gym performance, what do you see? - Well, we do not do research on steroids, [chuckles] but there is a lot of research in the literature. A lot of that research in the strength conditioning magazines is not very scientific. - No. - Okay? - Or it might not even be scientific at all. - Right. - Right. - But we did do an analysis of reputable papers and we did find, I think it was probably eight or nine, 10 studies on bench press, increase in bench press performance on steroids or not, okay? - These were males or females? - Well, these were all males, but I'll get back to the females, okay? The bottom line is that in all of these independent studies, their rate of improvement was approximately 1% per week. - Okay. - Okay? Now I've just told you about studies in which we've had 300% increase in a month. [Craig chuckles] So. - It's an enormous, enormous difference. - So why would you endanger your health as well as your legal ability to compete with such an ineffective tool? - Yeah, no, I think it's the notion of performance enhancement is a really interesting one, because people clearly pay attention to nutrition. Sleep is now something that I think everybody, but especially athletes are paying attention to. - Right. - And I predict that temperature will be one of the more powerful parameters that people are going to be focusing on. - Yeah. That's true. - Because of the magnitude of the effects that you're describing and also because so much of the variability around performance, as you mentioned, has to do with when you go to a new environment, everyone has their home environment worked out pretty well. Sleep well in your own bed at home. When you can control everything, your performance is always great. This is why I think military special operators are particularly interesting group, because their whole world is centered around elite and high performance with very high risk, high consequence under variable conditions. The essence of their work is variable unpredictable conditions. So you mentioned female athletes and steroids. I'm curious about this. - Yeah, because everybody has always said to us, well, you only use male subjects and obviously they have this testosterone background. They have higher levels of testosterone. That's why you get these results. So we did a comparative study on females. We get the same results. - Impressive, and these are Stanford athletes or also- - No, these were not Stanford athlete, they were Stanford students. But not athletes. Well, we have done, of course, work on some athletes. But in general, we don't do research on our teams, our varsity teams. So they have their own protocols. They have their own training program. - Yeah. They don't like us to get too close to them. I work with some of these folks in the coaches and they are very skeptical, with good reason also. And the reason I ask is that when you see these Pac-10 or Division I college athletes, and then you see their peers, there's clearly a difference, right? I mean, they are pedigreed at throughout, right? And more typical folks also have different goals. They may not want to get infinitely stronger or perform more endurance work. So I want to ask you a couple of things about shivering and metabolism, 'cause I think they're very interesting and sufficiently related. So my understanding is that shiver is an adaptation that's designed to heat us up. - Yes. - That we have brown fat that's in compartments around our body that are activated by shiver or co-activated by shiver. And that shivering is useful for increasing metabolism. Is that true? And does it require that cold be the stimulus? So two scenarios. I'll give you an experiment. I put someone into cold water of some sort, and then I make them get out or I have them stand near it, and then they start shivering. My understanding is that their metabolism will increase. What if I take someone and I just have them shiver, but they're not exposed by cold, it's kind of a deliberate shivering. Will that also create a substantial increase in metabolism? - Sure, so deliberate shivering without cold is essentially what happens when you get a fever. Your set point goes up in your hypothalamus and you actually, even though you're a normal body temperature, your thermostat is telling you you're too cold, increase your metabolism. So shiver, right? So, sure, shivering is a good way of increasing metabolism, but it only can take metabolism up maybe three or four times resting. - Okay, but it seems like- - Whereas exercise can take you up 10 times. - Got it. All right. I'm going to ask a couple of more random questions and seemingly random. Do bears actually hibernate? - Oh, yeah. - The true hibernation? - Well, it depends on how you define true. A bear, actually, we've done a lot of work on bears. [Craig chuckles] - Do you also put the nose thermal couple down in the esophagus? - We implant them surgically. - They're anesthetized when you implant them? - Yes. - Khat kind of bears are these? - Black bears. - Okay. - And did this with colleagues at University of Alaska. And we're analyzing the data now, but what we've done is we've had now a total of 18 bears and we implant them with EEG, EKG, temperature sensors, and sometimes we actually measure their oxygen consumption. - These are bears in the wild? - These are bears in the wild, but they're brought in to University of Alaska where we keep them in an outdoor enclosure. So they're hibernating in a nest box in an enclosure, and we're recording this electrophysiological data continuously for six months. - Amazing. How do I get on this protocol? [Craig chuckles] [Andrew chuckling] Craig and I are doing some work together going forward. And maybe you can slide me onto this protocol too, it sounds amazing. - Right now, it's a matter of just analyzing the gigabytes, terabytes of data that have been collected. But anyway, you asked about hibernation. So bears only go down to about 33, 34 degrees centigrade in core temperature. And that's been argued that, well, they can't go lower because they have so much insulation. They're so big, their surface volume ratio, and so forth, and that's not true. They shiver, so if we have a day like a minus 40, which you get up in Alaska, they will go through periods of shivering. And maintain a core temperature on 33-34. Now the ground squirrels and the marmots, which are smaller animals, they will drop down to a body temperature maybe within a degree of the environment. So they can go down to one or two degrees centigrade just above freezing during bouts of hibernation. So they'll stay in hibernation for seven or eight days and they'll come back up to normal body temperature for a day, then they'll go back down, and do another about- - What do they do during that day when they're warming up again? Do go around- - They rearrange their nests, eat, if they've stored food. Some species store lots of food. Others just depend on their fat. - A former mentor of mine, my master's degree mentor, and a colleague and friend of yours, Irving Zucker at UC Berkeley told me a story once, told me a lot of stories, he tells great stories, as you know. He told me that when an animal comes out of hibernation periodically, that it's a very dramatic thing to observe. That it's not like they wake up and yawn and look around, but it's like a complete epileptic seizure. - Right. - What what's going on? - Shiver. - It's just a very traumatic shiver. - So at the low temperatures, they cannot shiver because the effect of temperature on the conduction of the nerves and the muscle fiber. - So they're shut down basically? - They're shut down. So there they use brown fat. So they activate brown fat and then when they get up to a temperature of maybe 15, 16 degrees centigrade, then the shivering starts and it gets very, very violent, but they're still asleep. - Do we shiver in our sleep? - I would imagine we do, but it probably wakes us up. - Interesting, So the brown fat is kind of like kindling? - The brown fat is a tissue which has lots of stored energy, 'cause it's fat, but unlike our white fat, our regular fat, it also has lots of these little powerhouses, mitochondria, and lots of blood supply. So essentially it is a tissue just to produce heat. That's what it's there for. Now in these hibernators, there are big patches of brown fat at certain locations that are critical, like around the heart, for example. For us, the brown fat is sort of distributed. So for many, many years, it was thought humans don't have brown fat, but indeed we do. It's just not localized into discrete fat pads, like it is in ground squirrels, marmots. - I don't know why the phrase fat pads is so satisfying to say, but it is fat pads. Speaking of fat pads, I was taught that we have, by the internet, I should say, I was taught by the internet that we have brown fat between our scapulae and our upper neck. Is that truly a source of brown enrichment for brown fat? - If you're a ground squirrel. [Andrew scoffs] - So this is all the drawings out there? Okay, so what I'm hearing you say is that brown fat is actually distributed in patch- - In humans, it's distributed along with other fat tissue. It's not as discreet. - So the reason I'm kind of shocked and amused and troubled by this is because there is a somewhat standard protocol in the performance, wellness, whatever world, whatever you want to call it, of putting ice packs on the upper back as a way to stimulate brown fat thermogenesis. I'm hearing some inhales of concern from the physiologist. So tell me why, it sounds like that's probably not the best way to stimulate brown fat activation. - Well, let's put it this way- You're not attacking anyone specifically, because the whole little believes this. - But it may not be totally facetiae or false. Think of what that's doing. If you put ice right there where your spinal cord is close to the surface, that's where you're going to hit the vertebral arteries. So you're essentially putting a cold source into the brain, to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is you're too cold. So it is going to turn on shivering and brown fat so. - Would there be a better site for sake of activating brown fat? Palmar cooling? - I can't say because the activation of brown fat is a sympathetic nervous system response. So any lowering of core temperature that will let the thermostat say you're too cold is going to turn on sympathetic. Now people will have perhaps different amounts of brown fat. So newborn have more brown fat than adults. - 'Cause the newborns can't shiver. Correct? - I don't know. - Okay. That's what I read. I don't know if that's true. I read that in what I believe to be credible sources. - Yeah, it could be. I just don't know, it depends on if it's really newborn, I can agree because you don't have all of the motor pathways connected up yet. That's something that occurs in early days of life and is probably one of the functions of REM sleep, which infants have a lot of. - Right. - Okay. But how to activate brown fat if you are consistently exposed to cold? So if you live in the Arctic and you go out jogging in the winter, maybe that will increase the amount of brown fat you have. If you live in the tropics, maybe you have less brown fat. I don't know. I don't know of any studies which have looked into that. - Okay. Ice headache. Sometimes I'll drink a cold beverage or I'll eat ice cream in my head will- - Brain freeze. - Brain freeze. And speaking of special forces, I was talking to, we all see the images of the SEALs, SEAL training slash screening in Coronado where they're going in and out of the Pacific, which is very cold. But I know they also spend some time in the very cold waters of Kodiak, Alaska. You mentioned Alaska. Brain freeze, so-called ice headache, is a common occurrence there in those situations. But we all have experienced this. We eat ice cream, and you get that brain freeze. I can feel it right now a little bit subjectively. I can induce it. What's going on there? And I would always just rub my tongue on the roof of my mouth. Is there something that I'm doing that's functional there just to try and alleviate it? - Good question, the thing is that the roof of your mouth is very close to your hypothalamus. So if indeed it's a Popsicle that's giving you the brain freeze, it may be a direct cooling effect from the roof of your mouth and if you put your tongue there, you're insulating the roof of your mouth. I don't know, I'm guessing. - But what's the source of the brain freeze? It at vasoconstriction? - It's a vasomotor change. Whether it's constriction, I think it's more likely an increase in blood pressure, which will essentially cause an expansion of the arteries and activate pain receptors. We don't have pain receptors in the neural tissue in the brain. We have them in the meninges and predominantly associated with the blood vessels, the walls of the blood vessels. So if you have something which will dramatically increase your blood pressure going to the brain, you're likely to get... We've had some preliminary data. I even hate to mention this, because we have not been able to pursue it systematically, but we've had some experience with people with migraine that say, if they use one of our devices to heat, that the migraine goes away. And I don't know. - Yeah. It's very, and a lot of people suffer from migraine. I know there are a lot of different types of migraine. I've been reading a lot about this lately, because I get so many questions about migraine but. - I'd hate to say anything. - Sure. And we'll just underscore this as preliminary and people have been great about understanding that when we say preliminary, we mean it has not passed through the required filters to call it hard fact yet. - We don't even have a decent dataset. These are anecdotal report. - Yeah, anecdata, as people like to call it, but I don't even like to call it that because we don't want to give it more weight than it deserves, but that's interesting. The ice headache and the increase in blood pressure is interesting because the only thing that I've heard is similar to it is something that comes from, they have these competitions where people eat these very hot chili peppers. It's kind of an ego thing, I guess, for reasons that escaped me, that eating really hot peppers. And every once in a while, someone will eat one of these and get what's called thunderclap headache, where a headache comes on extremely quickly and so quickly that it's caused, so severe rather that it's been known to cause stroke and brain damage. So these very, very hot peppers, if you're not acclimated to them, and maybe even if you are, have been shown to actually cause brain damage. Yeah. Some good evidence for this. I do want to talk about something that we have not touched on yet, which is NEAT. Non-exercise induced thermogenesis, right? So non-activity associated thermogenesis. And the fidgeters, right? So the classic work of like Rothwell and Stock. And the idea that some people who overeat are burning off that energy by way of shaking their knee or moving around a lot. The quote/unquote nervous types. But they quoted in those studies, a huge degree of caloric burn, 800, 2500 calories per day burned above those who sit rather still. Does that seem farfetched? Those are older data but any comment on NEAT or non-exercise induced thermogenesis? - Well, I do think it's pretty straightforward that if you increase muscle activity of any kind, you're increasing your energy consumption and your heat production. And the really extreme example is hyper and hypothyroidism. People that are hyperthyroid or fidgety and they have a high metabolic rate and they're hot. And people that are hypothermic are cool. They don't move very much. So any kind of muscle activity increases, and when you say it's not much activity, but remember it's only 20% effective. 80% of the energy is going to heat. So it may not exert much energy to tap your foot. [chuckles] But four times the amount of energy that is going into the movement is being lost as heat. - That's very interesting. A couple more quick questions. There's a lot of excitement these days or at least usage these days of so-called energy drinks or pre-workout drinks. Many of these contain thermogenic compounds. So caffeine, things, there's a culture now of taking arginine, things that support arginine. So beet juice and L-citrulline, things to dilate the blood vessels. Sometimes this is for sake of increasing blood flow to the muscles during resistance exercise. But a lot of these are thermogenic, is to increase body temperature. And is it possible that some of these energy drinks are actually, or similar, six espresso or whatever it is, are acting to prevent optimal performance or reduce performance? - I don't think that the temperature rise is that, I really don't know, but what it does is it makes you more jittery and you're going to increase that NEAT that you were talking about. There's another thing. And that is that when you are exercising your muscle and it becomes slightly hypoxic, I mean the oxygen suppliers is not enough, the muscle releases adenosine. And what adenosine does in the muscle is cause the blood vessels to open up, to dilate. So it's a way of increasing the blood flow to the muscle and therefore the oxygen supply to the muscle. - And caffeine is essentially an adenosine antagonists. - An adenosine antagonist. Right. - So under the strict logic, ingesting caffeine will reduce adenosine release and will reduce oxygen utilization of the muscle? - Right. - So that would lead me to believe that, motivational support aside, that caffeine will hinder muscular performance? - I would think so, but I can't give you an authoritative answer on that. - Okay, we're just going through the logic and the gymnastics around that. I think it's a fascinating area that deserves attention because the question of what one can ingest in order to perform better, to say nothing of hormone augmentation, but often leads back to stimulants. And if those stimulants, most of which include caffeine of some sort, are inhibiting the adenosine system and the adenosine system is supporting the oxygenation of muscle, then I would imagine that avoiding them might be the better option. - Yeah, I just, I'm not aware of data that would, so this is a general phenomenon of adenosine and blood flow. It has of course, a different effect in the brain. Adenosine causes sleep. So caffeine keeps you awake. And if you stay awake, you're going to have a higher metabolic rate than if you go to sleep. And the thing is you say, energy drinks, the question is, what really is in them? - It's usually a cocktail of things. I don't take these, I don't like them at all, but they're usually a combination of vasodilators, caffeine, some sort of stimulant. - And source of glucose usually. - Sometimes a source of glucose and sometimes not. And oftentimes there are vasodilators and there are compounds that are thought to be so-called nootropics, smart drugs that basically increase acetylcholine or norepinephrine transmission. In the 80s and 90s, the beta-3 agonist like clenbuterol were very popular, but they were all banned. So those were all banned from, although people used them recreationally, which I do not recommend. There were actually a number of deaths due to dehydration, overheating, as well as cardiac effects. Before we wrap up, I know you've done a ton of work on sleep. I think we're going to have to do another episode about your work on sleep, because the amount of data that you produce there is vast actually. So I first got to know you and your work related to sleep and temperature. We all hear nowadays that it's good to keep the room that you sleep in cool. Keep it dark. I've talked a number of times on podcast episodes about the role of light and shifting circadian rhythms. I have two questions related to sleep. One is, are there any things that may or may not relate to temperature, but that you think are very useful for getting better sleep, that you don't hear that much about, that people might want to consider or try? Realizing that there are a lot of reasons why people don't sleep great, but what are some things that you don't hear that much about these days that you wish people knew? - Well, the sleep medicine community now puts a lot more emphasis on cognitive behavioral therapy than on pharmacology. So what cognitive behavioral therapy does is it essentially increases your sleep hygiene. So there are certain just general rules. So have a regular bedtime and a regular arousal time. Don't be skipping back and forth all the time. - Arousal, you mean wake-up time? - Wake-up time, yeah. - Spoken like a true physiologist. - Right. [laughs] Yeah, another thing is don't use screens within a couple hours of bedtime, because screens are predominantly rich in blue light. And what that does, as you mentioned, the circadian system, that affects your circadian system. That pushes off your circadian stimulus for sleep, okay? Another thing is of course relax. I mean, don't work right up until the time you're going to bed. Take some time to do something relaxing. And then temperature, you've mentioned that. And for many people, a warm bath is really conducive to good sleep. And people are now swearing by a cooler environment for sleep. And that makes sense in terms of the circadian effect on body temperature. So our circadian clock is effecting our thermostat. So at the time we go to bed, our thermostat is on its way down to a lower set point, okay? So what happens? You go to bed and you're feeling a little bit cool. So you pile on lots of blankets. And then what happens is you wake up a little bit later and you're hot, so you throw them off. It's because your thermostat has set downward. Now why is it better to have a cooler environment? It's better to have a cooler environment, because it's easier to thermoregulate. So you can go to Europe in the summertime and the hotel rooms still have these big comforters, these down comforters. So how do you deal with that? You stick out your hands and your legs, okay? - I've always slept with, I have one leg that just kind a hangs out of the, yeah. - But they're your heat loss surfaces, right? So if you're in a cool environment, you can take advantage of that. You can take advantage by passively regulating your body temperature. You don't have to get up and wake up and say, oh my God, I've got to change the covers or blankets, or what have you. If you're in a warm environment, what can you do? - You need to sleep with one hand in the CoolMitt. - Right. - Right? And right now that's not available yet. - Right. It's not available. - I've never heard about it that way. I've always heard you want to sleep in a cool room or keep the room cold. - Yeah. - But I never realized why that's useful, which is, you're saying, then you can move these glabrous surfaces in and out. You could even also wake up under the blanket completely. - Your face. Yeah, yeah. - Very, very interesting. That finally a rational science grounded explanation for why we need to sleep in a cool room. 'Cause I always thought, well, if your temperature is going down anyway, why do you have to sleep in a cool room? What about wearing socks while you sleep? That was big a few years ago where they said, you should put socks on. Now I would think that's probably the wrong advice. You probably just- - Well, I don't know if it's wrong advice. There's an old, old study that was supported by, I think, Eddie Bauer, the sleeping bag company. And what the study showed, what the study was asking is what are the most temperature-sensitive spots in the body? Where do you feel cold? And what that showed was it was the toes. - That makes sense. So when you sample water with your toe, you always see that. [Craig laughs] - So the socks essentially are promoting thermal comfort by insulating that area that's quite sensitive. Now of course, if it's too warm, you're not going to put socks on. - Right, well, Craig, thank you so much. You gave so much information that's actionable and interesting. I know a lot of people are going to be really interested in the palmar cooling technology from CoolMitt. We will be sure to provide resources to the website so that people can register interest. I do encourage people to play around with, so to speak, the palmar cooling technology that we all have, which are these glabrous surfaces. And I also just want to thank you for taking time out of your busy schedule to share this information. - Yeah, you're welcome. It was fun. It was lots of fun. - I certainly learned a lot and I know a lot of people are going to learn a lot that's useful to them. - Good questions. - Well, fabulous answers. Thank you. - Thank you. - Thank you for joining for my discussion with Dr. Craig Heller. If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel as well. You can give us feedback in the comment section on YouTube as to topics you would like us to cover, future guests, and so on. Also subscribe to the podcast on Apple and on Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review and you can leave us a comment or feedback there as well. Please also check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's a terrific way to support our podcast. In addition, if you're interested in supporting research in the Huberman Lab at Stanford, you can go to hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving. And there you can make a tax-deductible donation to support research in my laboratory on stress, human performance, sleep and trauma, and topics of that sort. If you're not already following us at Huberman Lab on Instagram or Twitter, you're welcome to do so. On Instagram, I do short neuroscience tutorials that are separate from the tutorials that I tend to do on the podcast. Often on this podcast, we discuss supplements. One of the really important things, if you're going to take supplements, is that the supplements be of the highest quality ingredients and that the amount of those ingredients that's listed on the label actually matches what is in those supplements. We've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because thorn has the highest levels of stringency in terms of quality and how much of each supplement they put in their products. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E.com/the letter U/Huberman. And there, you can see what I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements if you enter the Thorne site through that portal. And even if you navigate to other products and other product pages within the Thorne site, you can still get that 20% off. So it's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [energetic rock music]

========================================

--- Video 308 ---
Video ID: QmOF0crdyRU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QmOF0crdyRU
Title: Controlling Your Dopamine For Motivation, Focus & Satisfaction
Published: 2021-09-27 12:00:22 UTC
Description:
This episode serves as a sort of “Dopamine Masterclass”. I discuss the immensely powerful chemical that we all make in our brain and body: dopamine. I describe what it does and the neural circuits involved. I explain dopamine peaks and baselines, and the cell biology of dopamine depletion. I include 14 tools for how to control your dopamine release for sake of motivation, focus, avoiding and combating addiction and depression, and I explain why dopamine stacking with chemicals and behaviors inevitably leads to states of underwhelm and poor performance. I explain how to achieve sustained increases in baseline dopamine, compounds that injure and protect dopamine neurons including caffeine from specific sources. I describe non-prescription supplements for increasing dopamine—both their benefits and risks—and synergy of pro-dopamine supplements with those that increase acetylcholine. 

#HubermanLab #Dopamine #Motivation

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Logitech Event - Rethink Education: The Biology of Learning
https://info.logitech.com/ReThink-Education.html

Support Research in Huberman Lab at Stanford:
https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Review on Dopamine: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41583-021-00455-7
Cold Exposure & Dopamine: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs004210050065

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction & Tool 1 to Induce Lasting Dopamine
00:04:48 Sponsors: Roka, InsideTracker, Headspace
00:09:10 Upcoming (Zero-Cost) Neuroplasticity Seminar for Educators
00:09:58 What Dopamine (Really) Does
00:15:30 Two Main Neural Circuits for Dopamine 
00:18:14 How Dopamine Is Released: Locally and Broadly
00:22:03 Fast and Slow Effects of Dopamine
00:25:03 Dopamine Neurons Co-Release Glutamate
00:28:00 Your Dopamine History Really Matters 
00:30:30 Parkinson’s & Drugs That Kill Dopamine Neurons. My Dopamine Experience 
00:36:58 Tool 3 Controlling Dopamine Peaks & Baselines
00:40:06 Chocolate, Sex (Pursuit & Behavior), Nicotine, Cocaine, Amphetamine, Exercise
00:46:46 Tool 4 Caffeine Increases Dopamine Receptors
00:49:54 Pursuit, Excitement & Your “Dopamine Setpoint”
00:56:46 Your Pleasure-Pain Balance & Defining “Pain”
01:00:00 Addiction, Dopamine Depletion, & Replenishing Dopamine
01:07:50 Tool 5 Ensure Your Best (Healthy) Dopamine Release
01:15:28 Smart Phones: How They Alter Our Dopamine Circuits
01:19:45 Stimulants & Spiking Dopamine: Counterproductive for Work, Exercise & Attention
01:22:20 Caffeine Sources Matter: Yerba Mate & Dopamine Neuron Protection
01:24:20 Caffeine & Neurotoxicity of MDMA
01:26:15 Amphetamine, Cocaine & Detrimental Rewiring of Dopamine Circuits
01:27:57 Ritalin, Adderall, (Ar)Modafinil: ADHD versus non-Prescription Uses
01:28:45 Tool 6 Stimulating Long-Lasting Increases in Baseline Dopamine 
01:37:55 Tool 7 Tuning Your Dopamine for Ongoing Motivation
01:47:40 Tool 8 Intermittent Fasting: Effects on Dopamine 
01:53:09 Validation of Your Pre-Existing Beliefs Increases Dopamine
01:53:50 Tool 9 Quitting Sugar & Highly Palatable Foods: 48 Hours
01:55:36 Pornography
01:56:50 Wellbutrin & Depression & Anxiety
01:58:30 Tool 10 Mucuna Pruriens, Prolactin, Sperm, Crash Warning
02:01:45 Tool 11 L-Tyrosine: Dosages, Duration of Effects & Specificity
02:05:20 Tool 12 Avoiding Melatonin Supplementation, & Avoiding Light 10pm-4am
02:07:00 Tool 13 Phenylethylamine (with Alpha-GPC) For Dopamine Focus/Energy
02:08:20 Tool 14 Huperzine A
02:10:02 Social Connections, Oxytocin & Dopamine Release
02:12:20 Direct & Indirect Effects: e.g., Maca; Synthesis & Application
02:14:22 Zero-Cost & Other Ways To Support Podcast & Research

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [energetic music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to talk all about dopamine and what drives you to do the things that you do. We're going to talk about motivation and desire and craving, but also how dopamine relates to satisfaction and our feelings of wellbeing. And of course, any discussion about dopamine has to include a discussion about the potential for dopamine induced addiction. Indeed, dopamine lies at the heart of addiction to all things. But today we are mainly going to focus on, how what we do and how we do it, and how we conceptualize those things leads to changes in this amazing molecule in our brain and bodies that we call dopamine. I'm going to teach you what dopamine is and what it is not. There are a lot of myths about the molecule dopamine. We often hear about so-called dopamine hits. Today, we are going to dispel many common myths about dopamine, and we are going to talk about how dopamine actually works. We're going to discuss the biology of dopamine, the psychology. We will discuss some neural circuits and a really exciting aspect of dopamine biology or so-called dopamine schedules. In other words, we are going to discuss how things like food, drugs, caffeine, pornography, even some plant-based compounds can change our baseline levels of dopamine and in doing so, they change how much dopamine we are capable of experiencing from what could be very satisfying events, or events that make us feel not so good because of things that we did or took prior. So I promise you it's going to be a vast discussion, but I will structure it for you, and you'll come away with a deep understanding of really what drives you. You will also come away with a lot of tools, how to leverage dopamine so that you can sustain energy, drive and motivation for the things that are important to you over long periods of time. Before we dive into the meat of today's discussion, I'd like to share with you a fascinating result that really underscores what dopamine is capable of in our brains and bodies, and underscores the fact that just through behaviors, no drugs, nothing of that sort, just through behaviors, we can achieve terrifically high increases in dopamine that are very long and sustained in ways that serve us. This is a result that was published in the European Journal of Physiology. I'll go into it in more detail later, but essentially what it involved is having human subjects get into water of different temperatures. So it was warm water, moderately cool water and cold, cold water. Had them stay in that water for up to an hour, and they measured by way of blood draw things like cortisol, norepinephrine and dopamine. What was fascinating is that cold water exposure led to very rapid increases in norepinephrine and epinephrine, which is also just called adrenaline. It also led to increases in dopamine. And these increases in dopamine were very significant. They kicked in around 10 or 15 minutes after submersion into the cold water. And I should mention the head wasn't below water is just up to the neck. And the dopamine release continued to rise and rise and rise, and eventually reached 250% above baseline. Now, what was interesting is after subjects got out of this cold water, that dopamine increase was sustained. And I know nowadays many people are interested in using cold water therapy as a way to increase metabolism and fat loss, but also to improve sense of well-being, improve cognition, improve clarity of mind. There's something really special about this very alert, but calm state of mind that seems to be the one that's optimal for pretty much everything except sleep, but for all aspects of work and for social engagement and for sport that highly alert, but calm state of mind really is the sweet spot that I believe most of us would like to achieve. And this cold water exposure done correctly really can help people achieve that state of mind through these increases in dopamine that lasts a very long time. So I will later detail the specifics of that study, what it entailed in terms of how long, the variations, the different subjects experienced, as well as how to limit the amount of stress hormone, cortisol, that's released as a consequence of the cold water. And we will also talk about compounds, supplements that people can take in order to increase their levels of dopamine should they choose. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system. And I can tell you that the visual system has to go through a lot of work in order to main clarity of what you see when there are shadows, when you go into different types of indoor lighting, and so on. And a lot of glasses don't work well because you put them on, and then you're in bright light and you can see fine, but then you move into a shadow and then you have to take them off and they don't adjust, or they don't adjust quickly enough. With Roka their eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed with the visual system biology in mind. So you always see things with perfect clarity. The glasses are also terrific because they're very lightweight, and they won't slip off your face if you're exercising, if you're running or biking. In fact, they were designed for the purpose of being able to be worn while you're engaging in those sorts of activities or simply working at your desk. I happen to wear readers at night or when I drive or when I work, and I love their sunglasses cause I can wear them anywhere. And also the aesthetics of their sunglasses and eyeglasses are terrific. Unlike a lot of other performance glasses that frankly make people look like cyborgs. The aesthetics on Roka's are really terrific. You could wear them anywhere you'd like to go. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to www.roka.com. That's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's Roka, www.R-O-K-A.com. Enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can also analyze your DNA to see what you ought to be doing for your immediate and long-term health. We hear a lot these days about optimization, optimizing hormones, optimizing your metabolism, optimizing this, optimizing that, but unless you know the measurements of metabolic factors, hormones and other things that are in your blood and DNA, you don't know what to optimize. With InsideTracker it makes all of that very easy. They can come to your house to take the blood and DNA test, or you can go to a nearby clinic. They send you the information and you take those results. And unlike a lot of laboratories doing blood work out there and DNA tests, they have a simple platform, a dashboard that walks you through your results and helps you identify what sorts of nutritional or behavioral or other types of practices you might want to incorporate into your life in order to positively impact your immediate and long-term health. It's a very easy system to use, and you will gain a ton of information simply by doing that test. Whether or not you end up making changes to what you're doing or not. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to www.insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app backed by 25 published studies and has over 600,005 star reviews. I've been meditating for a long time, but I confess sometimes I meditate and sometimes I'm very inconsistent about my meditation. Ideally, I would meditate every day for 20 or 30 minutes, but what I found over the years is that, I'll start a meditation practice and then as life gets more stressful or busier, which is exactly when I need to meditate more, I tend to meditate less often. Switching over to Headspace as a meditation app really helped me stay consistent with my meditation practice. And that's because they have a huge range of meditations to select from. Some are short, some are longer. And in general, I try and get 20 minutes of meditation in every day, but some days it's just five minutes and they have some terrific just five minute meditations. The science says that even a five minute meditation can be beneficial for different aspects of our brain and body. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to www.headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get one month as a free trial with full library of meditations that you can use in any situation. This is the best deal offered by Headspace right now. So if you're interested, go to www.headspace.com/specialoffer to get one free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations. I'd like to announce that there's an event that some of you may find very useful. This is an event put on by Logitech that I will be speaking at. It's called Rethink Education, the Biology of Learning Reimagining Learning through Neuroscience. And at this event, I will be speaking, there will be other speakers as well, and I will be talking about neuroplasticity and its applications for teaching and for learning. I will describe what I call the plasticity super protocol that incorporates all of what we know about rapid learning, efficient learning and the best ways to teach and learn. It's geared towards educators of all kinds. It is zero cost. So please feel free to sign up. The event is September 30th, 2021 at 3:00 p.m Eastern. You can find the registration link in the caption for this episode. So let's talk about dopamine. Most people have heard of dopamine, and we hear all the time now about dopamine hits. But actually there's no such thing as a dopamine hit. And actually the way that your body uses dopamine is to have a baseline level of dopamine. Meaning an amount of dopamine that's circulating in your brain and body all the time. And that turns out to be important for how you feel generally, whether or not you're in a good mood, motivated, et cetera. And you also can experience peaks in dopamine above baseline. Now, this has a very specific name in the neurobiology literature, so-called tonic and phasic release of dopamine. And I'll explain what that means in a couple of minutes. But if you remember nothing else from this episode, please remember this, that when you experience something or you crave something really desirable, really exciting to you, very pleasurable. What happens afterwards is your baseline level of dopamine drops. Okay? So these peaks in dopamine, they influence how much dopamine will generally be circulating afterward. And you might think, oh, a big peak in dopamine after that, I'm going to feel even better because I just had this great event. Not the case. What actually happens is that your baseline level of dopamine drops. And I will explain the precise mechanism for that. Okay? In the neuroscience literature, we refer to this as tonic and phasic release of dopamine. Tonic being the low level baseline that's always there circulating, released into your brain all the time. And then phasic these peaks that ride above that baseline. And those two things interact. And this is really important. I'm going to teach you the underlying neurobiology, but even if you have no background in biology, I promise to make it all clear. I'll explain the terms and what they mean. And I'm excited to teach you about dopamine, because dopamine has everything to do with how you feel right now as you're listening to this, it has everything to do with how you will feel an hour from now, has everything to do with your level of motivation and your level of desire, and your willingness to push through effort. If ever you've interacted with somebody who just doesn't seem to have any drive they've given up, or if you've interacted with somebody who seems to have endless drive and energy, what you are looking at there in those two circumstances is without question a difference in the level of dopamine circulating in their system. There will be other factors too, but the level of dopamine is the primary determinant of how motivated we are, how excited we are, how outward facing we are and how willing we are, to lean into life and pursue things. Dopamine is what we call a neuromodulator. Neuromodulators are different than neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are involved in the dialogue between neurons nerve cells. And neurotransmitters tend to mediate local communication. Just imagine two people talking to one another at a concert, that communication between them is analogous to the communication carried out by neurotransmitters, whereas neuromodulators influence the communication of many neurons. Imagine a bunch of people dancing where it's a coordinated dance involving 10 or 20 or hundreds of people. Neuromodulators are coordinating that dance. In the nervous system what this means is that, dopamine release changes the probability that certain neural circuits will be active and that other neural circuits will be inactive. Okay? So it modulates a bunch of things all at once, and that's why it's so powerful at shifting not just our levels of energy, but also our mindset, also our feelings of whether or not we can, or cannot accomplish something. So how does dopamine work and what does it do? Well, first of all, it is not just responsible for pleasure, it is responsible for motivation and drive. Primarily, at the psychological level, also for craving. Those three things are sort of the same. Motivation, drive and craving. It also controls time perception, and we will get deep into how dopamine can modulate time perception, and how important it is that everybody be able to access increases in dopamine at different timescales. This turns out to be important to not end up addicted to substances, but it also turns out to be very important to sustain effort and be a happy person over long periods of time. Which I think most everybody wants. It certainly is adaptive in life to be able to do that. Dopamine is also vitally important for movement. I'll explain the neural circuits for dopamine and mindset, and dopamine in movement in a moment, but in diseases like Parkinson's or Lewy bodies dementia, which is similar to Parkinson's in many ways. There's a depletion or death of dopamine neurons at a particular location in the brain which leads to shaky movements, challenges and speaking, challenges in particular in initiating movement. And because dopamine is depleted elsewhere to people with Parkinson's and Lew's bod, excuse me, Lewy body dementia also experience drops in motivation and affect, meaning mood. They tend to get depressed and so on. When those people are properly treated, they can, not always, but they can recover some fluidity of movement, some ability to initiate movement. And almost without question, those people feel better psychologically, not just because they can move, but also because dopamine impacts mood and motivation. So what are the underlying neural circuits? For those of you that are not interested in biology and specific nomenclature, you can tune out now if you want, but it's actually pretty straightforward. You have two main neural circuits in the brain that dopamine uses in order to exert all its effects. The first one is a pathway that goes from this area in the what's called the ventral tegmentum. That's a fancy, but ventral just means bottom, and tegmentum actually means floor. So it's at the bottom of the brain, and it's the ventral part of the floor. So it's really low in the back of the brain, the ventral tegmentum. And it goes from the ventral tegmentum to what's called the ventral striatum and the prefrontal cortex. Now, that's a lot of language, but basically what we call this is the, mesocorticolimbic pathway. This is the pathway by which dopamine influences motivation, drive and craving. It involves structures that some of you may have heard of before. Things like nucleus accumbens and the prefrontal cortex. This is the pathway that really gets disrupted in addictions where in particular drugs that influence the release of dopamine like cocaine and methamphetamine. We'll talk about those drugs today. They tap into this pathway. But if you are pursuing a partner, a boyfriend or girlfriend, if you're pursuing a degree in school, if you're pursuing a finish line in a race, you are tapping into this so-called mesecorticolimbic pathway. This is the classic reward pathway in all mammals. The other pathway emerges from an area in the brain called the substantia nigra. So-called because the cells in that area are dark, and the substantia nigra connects to an area of the brain called the dorsal striatum. This is not surprisingly called the nigrostriatal pathway. For those of you who have never done any neuroanatomy, I'm going to teach you a little trick right now. Everything in neuroanatomy, the first part of a word tells you where the neurons are. And then the second part tells you where they are connecting to. So when I say nigropstriatal pathway, it means that the neurons are in substantial nigra and they connect to the striatum, nigrostriatal pathway. So while it's a lot of language there, some logic there. Okay? So we've got these two pathways. One, mainly for movement, right? This is the substantia nigra to dorsal striatum. And we've got this other pathway, the so-called mesocorticolimbic pathway, that's for reward, reinforcement and motivation. I want you to remember that there are two pathways. If you don't remember the two pathways in detail, that's fine. But please remember that there are two pathways, because that turns out to be important later. Now, the other thing to understand about dopamine is that, the way that dopamine is released in the brain and body can differ. Meaning it can be very local, or it can be more broad. Now, most of you have probably heard of synapses. Synapses are the little spaces between neurons, and basically neurons nerve cells communicate with one another by making each other electrically active, or by making each other less electrically active. So here's how this works. You can imagine one nerve cell and another nerve cell with a little gap between them, a little synapse. And the way that one nerve cell causes the next nerve cell to fire. What we call fire really means to become electrically active is that it vomits out these little packets, what we call vesicles. They're little bubbles filled with a chemical, when that chemical enters the synapse, it some of it docks or parks on the other side, in the other neuron. And by virtue of electrical changes in the, what we call the postsynaptic neuron, that chemical will make that neuron more electrically active or less electrically active. Dopamine can do that like any other neurotransmitter or neuromodulator. So it can have one neuron influence another neuron. But dopamine can also engage in what's called a volume metric release. Volumetric release is like a giant vomit that gets out to 50 or a hundred or even thousands of cells. So there's local release what we call synaptic release, and then there's volumetric release. So volumetric release is like dumping all this dopamine out into the system. So dopamine is incredible because it can change the way that our neural circuits work at a local scale and at a very broad scale. And for those of you that are only interested in tools, like how do I get more dopamine? Let me tell you this part is really important because if you were to take a drug or supplement that increases your level of dopamine, you are influencing both the local release of dopamine and volumetric release. This relates back to the baseline of dopamine and the big peak above baseline. And that turns out to be important. And I'll just allude to why it's important. Many drugs and indeed many supplements that increase dopamine will actually make it harder for you to sustain dopamine release over long periods of time. And to achieve those peaks that most of us are craving when we are in pursuit of things. Why? Because if you get both volume metric release, the dumping out of dopamine everywhere, and you're getting local release, what it means is that the difference between the peak and baseline is likely to be smaller. And this is very important, how satisfying or exciting or pleasureful a given experience is, doesn't just depend on the height of that peak, it depends on the height of that peak relative to the baseline. So if you increase the baseline and you increase the peak, you're not going to achieve more and more pleasure from things. I'll talk about how to leverage this information in a little bit, but just increasing your dopamine. Yes, it will make you excited for all things. It will make you feel very motivated, but it will also make that motivation very short-lived. So there's a better way to increase your dopamine. There's a better way to optimize this peak to baseline ratio. For now what we've talked about is two main neural circuits, one for movement, and one for motivation and craving with dopamine. And we've talked about two main modes of communication between neurons with dopamine. One is this local synaptic release. One is more volume metric release. And in the back of your mind, you can relate this back to, again, this baseline versus peaks above baseline. So that's a description of what we would call the spatial effects or the spatial aspects of dopamine. I said this connects to that, that connects to this. You can get local or more broad volumetric release. What about the duration of release or the duration of action for dopamine? Well, dopamine is unique among chemicals in the brain, because dopamine unlike a lot of chemicals in the brain works through what are called G protein-coupled receptors. And for those of you that are about to pass out from the amount of detail, just hang in there with me. It's really not complicated. There are two ways that neurons can communicate or mainly two ways. There are third and fourth, but mostly neurons communicate by two modes. One, are what we call fast electrical synapses ionotropic conduction. All right? You don't need to know what that means, but basically one neuron activates another neuron and little holes open up in that neuron, and ions rush in. Sodium is the main ion salt by which one neuron influences the electrical activity of another neuron because sodium ions contain a charge. Okay? There are other things like chloride and potassium. If you're interested in looking this up, just look up ionic conductances in the action potential, or I could do a post on it some time and we could go into detail. But just understand that when neurons want to influence each other, they can do it by way of this fast ionotropic conduction. This is a really quick way for one neuron to influence the next. Dopamine doesn't communicate that way. Dopamine is slower. It works through what are called G protein-coupled receptors. So what happens is dopamine is released in these little vesicles that I've mentioned before, get vomited out into the synapse. Some of that dopamine will bind to the so-called postsynaptic neuron, it'll bind to the next neuron, and then it sets off a cascade. It's kind of like a bucket brigade of one thing, getting handed off to the next, to the next, to the next. It's G protein-coupled receptors. And anytime you hear about these GPCRs or G protein-coupled receptors, pay attention because they're really interesting. They're slow, but they also can have multiple cascades of effects. They can impact even gene expression at some level. They can change what a cell actually becomes. They can change how well or how poorly that cell will respond to the same signal in the future. So dopamine works through the slower process. These G protein-coupled receptors. And so its effects tend to take a while in order to occur. This aspect of dopamine transmission is important because it now underscores two things. One, there's two pathways for dopamine to communicate. One for movement, one for motivation and craving. There's two spatial scales at which dopamine can operate synaptically or volumetrically. And dopamine can have slow effects, really slow effects, or even very long lasting effects. And it even can control gene expression. It can actually change the way that cells behave. One thing that's not often discussed about dopamine, but is extremely important to know is that dopamine doesn't work on its own. Neurons that release dopamine co-release glutamate. Glutamate is a neurotransmitter and it's a neurotransmitter that is excitatory, meaning it stimulates neurons to be electrically active. So now even if you don't know any cell biology, you should start to gain a picture that dopamine is responsible for movement, motivation and drive. It does that through two pathways, but also the dopamine stimulates action in general, because it releases this excitatory neurotransmitter. It tends to make certain neurons that are nearby or even that are far away, because of volumetric release, it tends to make those more active. So dopamine is really stimulating. And indeed we say that dopaminergic transmission or dopamine tends to stimulate sympathetic arousal. Sympathetic doesn't have anything to do with sympathy. It's just simply means that it tends to increase our levels of alertness. It tends to bring an animal or a human into a state of more alertness, readiness and desire to pursue things outside the confines of its skin. So if I were to just put a really simple message around dopamine it would be, there's a molecule in your brain and body that when released tends to make you look outside yourself, pursue things outside yourself, and to crave things outside yourself. The pleasure that arrives from achieving things also involves dopamine, but is mainly the consequences of other molecules. But if ever you felt lethargic and like just lazy and you had no motivation or drive, that's a low dopamine state. If ever you felt really excited, motivated, even if you're a little scared to do something. Maybe you did your first skydive, or you're about to do your first skydive, or you're about to do some public speaking and you really don't want to screw it up, you are in a high dopamine state. Dopamine is a universal currency in all mammals, but especially in humans for moving us toward goals and how much dopamine is in our system at any one time compared to how much dopamine was in our system a few minutes ago, and how much we remember enjoying a particular experience of the past. That dictates your so-called quality of life and your desire to pursue things. This is really important. Dopamine is a currency, and it's the way that you track pleasure. It's the way that you track success. It's the way that you track whether or not you are doing well or doing poorly. And that is subjective, but if your dopamine is too low, you will not feel motivated. If your dopamine is really high, you will feel motivated. And if your dopamine is somewhere in the middle, how you feel depends on whether or not you had higher dopamine a few minutes ago or lower dopamine. This is important, your experience of life and your level of motivation and drive depends on how much dopamine you have relative to your recent experience. This is again, something that's just not accounted for in the simple language of dopamine hits. Okay? A simple way to envision dopamine hits is every time you do something you like, you to piece of chocolate, dopamine hit. You look at your Instagram, dopamine hit. You see someone you like, dopamine hit. All these things described as dopamine hits neglect the fact that if you scroll social media and you see something you really like, dopamine hit. Sure there's an increase in dopamine, but then you get to something else and you go, hmm, not that interesting. However, had you arrived at that second thing first, you might think that it was really interesting. If you had arrived to that second Instagram post three days later or four days later, you might find it extremely interesting. Again, how much dopamine you experience from something depends on your baseline level of dopamine when you arrive there, and your previous dopamine peaks. Okay? That's super important to understand, and it's completely neglected by the general language of dopamine hits. This is why when you repeatedly engage in something that you enjoy, your threshold for enjoyment goes up and up and up. So I want to talk about that process. And I want to explain how that process works, because if you understand that process, and you understand some of these schedules and kinetics as we call them around dopamine, you will be in a terrific position to use any dopamine enhancing tools that you decide to use. You'll be in an excellent position to modulate and control your own dopamine release for optimal motivation and drive. I realized that was a lot of information about the biology of dopamine, sort of like trying to make you drink from the fire hose of dopamine biology. However, I realized that some people probably want even more information about the biology of dopamine transmission. If you're interested in that, I'll post a link to a absolutely stellar review that was published in Nature Reviews Neuroscience called spatial and temporal scales of dopamine transmission. It is quite detailed, but they have beautiful diagrams and can walk you through all the things that I just described and get into even more detail. We'll put a link to that in the caption on YouTube. Right now, I want to share with you two anecdotes, one from my own life, and one from some fairly recent history that illustrate some of the core biology of dopamine and how profoundly it can shape our experience. The first one is a really tragic situation that occurred. This was in the 80s, there was a outbreak of what looked like Parkinsonian symptoms in a young population. So many of you heard of Parkinson's disease. Parkinson's disease is a disease in which people initially start to quake, can't generate smooth movements, they'll have issues with speech, sometimes cognition as well. There are examples like Michael J. Fox, which are kind of early onset. Parkinson's typically it hits people a little bit later in life. There's a genetic component. But there is this question, and there's always been this question whether or not certain lifestyle factors can also create Parkinson's? And some years ago there was a situation where street laboratories, illicit laboratories were trying to make a drug called MPPP, which is an opioid light compound. It's a bit like heroin, and heroin addicts seeking heroin went out and bought what they thought was MPPP. Unfortunately, it was not MPPP. I mean, it would have been tragic if it was anyway because they were drug addicts, but what they ended up taking turned out to be a lot worse. What they ended up taking was MPTP, and MPTP can arise in the synthesis of MPPP. So someone in a lab someplace, this was mainly in the Central Valley in California, but elsewhere as well. Somebody created MPTP, and what ended up happening was a large number of young people who were opioid addicts became completely boxed in paralyzed. Couldn't speak, couldn't blink, couldn't do anything. Couldn't function, couldn't move. So both aspects of dopamine transmission were disrupted. They had no motivation and drive. They couldn't generate any movement of any kind. They were literally locked in frozen. And sadly, this is irreversible. It's irreversible, because what MPTP does is it kills the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra that nigrostriatal pathway that's involved in generating movement. And it kills the dopaminergic neurons of the so-called mesocorticolimbic pathway. I was in college when this whole MPTP thing happened. And I remember hearing this story. At the time, I had no understanding of what it is to have very high levels of dopamine or extremely depleted levels of dopamine. There was no reason why I should have that understanding. I mean, of course I had experienced different pleasures of different kinds and I've had lows in my life, but nothing to the extreme that I'm about to discuss. I got Giardia. And Giardia is a stomach bug that if any of you ever had it, it is terrible. It's terrible diarrhea. You end up very dehydrated very quickly. You drop a ton of weight and it is extremely unpleasant. I ended up going to the emergency room, and in the emergency room, I begged them for something to stop up my guts. And they gave it to me. They put a saline line into rehydrate me and they injected something into the saline bag. And within minutes I felt more sadness, more overwhelming sense of depression, basically, lower than I'd ever felt in my entire life. It was absolutely profound. I was crying endlessly without knowing why I was crying. I was miserable. And I asked them, what did you inject? And they said, "We injected Thorazine." Thorazine is an antipsychotic drug. It's actually used to block dopamine receptors. It's what's given to people who have schizophrenia. Often is given to people who have schizophrenia, because schizophrenia involves among other things elevated levels of dopamine. It was horrible. The experience of it was miserable, unlike anything I'd ever experienced. And so I actually said to them, "What did you give me?" They said, "Thorazine." And I said, "You have to give me l-DOPA. "You have to give me something to get my dopamine levels "back up again." And they did. They gave me an injection of l-DOPA into the bag, went straight to my bloodstream. And within minutes I felt fine again. It was incredible. And it really opened up my mind and my experience to what it is to have absolutely plummeted levels of dopamine. And there's nothing more miserable than that I'll tell you. And these poor souls who had this MPTP experience, unfortunately, they couldn't recover those cells. People who have severe Parkinson's are struggling with this as well, because in Parkinson's and in Lewy body dementia, the dopaminergic neurons often die. It's not just a problem with those neurons releasing enough dopamine. Later, we're going to talk about some approaches to maintaining dopaminergic neuron health and things that we can all do for that. But I will tell you these dopamine neurons that we all have are very precious for movement and mood and motivation. Having experienced what it is to have very, very low levels of dopamine or in this case to have my dopamine receptors blocked from Thorazine was eye-opening to say the least, and has given me tremendous sensitivity to the fact that dopamine is perhaps one of the most powerful molecules that any of us has inside of us. And the one that we ought to all think very carefully about how we leverage, because while most experiences and most things that we do, and take and eat and cetera, won't create enormous highs and enormous lows in dopamine. Even subtle fluctuations in dopamine really shape our perception of life and what we're capable of, and how we feel. And so we want to guard those and we want to understand them. So let's lean into that understanding about dopamine. And then let's talk about some tools that we can all use to leverage dopamine in order to keep that baseline in the appropriate, healthy place, and still be able to access those peaks in dopamine. Because those, after all are some of what makes life rich and worth living. So let's talk about the baseline of dopamine that we all have and the peaks in dopamine that we all can achieve through different activities and things that we ingest. All of us have different baseline levels of dopamine. Some of this is sure to be genetic. Some people just simply ride at a level a little bit higher. They're a little bit more excited, they're a little bit more motivated, or maybe they're a lot more excited or a lot more motivated. Some people are a little mellower, some people are a little less excitable. And some of that has to do with the fact that dopamine doesn't act alone. Dopamine has close cousins or friends in the nervous system. And I'll just name off a few of those close cousins and friends. Epinephrin also called adrenaline is the main chemical driver of energy. We can't do anything, anything at all, unless we have some level of epinephrin in our brain and body. It's released from the adrenal glands which right on top our kidneys. It's released from an area of the brainstem called locus coeruleus. And its release tends to wake up neural circuits in the brain and wake up various aspects of our body's physiology and give us a readiness. So it should come as no surprise that dopamine and epinephrin aka adrenaline hang out together. In fact, epinephrin and adrenaline are actually manufactured from dopamine. There's a biochemical pathway involving dopamine which is a beautiful pathway. If ever you want to look it up, you can just look up biochemistry of dopamine. But what you'll find is that, l-DOPA is converted into dopamine. Dopamine is converted to two noradrenaline. Norepinephrin, it's also called. And noredrenaline, norepinephrin is converted into adrenaline. So not only are dopamine and epinephrin aka adrenaline close cousins, they are actually family members. Okay? They're closely related. I'm not going to get too deep into epinephrin today. I'm not going to talk too much about those pathways, but anytime I'm talking about dopaminergic transmission or that you have a peak in dopamine, inevitably, that means that you have a peak and release of epinephrin as well. What dopamine does is dopamine really colors the subjective experience of an activity to make it more pleasureful, to make it something that you want more of. Epinephrin is more about energy. Epinephrin alone can be fear, paralysis, trauma. Not physical paralysis, but mental paralysis, you know, frozen in fear or being traumatized or scared. But the addition of dopamine to that chemical cocktail, if dopamine is released in the brain, well, then that epinephrin becomes one of excitement. Okay? I'm using a broad brush here, but essentially what you need to know is that, dopamine and epinephrin aka adrenaline are family members. And they tend to work together like a little gang to make you seek out certain things. So what sorts of activities? What sorts of things increase dopamine? And how much do they increase dopamine? Well, let's take a look at some typical things that people do out there or ingest out there that are known to increase dopamine. So let's recall that you have a baseline level of dopamine and that everybody does. And even within a family, you might have family members who are very excitable, happy and motivated, and others who are less excitable, happy and motivated. But your level of dopamine has everything to do with those genetics, but also with what you've experienced in the previous days and the previous months and so on. When you do or ingest certain things, your levels of dopamine will rise above baseline transiently. And depending on what you do or ingest, it will rise either more or less, and it will be very brief or a last a long time. So let's take a look at some of the typical things that people take and do and eat. Some are good for us, some are not good for us. And let's ask how much dopamine is increased above baseline? Now, of course, these are averages, but these are averages that have been measured in so-called micro dialysis studies in animals. So actually extracting from particular brain areas how much dopamine is released? Or from measuring the serum, the circulating levels of dopamine in humans. Chocolate. They didn't look at milk versus dark chocolate. But chocolate will increase your baseline level of dopamine 1.5 times. Okay? So it's a pretty substantial increase in dopamine. It's transient. It goes away after a few minutes or even a few seconds. I'll explain what determines the duration in a minute. But 1.5 times for chocolate. Sex. Both the pursuit of sex and the act of sex increases dopamine two times. So it's a doubling above baseline. Now, of course, there's going to be variation there, but that's the average increase in baseline dopamine caused by sex. Later, I will talk about how the different aspects of the so-called arousal art, the different aspects of sex, believe it or not have a differential impact on dopamine. But for now as a general theme or activity, sex doubles the amount of dopamine circulating in your blood. Nicotine. In particular, nicotine that is smoked like cigarettes and so forth, increases dopamine two and a half times above baseline. So there's a peak that goes up above baseline two and a half times higher. It is very short-lived. Anyone who's ever been a chain smoker or observed a chain smoker understands that the increase in dopamine from nicotine is very short-lived. Cocaine will increase the level of dopamine in the bloodstream two and a half times above baseline. And amphetamine another drug that increases dopamine will increase the amount of dopamine in the bloodstream 10 times above baseline. A tremendous increase in dopamine. Exercise. Now, exercise will have a different impact on the levels of dopamine, depending on how much somebody subjectively enjoys that exercise. So if you're somebody who loves running, chances are it's going to increase your levels of dopamine two times above your baseline, not unlike sex. People who dislike exercise will achieve less dopamine increase or no increase in dopamine from exercise. And if you like other forms of exercise like yoga or weightlifting or swimming or what have you. Again, it's going to vary by your subjective experience of whether or not you enjoy that activity. This is important. And it brings us back to something that we talked about earlier. Remember that mesocorticolimbic pathway? Well, the cortical part is important. The cortical part actually has a very specific part, which is your prefrontal cortex. The area of your forebrain that's involved in thinking and planning and involved in assigning a rational explanation to something, and involved in assigning a subjective experience to something, right? So for instance, the pen that I'm holding right now, it's one of these Pilot V5s. I love these Pilot V5s. They don't sponsor the podcast. I just happen to like them. I liked the way that they write, how they feel. If I spent enough time thinking about it, or talking about it, I could probably get a dopamine increase just talking about this Pilot V5. And that's not because I have the propensity to release dopamine easily, it's that as we start to engage with something more and more and what we say about it, and what we encourage ourselves to think about it, has a profound impact on its rewarding or non rewarding properties. Now, it's not simply the case that you can lie to yourself, and you can tell yourself I love something and when you don't really love it, and it will increase dopamine. But what's been found over and over again, is that if people journal about something or they practice some form of appreciation for something, or they think of some aspect of something that they enjoy, the amount of dopamine that that behavior will evoke tends to go up. So for people that hate exercise, you can think about some aspect of exercise that you really enjoy. However, I will caution you against saying to yourself, I hate exercise or I hate studying or I hate this person, but I love the reward I give myself afterward. Later, we're going to talk about how rewards given afterward actually make the situation worse. They won't make you like exercise more or study more, they actually will undermine the dopamine release that would otherwise occur for that activity. So certain things chemicals have a universal effect. They make everybody's dopamine go up. So some people like chocolate, some people don't of course, but in general, it make has causes this increase in dopamine. But sex, nicotine, cocaine, amphetamine, those things cause increases in dopamine and everybody that takes them. Things like exercise, studying, hard work, working through a challenge in a relationship or working through something hard of any kind that is going to be subjective as to how much dopamine will be released. And we will return to that subjective component in a little bit. But now you have a sense of how much dopamine can be evoked by different activities and by different substances. One that you might be wondering about is caffeine. I'm certainly drinking my caffeine today, and I do enjoy caffeine in limited quantities. I drink yerba mate and I drink coffee and I love it. Does it increase dopamine? Well, a little bit. Caffeine will increase dopamine to some extent, but it is pretty modest compared to the other things that I described. Chocolate, sex, nicotine, cocaine, amphetamine and so on. However, there's a really interesting paper published in 2015. This is Volkow et al. You can look up it's very easy to find. That showed that regular ingestion of caffeine, whether or not it's from coffee or otherwise, increases up regulation of certain dopamine receptors. So caffeine actually makes you able to experience more of dopamines effects. Because as I mentioned before, dopamine is vomited out into the synapse or it's released volumetrically, but then it has to bind someplace and trigger those G protein-coupled receptors. And caffeine increases the number, the density of those G protein-coupled receptors. Now, sitting back and thinking about that, you might think, oh yeah, you know, sometimes I'll notice people, at least in the old days that used to be a cigarette and a cup of coffee. Or when people drink alcohol, oftentimes they'll smoke. And it's well-known that different compounds like alcohol and nicotine or caffeine and nicotine or certain behaviors and certain drugs can synergize to give bigger dopamine increases. And this is not terribly uncommon. There are a lot of people nowadays who for instance take pre-workout energy drinks. They'll drink, I won't name names, but they'll drink a canned energy drink or they'll drink a pre-workout and they'll try and get that big stimulation that stimulant effect for the dopamine, the norepinephrin, that family of molecules that works together to make you motivated. And then they'll also exercise to try and get even more of a dopaminergic experience out of that workout. Sometimes it's also to perform better as well, of course, but as we'll talk about in a few minutes, that aspect or that approach rather of trying to just get your dopamine as high as you possibly can, in order to get the most out of experience, turns out to not be the best approach. And what you'll find as we talk about dopamine schedules is that layering together multiple things, substances and activities that lead to big increases in dopamine, actually can create pretty severe issues with motivation and energy right after those experiences and even a couple of days later. So I'm not saying that people shouldn't take the occasional pre-workout if that's your thing, or drink a cup of coffee or two before working out now and again. Some people really enjoy that. I certainly do that every once in a while, but if you do it too often, what you'll find is that your capacity to release dopamine and your level of motivation and drive and energy overall will take a serious hit. Now, I've been alluding to this dopamine peaks versus dopamine baseline things since the beginning of the episode. I talked about tonic and phasic release and so forth. But now let's really drill into what this means, and how to leverage it for our own purposes. In order to do that, let's take a step back and ask, why would we have a dopamine system like this? Why would we have a dopamine system at all? Well, we have to remember what our species primary interest is? Our species like all species has a main interest, and that's to make more of itself. And it's just about sex and reproduction. It's about forging for resources. Resources can be food, it can be water can be salt, it can be shelter, it can be social connection. Dopamine is the universal currency of forging and seeking, right? We call sometimes talk about motivation and craving, but what we mean in the evolutionary adaptive context, what we mean is forging and seeking. Seeking water, seeking food, seeking mates. Seeking things that make us feel good and avoiding things that don't make us feel good. But in particular seeking things that will provide sustenance and pleasure in the short-term and will extend the species in the long-term. Once we understand that dopamine is a driver for us to seek things, it makes perfect sense as to why it would have a baseline level and it would have peaks. And that the baseline and peaks would be related in some sort of direct way. Here's what I mean by that. Let's say that you were not alive now, but you were alive 10,000 years ago. And you woke up and you looked and you realized you had minimal water and you had minimal food left. Maybe you have a child, maybe you have a partner, maybe you're in an entire village, but you realize that you need things. Okay? You need to be able to generate the energy to go seek those things. And chances are there were dangers in seeking those things. Yes, it could be saber-tooth tigers and things of that sort, but there are other dangers too. There's the danger of a cut to your skin that could lead to infection. There's the danger of storms, there's the danger of cold, there's the danger of leaving your loved ones behind. So you go out and forage, right? You could be hunting, you could be gathering, or you could be doing both. The going out and foraging process was we are certain driven by dopamine. I mean, there's no fossil record of the brain, but the circuits have existed. We know for tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of years. And they are present in every animal, not just mammals, but even in little worms like C. elegans, it's the same process. It's mediated by dopamine. So dopamine drives you to go out and look for things. And then let's say you find a couple berries, and these ones are rotten, these ones are good. Maybe you hunt an animal and kill it, or you find an animal that was recently killed and you decide to take the meat. You are going to achieve, or I should say, experience some sort of dopamine release. You found the reward. That's great. But then it needs to return to some lower level. Why? Well, because if you just stayed there, you would never continue to forage for more. It doesn't just increase your baseline and then stay there. It goes back down. And what's very important to understand is that it doesn't just go back down to the level it was before, it goes down to a level below what it was before you went out seeking that thing. Now, this is counter-intuitive. We often think, Oh, okay, I'm going to pursue the win, right? Let's move this to modern day. I'm going to run this marathon, I'm going to train for this marathon. Then you run the marathon and you finish, you cross the finish line, you feel great. And you would think, okay, now I'm set for the entire year, I'm going to feel so much better, I'm going to feel this accomplishment in my body, it's going to be so great. That's not what happens. You might feel some of those things, but your level of dopamine has actually dropped below baseline. Now, eventually it will ratchet back up. But two things are really important. First of all, the extent to which it drops below baseline is proportional to how high the peak was. So if you cross the finish line pretty happy, it won't drop that much below baseline afterward. If you cross the finish line ecstatic, well, a day or two later, you're going to feel quite a bit lower than you would otherwise. You might not be depressed, because it depends on where that baseline was to begin with. But the so-called postpartum depression that people experience after giving birth or after some big win a graduation or any kind of celebration that postpartum drop in mood and affect and motivation is the drop in baseline dopamine. This is very important to understand, because this happens on very rapid timescales and it can last quite a long time. It also explains the behavior that most of us are familiar with, of engaging in something that we really enjoy. Going to a restaurant that we absolutely love, or engaging in some way with some person that we really, really enjoy. But if we continue to engage in that behavior over and over again, it kind of loses its edge. It starts to kind of feel less exciting to us. Some of us experienced that drop in excitement more quickly and more severely than others, but everyone experiences that to some extent. And this has direct roots in these evolutionarily conserved circuits. Some of you may be hearing this and think, no, no, no, no that's not how it works for me. I'm just riding higher and higher all the time. I love my kids, I love my job, I love school, I love wins, I don't want losses. I agree. We all feel good when we are achieving things, but oftentimes we are feeling good because we are layering in different aspects of life, consuming things and doing things that increase our dopamine. We're getting those peaks, but afterward the drop in baseline occurs, and it always takes a little while to get back to our stable baseline. We really all have a sort of dopamine set point. And if we continue to indulge in the same behaviors or even different behaviors that increase our dopamine in these big peaks over and over and over again, we won't experience the same level of joy from those behaviors or from anything at all. Now, that has a name. It's called addiction. But even for people who aren't addicted, even for people don't an attachment to any specific substance or behavior, this drop in bay below baseline after any peak in dopamine is substantial. And it governs whether or not we are going to feel motivated to continue to pursue other things. Fortunately, there's a way to work with this, such that we can constantly stay motivated, but also keep that baseline of dopamine at an appropriate, healthy level. A previous guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast was Dr. Anna Lembke. She's head of the Addiction Dual Diagnosis Clinic at Stanford. Has this amazing book, "Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence". If you haven't read the book, I highly encourage you to check it out. It's fantastic. The other terrific book about dopamine is the "Molecule of More", which is a similar in some regard, but isn't so much about addiction, it's more about other types of behaviors. Both books really focus on these dopamine schedules and the relationship between these peaks and baselines of dopamine. In Dr. Lembke's book, and when she was on the Huberman Lab Podcast and other podcasts, she's talked about this pleasure pain balance that when we seek something that we really like, or we indulge in it, like eating a little piece of chocolate, if we really liked chocolate, there's some pleasure. But then there's a little bit of pain that exceeds the amount of pleasure, and it's subtle, and we experience it as wanting more of that thing. Okay? So there's a pleasure pain balance, and I'm telling you that the pleasure and the pain are governed by dopamine to some extent. Well, how could that be? Right? I said before, when you engage in an activity or when you ingest something that increases dopamine, the dopamine levels go up, you know, to substantial degree with all the things I listed off. Where's the pain coming from? Well, the pain is coming from the lack of dopamine that follows. And you now know what that lack of dopamine reflects. How do you know? Well, earlier we were talking about how dopamine is released between neurons. And I mentioned two ways. One, is into the synapse where it can activate the postsynaptic neuron. And the other was what I called volumetric release where it is distributed more broadly. It's released out over a bunch of neurons. In both cases it's released from these things we call synaptic vesicles, literally little bubbles, tiny, tiny little bubbles that contain dopamine. Prrr! They get vomited out into the area or into the synapse. Well, those vesicles get depleted. For the synaptic physiologists out there, we call this the readily releasable pool of dopamine. We can only deploy dopamine that is ready to be deployed. That's packaged in those little vesicles and ready to go. It's like when you order a product and they say out of stock until two months from now. Well, it's not ready to be released. Same thing with dopamine. There's a pool of dopamine that synthesized, and you can only release the dopamine that's been synthesized. It's the readily releasable pool. The pleasure pain balance doesn't only hinge on the readily releasable pool of dopamine, but a big part of the pleasure pain balance hinges on how much dopamine is there? And how much is ready and capable of being released into the system? So now we've given some meat to this thing that we call the pleasure pain balance, and now it should make perfect sense why if you take something or do something that leads to huge increases in dopamine, afterward your baseline should drop because there isn't a lot of dopamine around to keep your baseline going. Fortunately, most people do not experience or pursue enormous increases in dopamine leading to the severe drops in baseline. Many people do, however, and that's what we call addiction. When somebody pursues a drug or an activity that leads to huge increases in dopamine. And now you understand that afterward the baseline of dopamine drops because of depletion of dopamine, that readily releasable pool. The dopamine is literally not around to be released, and so people feel pretty lousy and many people make the mistake of then going and pursuing the dopamine evoking the dopamine releasing activity or substance again thinking mistakenly that it's going to bring up their baseline. It's going to give them that peak again. Not only does it not give them a peak, their baseline gets lower and lower because they're depleting dopamine more and more and more. And we've seen this over and over again when people get addicted to something then they're not achieving much pleasure at all. You can even see this with video games. People will play a video game, they love it, it's super exciting to them, and then they'll keep playing and playing and playing, and either one of two things happens typically both. First of all, I always say addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. So oftentimes what will happen is the person only has excitement and can achieve dopamine release to the same extent doing that behavior and not other behaviors. And so they start losing interest in school, they start losing interest in relationships. they start losing interest in fitness and wellbeing and depletes their life. And eventually what typically happens is, they will stop getting dopamine release from that activity as well, and then they drop into a pretty serious depression and this can get very severe and people have committed suicide from these sorts of patterns of activity. But what about the more typical scenario? What about the scenario of somebody who is really good at working during the week, they exercise during the week, they drink on the weekends? Well, that person is only consuming alcohol maybe one or two nights a week, but oftentimes that same person will be spiking their dopamine with food during the middle of the week. Now, we all have to eat and it's nice to eat foods that we enjoy. I certainly do that. I love food in fact. But let's say they're eating foods that really evoke a lot of dopamine release in the middle of the week, they're drinking one or two days on the weekend, they are one of these work, hard play hard type. So they're swimming a couple miles in the ocean in the middle of the week as well. They're going out dancing once on the weekend. Sounds like a pretty balanced life as I describe it. Well, here's the problem. The problem is that dopamine is not just evoked by one of these activities, dopamine is evoked by all of these activities. And dopamine is one currency of craving motivation and desire and pleasure. There's only one currency. So even though if you look at the activities, you'd say, well, it's just on the weekends so this thing is only a couple of times a week. If you looked at dopamine simply as a function, as a chemical function of peaks and baseline, it might make sense why this person after several years of work hard, play hard would say, yeah, you know I'm feeling kind of burnt out. I'm just not feeling like I have the same energy that I did a few years ago. And of course there are age-related reasons why people can experience drops in energy, but oftentimes what's happening is not some sort of depletion and cellar metabolism that's related to aging. What's happening is they're spiking their dopamine through so many different activities throughout the week, that their baseline is progressively dropping. And in this case it can be very subtle. It can be very, very subtle. And that's actually a very sinister function of dopamine we could say. Which is that it can often drop in imperceptible ways, but then at once it reaches a threshold of low dopamine, we just feel like, hmm, we can't really get pleasure from anything anymore. What used to work doesn't work anymore. So it starts to look a lot like the more severe addictions or the more acute addictions to things like cocaine and amphetamine which lead to these big increases, these big spikes in dopamine, and then these very severe drops in the baseline. Now, of course, we all should engage in activities that we enjoy. I certainly do, everybody should. A huge part of life is pursuing activities and things that we enjoy. The key thing is to understand this relationship between the peaks and the baseline, and to understand how they influence one another. Because once you do that, you can start to make really good choices in the short run and in the long run to maintain your level of dopamine baseline. Maybe even raise that level of dopamine baseline and still get those peaks and still achieve those feelings of elevated motivation, elevated desire and craving. Because again, those peaks and having a sufficiently healthy high level of dopamine baseline are what drove the evolution of our species, and they're really what drive the evolution of anyone's life progression too. So they're a good thing. Dopamine is a good thing. Just very briefly, because it was also covered in the interview episode I did with Anna Lembke about addiction. Some of you might be asking, what should I do if I experience a drop in my baseline level of dopamine because of engagement with some activity or some substance that led to big peaks? Just to put some color and example on this, a few episodes ago I talked about a friend who I've known a long time. So it actually the child of a friend who has basically become addicted to video games, he decided actually after seeing that episode with Anna to do a 30-day complete fast from phone, from video games and from social media of all kinds. He's now at day 29 has really accomplished this, not incidentally, his levels of concentration, his overall mood are up. He's doing far far better. What he did is hard. In particular first 14 days is really hard, but the way that you replenish the releasable pool of dopamine is to not engage in these dopaminergic seeking behaviors. Because remember typically people arrive at a place where they want to stop engaging in these behaviors or ingesting substances when that dopamine is depleted, when they're not getting the same lift. In his case, he was feeling depressed. He thought he had ADHD. They were starting to treat it as ADHD. And certainly there are people out there who have ADHD, but what he found was that his levels of concentration are back. He does not need to be treated for ADHD. And actually the psychiatrist wondered if he did prior to this video game, social media fast. He's feeling good. He's exercising again. I'm not making this up. This is really a very specific, but very relevant example of how the dopamine system can replenish itself. Of course, if there's a clinical need for ADHD treatment, by all means pursue that. But I think a lot of ADHD does go misdiagnosed because of this depletion in dopamine that occurs because of overindulgence in other activities in the drop in baseline. So for anyone that's experienced a real drop in baseline who has addictive tendencies, whether or not their behaviors or substances, that is always going to be the path forward. Is going to be either cold turkey or through some sort of tapering to limit interactions with the, what would otherwise be the dopamine evoking behavior or substance. So let's talk about the optimal way to engage in activities or to consume things that evoke dopamine. And by no means am I encouraging people to take drugs of abuse. I would not do that, I am not doing that. But some of the things on these lists of dopamine evoking activities are things like chocolate, coffee, even if it's indirect. Sex and reproduction, provided it's healthy consensual context appropriate, age appropriate, species appropriate of course, is central to our evolution and progression as a species. So certain things like cocaine, amphetamine, I will put in the classification of bad. I'm willing to do that. And other things are part of life, food, exercise if that evokes your dopamine. How are we supposed to engage with these dopamine evoking activities in ways that are healthy and beneficial for us? How do we achieve these peaks, which are so central to our wellbeing and experience of life without dropping our baseline? And the key lies in intermittent release of dopamine. The real key is to not expect or chase high levels of dopamine release every time we engage in these activities. Intermittent reward schedules are the central schedule by which casinos keep you gambling. The central schedule by which elusive partners or potential partners keep you texting and pursuing on either side of the relationship. Intermittent schedules are the way that the internet and social media and all highly engaging activities keep you motivated and pursuing. And we can take this back to our evolutionary adaptive scenario where you are out there looking for water, looking for food, not every trail, not every pursuit, not every hunch about where the animals will be? Where the food will be? Where the berries will be? Not every single one of those played out. There's something called dopamine reward prediction error. When we expect something to happen, we are highly motivated to pursue it. If it happens great, we get the reward. The reward comes in various chemical forms including dopamine, and we are more likely to engage in that behavior again. This is the basis of casino gambling. This is how they keep you going back again and again and again, even though on average the house really does win. You can transplant that example to any number of different pleasureful activities. If you're not a gambler and that doesn't appeal to you, I have to imagine there's something that appeals to you, something that you do repeatedly because you enjoy it. And almost inevitably it's because there's an intermittent schedule. There's a intermittent schedule by which dopamine sometimes arrives, sometimes a little bit, sometimes a lot, sometimes a medium amount. Okay? That intermittent reinforcement schedule is actually the best schedule to export to other activities. How do you do that? Well, first of all, if you are engaged in activities school, sport, relationship, et cetera, where you experience a win, you should be very careful about allowing yourself to experience huge peaks in dopamine, unless you're willing to suffer the crash that follows and waiting a period of time for it to come back up. What would this look like in the practical sense? Well, let's say you are somebody who really does enjoy exercise, or let's say you're somebody who kind of likes exercise, but forces yourself to do it, but you make it pleasureful by giving yourself your favorite cup of coffee first, or maybe taking a pre-workout drink or taking an energy drink or listening to your favorite music. And then you're in the gym and you're listening to your music. That all sounds great, right? Well, it is great except that by layering together all these things to try and achieve that dopamine release, and by getting a big peak in dopamine, you're actually increasing the number of conditions required to achieve pleasure from that activity again. And so there is a form of this where sometimes you do all the things that you love to get the optimal workout. You listen to your favorite music, you got your favorite time of day, you have your pre-workout drink, if that's your thing. You do all the things that give you that best experience of the workout for you. But there's also a version of this where sometimes you don't do the dopamine enhancing activities. You don't ingest anything to increase your dopamine. You just do the exercise. You don't do the exercise and expect dopamine to arrive through some what we call exogenous source as well. You might think, well, that sounds lame. I want to continue to enjoy exercising. Ah, well, that's exactly the point. If you want to maintain motivation for school, exercise, relationships or pursuits of any duration in kind, the key thing is to make sure that the peak in dopamine, if it's very high, doesn't occur too often. And if something does occur very often that you vary how much dopamine you experience with each engagement in that activity. Now, some activities naturally have this intermittent property woven into them, right? We sometimes have classes that we like and other classes we don't like. We don't always get straight A's, sometimes we don't get rewarded with the outcome that we would like. We don't always have the perfect relationship outcome, but understand that your ability to experience motivation and pleasure for what comes next is dictated by how much motivation and pleasure and dopamine you experienced prior. The reason I can't give a very specific protocol like delete dopamine or lower dopamine every third time, is that that wouldn't be intermittent. The whole basis of intermittent reinforcement is that you don't really have a specific schedule of when dopamine is going to be high, and when dopamine is going to be low and when dopamine is going to be medium. That's a predictable schedule, not a random intermittent schedule. So do like the casinos do certainly works for them and for activities that you would like to continue to engage in over time, whatever those happen to be. Start paying attention to the amount of dopamine and excitement and pleasure that you achieve with those, and start modulating that somewhat at random. That might be removing some of the dopamine releasing chemicals that you might take prior. Maybe you remove them every time, but then every once in a while you introduce them,. Maybe it involves sometimes doing things socially that you enjoy doing socially, sometimes doing the same thing, but alone. There are a lot of different ways to do this. There are a lot of different ways to approach this, but now knowing what you know about peaks and baselines in dopamine and understanding how important it is not just to achieve peaks, but to maintain that baseline at a healthy level, it should be straightforward for you to implement these intermittent schedules. For those of you that are begging for more specificity, we can give you a tool. One would be, you can flip a coin before engaging in any of these types of activities and decide whether or not you are going to allow other dopamine supportive elements to go for instance, into the gym with you. Are you going to listen to music or not? If you enjoy listening to music, well then flip a coin, and if it comes up heads, bring the music in, if it comes up tails, don't. Okay? It sounds like you're undercutting your own progress, but actually you are serving your own progress both short-term and long-term by doing that. Now, the smartphone is a very interesting tool for dopamine in light of all this. It's extremely common nowadays to see people texting and doing selfies and communicating in various ways, listening to podcasts, listening to music, doing all sorts of things while they engage in other activities or going to dinner and texting other people or making plans, sharing information. That's all wonderful, it gives depth and richness and color to life, but it isn't just about our distracted nature when we're engaging with the phone, it's also a way of layering in dopamine. And it's no surprise that levels of depression and lack of motivation are really on the increase. Everything that we've talked about until now sets up an explanation or interpretation of why interacting with digital technology can potentially lead to disruptions or lowering in baseline levels of dopamine. I can use a personal example for this. I happen to really enjoy working out, I've always really enjoyed it. But in recent years I noticed that, if I was bringing my phone to my workouts, then not only was I a little bit more distracted and not focusing on what I was doing as much as I could have or should have, but also I started to lose interest in what I was doing. It wasn't as pleasureful, I would feel like it just didn't have the same kind of oomph. And I was beginning to question my motivation. As I started learning more about this relationship between the peaks and the bass lines in dopamine. What I realized was that some time ago I probably experienced a incredible increase in the amount of dopamine during one of my workouts, because I enjoy working out and I enjoy listening to music. I also enjoy listening to podcasts, I also enjoy communicating with people. Those are all wonderful pursuits, but I had layered in too many of them too many times. And then it essentially wasn't working for me anymore. Much in the same way a drug wouldn't work for somebody who takes it repeatedly because their baseline of dopamine is dropping. So at least for this calendar year, I've made a rule for myself, which is I don't allow my phone into my workouts at all. No music, at least not from the phone. It can be in the room. I might listen to a podcast in the room, but I don't listen to anything or engage in anything on my phone. No texting whatsoever. And most of the time I just don't even bring it with me for that period of time. It's only a short period of time. I'm not training that often. This is something that I think has been misinterpreted as people can't be alone now. People talk about, oh, you know, they can't walk across the street or they can't go anywhere, ride the bus, can't be on the plane without being in contact. They can't handle just their thoughts. I don't think that's really what's going on. I think what's happened is that we achieved the great dopamine increase that comes from this incredible thing which I personally enjoy being able to communicate by phone, by text and exchange pictures and send links and these kinds of things, social media. But then what happens is it doesn't have that same fulfilling aspect to it. And it tends to remove the excitement and the pleasure of the very activities that we are engaged in. So I know this is a hard one for many people, but I do invite you to try removing multiple sources of dopamine release or what used to be multiple sources of dopamine release from activities that you want to continue to enjoy, or that you want to enjoy more. And now you understand the biological mechanisms that would underlie a statement like that. It takes a little bit of working with, I know it can be challenging in the first week or so of not engaging with the phone during any kind of workout. That actually was really tough, but now I'm back to a place where I enjoy it that much more. I also feel as if I conquered something in terms of the circuitry related to dopamine. I now understand why something that I enjoyed so much had become less pleasureful for me. And there's a deep, deep satisfaction that comes from understanding, okay, there wasn't anything wrong with me or what I was doing or anything at all. It was just there was something wrong with the approach I was taking, which was layering in all these sources of dopamine and dropping my baseline. For this very same reason, I caution people against using stimulants every time they study or every time they work out or every time that they do anything that they would like to continue to enjoy and be motivated at. There's one exception which is caffeine, because as I mentioned before, if you like caffeine, that actually could be a good thing for your dopamine system, because it does upregulate these D2, D3 receptors. So it actually makes whatever dopamine is released by that activity, more accessible or more functional within the biochemistry and the pathways of your brain and body. However, a number of energy drinks and particular pre-workouts contain things that are precursors to dopamine, and on their own, even if you didn't engage in the activity would cause the release of dopamine to a substantial degree. They do cause the release of dopamine to a substantial degree. And over time that will deplete your dopamine. So energy drinks, pre-workout drinks, drugs of various kinds that people take to study and pay attention. We talked about some of these for the ADHD episode, things like Adderall, Ritalin, armodafinil or modafinil taken repeatedly over time will reduce the level of satisfaction and joy that you get from the activities you engage in while under the influence of those compounds. I'm not trying to demonize those compounds for their clinical use. What I'm saying is taking stimulants and then engaging in activities that you would like to continue to feel pleasureful is undercutting the process. And inevitably might not happen tomorrow, might not happen in a month, but inevitably you will have challenges with motivation and drive related to those activities. Now, some people can keep it right in check. They can just do the one can have the energy drink or they only do their pre-workout before really hard days, for instance. More power to you. I actually do that sometimes, frankly. But people who are trying to get into that peak super motivated, driven, driven state, really focused every time they engage in an activity, you are absolutely undercutting the process and you are undermining your ability to stay motivated and focused. So just as we talked about intermittent reward schedules a moment ago, intermittent spiking of dopamine if you do it at all is definitely the way to go, and chronically trying to spike your dopamine in order to enhance your motivation, focus and drive will absolutely undermine your motivation focus and drive in the long run. Ingestion of caffeine is somewhat of an exception among the other examples of things I've mentioned to avoid before what would otherwise be dopamine increasing activities. Because again, caffeine can increase the density and the efficacy of these dopamine receptors. It turns out that the source of caffeine could also matter while coffee or tea or other forms of caffeine will have this effect of increasing dopamine receptors. Yerba mate something I've talked about before on this podcast has some interesting properties. First of all, it contains caffeine. It's also high in antioxidants. It also contains something called GLP-1 which is favorable for management of blood sugar levels. Yerba mate turns out has also been shown to be neuroprotective specifically for dopaminergic neurons. Now, I should mention this is just a couple of studies, so we don't want to conclude too much from these studies more needs to be done. But they showed that in a model of damage to dopamine neurons, ingestion of yerba mate, and some of the compounds within yerba mate can actually serve to preserve the survival of dopamine neurons in both the movement related pathway and the motivation pathway. So perhaps you need that incentive in order to ingest your yerba mate, perhaps you don't need any incentive. In my case, I don't need any incentive. I already enjoy yerba mate as my principle source of caffeine, although I do drink coffee as well. But if one were going to consume caffeine, you might consider consuming that caffeine in the form of yerba mate both for sake of upregulating dopamine receptors and getting more of a dopamine increase. And of course, for the similar properties of caffeine if that's what you're seeking. And in addition to that, because your yerba mate does appear to have some sort of neuroprotective and a particular dopamine neuron protective properties. Now, that doesn't mean that caffeine is always beneficial. And actually there's one instance related to dopamine where caffeine can be particularly dangerous. And this relates to MDMA so-called ecstasy. MDMA is under investigation in various clinical trials for its potential to treat trauma and depression. It's also of course, a drug that's used recreationally. It's still illegal at least in the United States. Whether or not MDMA is neurotoxic has been very controversial. Early on it was thought that it is neurotoxic that it can destroy serotonergic neurons. There were other papers that came out which argued that's not the case. And that's in particular because one of the early papers published in science magazine claiming that MDMA was neurotoxic. That paper was retracted. It turns out that that study had mistakenly used methamphetamine instead, and methamphetamine is known to be neurotoxic. I think most of the data point to the idea that MDMA might not be neurotoxic, but in any case, caffeine has been shown to increase the toxicity of MDMA receptors. And you might say, "Well, how could that be?" Well, now you understand why that could be. Caffeine increases the density and efficacy of these dopamine receptors, D2 and D3 receptors. MDMA is a potent drug for increasing concentrations of dopamine as well as serotonin and other neuromodulators. And it appears that caffeine ingestion by upregulating these receptors, can lead to more toxicity of MDMA. So caffeine can be a beneficial substance in one context, and actually can be a detrimental if not dangerous substance in another context. Two substances that greatly increase dopamine, namely amphetamine and cocaine can cause long-term problems with the dopaminergic pathways. And this is largely based on a study that was published some years ago, 2003, but still holds a lot of merit. This is a paper published in proceeds in the National Academy of Sciences, a very high tier stringent journal. First author is Kolb, K-O-L-B. And the title of the paper pretty much tells the story. Amphetamine or cocaine limits the ability of later experience to promote structural plasticity in the neocortex and nucleus accumbens. Neocortex is the outer shell of the brain more or less. And the nucleus accumbens is part of that, mesolimbic dopamine pathway for motivation drive and reinforcement. Neuroplasticity of course, is the brain's ability to change in response to experience. And neuroplasticity is the basis of learning and memory and essentially remodeling of our neural circuitry in positive ways of all kinds. And this study was really one of the first to show that ingesting amphetamine and cocaine because of the high peak in dopamine that it creates and the low dopamine state, the baseline drop that it creates afterwards, limits plasticity and learning subsequent to taking amphetamine and cocaine. It was at least in this study shown to be a long lasting effect. I doubt it's a permanent effect, but this should serve as a serious cautionary note that amphetamine and cocaine not only can cause a drop in baseline dopamine, but can actually put the brain into a state in which it cannot learn and modify itself to get better at least for some period of time. In a previous episode on ADHD, I talked about the widespread use of drugs like Adderall, Ritalin, modafinil and armodafinil, all of which lead to very large increases in dopamine, and for people with ADHD can really improve their symptoms. But of course there's a lot of non-prescription, non-clinical use of those compounds as well. And it stands to reason that the use of those substances to increase dopamine could very well provide the same sort of blockade of neuroplasticity that cocaine and amphetamine do. Because when you look at the amount of dopamine increase that's triggered by those compounds, it's really comparable. So again, a cautionary note against spiking one's dopamine too much on a regular basis, unless there's a valid clinical need for doing that. So we've been focusing a lot for the last few minutes on the kind of darker side of dopamine and how getting big peaks in dopamine can be detrimental, but I want to acknowledge the truth, which is that dopamine feels great. Being in pursuit and motivated and craving things feels wonderful. And I don't want to demonize dopamine. What I'm trying to do today is to illustrate how dopamine works in your brain so that you can continue to engage in dopamine evoking activities. And certainly there is a place for ingesting things that can increase dopamine provided that they are safe for us in the short and long-term. There are activities that we can do that will give us healthy, sustained increases in dopamine, both the peaks when they happen and to maintain or even increase our baseline levels of dopamine. So how do we do that? What are some of these activities? Well, in recent years, there's been a trend toward more people doing so-called cold exposure. In part, this was popularized by Wim Hof, the so-called 'Iceman' getting into cold showers, taking ice baths, exposing oneself to cold water of various kinds can in fact increase our levels of dopamine as well as the neuromodulator norepinephrine. This is not a new phenomenon. In the 1920s, a guy by the name of Vincent Priessnitz was one of the first people to popularize and formalize cold water therapies. He was an advocate of cold water exposure in order to boost the immune system and increase feelings of wellbeing. And actually this practice dates back long before Vincent's popularized it. And Wim Hof is the more recent iteration of this. First of all, some of the safety parameters. Let's establish those first. Getting to very, very cold water. You know, 30 degree Fahrenheit or even low 40 degree Fahrenheit can put somebody into a state of cold water shock. I mean, people can die doing that. So obviously you want to approach this with some caution, but for most people getting into 60 degree water or 50 degree water, or if you're acclimated and comfortable with it, you know, 40 degree water or 45 degree water can have tremendously beneficial results on your neuromodulator systems, including dopamine. What temperature of water you can tolerate will depend on how cold water adapted you are, and how familiar you are with the experience of getting into cold water. And when I say comfortable with, I should mention, there is never a case in which getting into cold water does not evoke a release of epinephrin. So the quickening of the breath, the widening of the eyes, the feeling as if you can't catch your breath and even some physical pain at the level of the skin that happens almost every time, or every time that you get into cold water, even if your cold water adapted. What almost everybody knows and understands is that, that wall, as I like to refer to it is coming. That's always the first experience of getting into cold water. There's no real way around that. Now, this study that I mentioned earlier, human physiological responses to immersion into water of different temperatures, really interesting study that was done and published in the university of, excuse me, the European Journal of Applied Physiology. I can provide a link to that study in the show caption. It's a really interesting study. They looked at people getting exposed to water that was warm, moderately cold or very cold. It was 32 degrees Celsius, 20 degrees Celsius, or 14 degrees Celsius. You can just put those online and do the conversion, or you can do the conversion to Fahrenheit if you like. But in any case, what they looked at were the concentrations of things like epinephrin and dopamine and so on. And what they found was really interesting. First of all, upon getting into cold water, the changes in adrenaline and noradrenaline, epinephrin and norepinephrine were immediate and fast, and these were huge increases. So that's the getting into the cold water that everybody experiences these huge increases in adrenaline. But then what was interesting is they observed that dopamine levels started to rise somewhat slowly and then continued to rise and reach levels as high as 2.5 times above baseline. That's a remarkably high increase. Remember if we go back to our examples of chocolate, sex, a doubling above baseline, nicotine two and a half times above baseline, cocaine. The increase in dopamine from a cold water exposure of this kind was comparable to what one sees from cocaine, except, except in this case, it wasn't a rise and crash. It was actually a sustained rise in dopamine that took a very long time up to three hours to come back down to baseline. Which is really remarkable, and I think this explains some of the positive, mental and physical effects that people report subjectively after doing cold water exposure. One question that many of you are probably asking is just how cold should the water be? Well, you could mimic what was done in this study and do 14 degrees Celsius. But for some people that won't be cold enough, for some people that will be too cold. They did look at the release of stress hormones like cortisol in addition to the release of things like epinephrin and adrenaline. And it's interesting that they noted that in all cases, but especially at that coldest temperature, there was an increase in cortisol, but that it was transient, That eventually people's cortisol, the stress hormone subsided a bit. There are basically two different approaches to remaining in the cold when it's uncomfortable. One is to try and relax yourself. Two, try and practice slow breathing, to try and dilate your gaze. I've talked about this before in previous podcasts, you go into panoramic vision to essentially try and calm yourself so that it's not as stressful in the cold. Other people however, take the approach of trying to ramp up their level of internal autonomic arousal, meaning to get really energized and kind of lean into the friction of the cold. And they find that easier. Other people distract themselves, they recite the alphabet, or they do something, anything to try and distract themselves from the discomfort. To be totally honest, it does not matter for sake of dopamine release. Because the dopamine release is triggered and then continues even after you get out of the cold water. Now, in this study, it was long exposure to cold water. It was an hour. That's a long period of time. And I do warn you against getting into cold water that's so cold that it will make your temperature drop and make you hyperthermic for an hour. That actually could be dangerous for a lot of people. You might have a hard time reheating, and hypothermia is not a good thing. They had people monitoring subjects in these studies and paying attention to their core body temperature. They were able to reheat them afterwards. It's well-established now that getting into cold water, whether or not it's a shower, an ice bath circulating cold water, a stream, et cetera, that can evoke the norepinephrine release immediately, and the long arc of that dopamine release. Why would that be good? Up until now, I've basically said getting increases in dopamine are detrimental to your baseline. Well, this does appear to raise the baseline of dopamine for substantial periods of time. And most people report feeling a heightened level of calm and focus after getting out of cold water. So cold water exposure turns out to be a very potent stimulus for shifting the entire milieu, the entire environment of our brain and body and allowing many people to feel much, much better for a substantial period of time after getting out of the ice bath or cold water of any kind than they did before. Now, you might ask how often to do this? Some people do this every day. It can be very stimulating. So typically doing it early in the day, it's going to be better. I don't necessarily recommend doing it right before sleep, but some people do it in the afternoon. And some people will indeed do that seven days a week, other people three days a week, other people every once in a while. What I can say is once you become cold water adapted, once it no longer has the same impact of novelty and feeling a bit like a, I don't want to say a shock to your system, 'cause you don't want to go into cold water shock, but once it is comfortable for you, then it will no longer evoke this release. There really does seem to be something in the pathway from cold water exposure through the norepinephrine pathway and into the mesolimbic brainstem that causes this release in dopamine. But nonetheless, it's a basically zero cost. I mean, you need access to water of some sort, cold water shower, et cetera, but basically zero cost way of triggering a long lasting increase in dopamine without ingesting anything, no pharmacology whatsoever. Please again, approach it with a safety and caution in mind, but it is a very potent stimulus. Again, 250% of a rise in baseline, two and a half times rise in baseline rivals that of cocaine which is really remarkable. Now, I'd like to talk about the positive aspects of rewards for our behavior, and the negative aspects of rewards for our behavior. And from that, I will suggest a protocol by which you can achieve a better relationship to your activities and to your dopamine system. In fact, it will help tune up your dopamine system for discipline, hard work and motivation. Hard work is hard. Generally, most people don't like working hard. Some people do, but most people work hard in order to achieve some end goal. End goals are terrific and rewards are terrific whether or not they are monetary social or any kind. However, because of the way that dopamine relates to our perception of time, working hard at something for sake of a reward that comes afterward, can make the hard work much more challenging and make us much less likely to lean into hard work in the future. Let me give you a couple examples by way of data and experiments. There's a classic experiment done actually at Stanford many years ago in which children in nursery school and kindergarten drew pictures, and they drew pictures cause they like to draw. The researchers took kids that liked to draw and they started giving them a reward for drawing. The reward generally was a gold star or some thing that a young child would find rewarding. Then they stopped giving them the gold star. And what they found is the children had a much lower tendency to draw on their own. No reward. Now, remember this was an activity that prior to receiving a reward, the children intrinsically enjoyed and selected to do. No one was telling them to draw. What this relates to is so-called intrinsic versus extrinsic reinforcement. When we receive rewards, even if we give ourselves rewards for something, we tend to associate less pleasure with the actual activity itself that evoked the reward. Now, that might seem counterintuitive, but that's just way that the way that these dopaminergic circuits work. And now understanding these peaks in baselines in dopamine which I won't review again, this should make sense. If you get a peak in dopamine from a reward, it's going to lower your baseline and the cognitive interpretation is that you didn't really do the activity because you enjoyed the activity. You did it for the reward. Now, this doesn't mean all rewards of all kinds are bad, but it's also important to understand that dopamine controls our perception of time. When and how much dopamine we experience is the way that we carve up what we call our experience of time. When we engage in an activity, let's say school or hard work of any kind or exercise because of the reward we are going to give ourselves a receive at the end, the trophy, the sundae, the meal, whatever it happens to be. We actually are extending the time bin over which we are analyzing or perceiving that experience. And because the reward comes at the end, we start to dissociate the neural circuits for dopamine reward that would have normally been active during the activity. And because it all arrives at the end over time, we have the experience of less and less pleasure from that particular activity while we're doing it. Now, this is the antithesis of growth mindset. My colleague at Stanford, Carol Dweck, as many of you know, has come up with this incredible theory and principle, and actually goes beyond theory and principle called "Growth Mindset", which is this striving to be better to be in this mindset of I'm not there yet, but striving itself is the end goal. And that of course delivers you to tremendous performance. It's been observed over and over and over again, that people that have growth mindset, kids that have growth mindset end up performing very well because they're focused on the effort itself. And all of us can cultivate growth mindset. The neural mechanism of cultivating growth mindset involves learning to access the rewards from effort and doing. And that's hard to do because you have to engage this prefrontal component of the mesolimbic circuit. You have to tell yourself, okay, this effort is great, this effort is pleasureful. Even though you might actually be in a state of physical pain from the exercise, or I can recall this from college, just feeling like I wanted to get up from my desk, but forcing myself to study, forcing myself and forcing myself. What you find over time is that you can start to associate a dopamine release. You can evoke dopamine release from the friction and the challenge that you happen to be in. You completely eliminate the ability to generate those circuits and the rewarding process of being able to reward friction while in effort, if you are focused only on the goal that comes at the end. Because of the way that dopamine marks time. So if you say, oh, I'm going to do this very hard thing, and I'm going to push and push and push and push for that end goal that comes later. Not only do you enjoy the process of what you're doing less, you actually make it more painful while you're engaging in it. You make yourself less efficient at it, because if you were able to access dopamine while in effort, dopamine has all these incredible properties of increasing the amount of energy in our body, and in our mind, our ability to focus by way of dopamines conversion into epinephrin. But also you're undermining your ability to lean back into that activity the next time. The next time you need twice as much coffee and three times as much loud music, and four times as much energy drink and the social connection just to get out the door in order to do the run or to study. So what's more beneficial in fact can serve as a tremendous amplifier on all endeavors that you engage in. Especially hard endeavors is to A, not start layering in other sources of dopamine in order to get to the starting line, not layering in other sources of dopamine in order to be able to continue, but rather to subjectively start to attach the feeling of friction and effort to an internally generated reward system. And this is not meant to be vague, this is a system that exists in your mind, that exists in the minds of humans for hundreds of thousands of years, by which you're not just pursuing the things that are innately pleasureful, food, sex, warmth, water when you're thirsty. But the beauty of this mesolimbic reward pathway that I talked about earlier is that, it includes the forebrain. So you can tell yourself the effort part is the good part. I know it's painful, I know this doesn't feel good, but I'm focused on this. I'm going to start to access the reward. You will find the rewards, meaning the dopamine release inside of effort if you repeat this over and over again. And what's beautiful about it is that, it starts to become reflexive for all types of effort. When we focus only on the trophy, only on the grade, only on the win as the reward, you undermine that entire process. So how do you do this? You do this in those moments of the most intense friction. You tell yourself this is very painful and because it's painful, it will evoke an increase in dopamine release later, meaning it will increase my baseline in dopamine, but you also have to tell yourself that in that moment you are doing it by choice and you're doing it because you love it. And I know that sounds like lying to yourself, and in some ways it is lying to yourself, but it's lying to yourself in the context of a truth which is that you want it to feel better. You want it to feel even pleasureful. Now, this is very far and away different from thinking about the reward that comes at the end, the hot fudge sundae for after you cross the finish line and you can replace hot fudge sundae with whatever reward happens to be appealing to you. We revere people who are capable of doing what I'm describing. David Goggins comes to mind is a really good example. Many of you are probably familiar with David Goggins, former Navy SEAL who essentially has made a post-military career out of explaining and sharing his process of turning the effort into the reward. There are many other examples of this too, of course. Throughout evolutionary history, there's no question that we revered people who were willing to go out and forage and hunt and gather and caretake in ways that other members of our species probably found exhausting and probably would have preferred to just put their feet up or soaked them in a cool stream rather than continue to forage. The ability to access this pleasure from effort aspect of our dopaminergic circuitry is without question the most powerful aspect of dopamine and our biology of dopamine. And the beautiful thing is it's accessible to all of us. But just to highlight the things that can interfere with, and prevent you from getting dopamine release from effort itself, don't spike dopamine prior to engaging in effort. And don't spike dopamine after engaging in effort, learn to spike your dopamine from effort itself. One straightforward example of learning to attach dopamine to effort and strain as opposed to a process or a reward that naturally evokes dopamine release is so-called intermittent fasting. I know this is very popular nowadays. Some people like to do intermittent fasting, some people don't. Some people have a 12 hour feeding window every 24 hours, some people do long fasts of two to three days even. I personally don't monitor a feeding window with a lot of precision. I tend to skip one meal a day, either breakfast or lunch, and then I eat the other two meals of the day depending on which meal I skipped. So it's either breakfast, lunch and maybe a little something in the evening, or I'll skip breakfast and do lunch and dinner and so on. Many people are now eating this way in part, because many people find it easier to not eat at all than to eat a smaller portion of some food. And that has everything to do with the dopamine reward evoking properties of food. When we ingest food or when we are about to ingest food, our dopamine levels go up. And typically when we ingest food, if it evokes some dopamine release, then we tend to want even more food. Remember dopamine's main role is one of motivation and seeking. And what dopamine always wants more of is more dopamine. More activity or thing that evokes more dopamine release. Well, let's just look at fasting from the perspective of dopamine schedules and dopamine release and peaks and baselines. Typically, when we eat we get dopamine release, especially when we eat after being very hungry. If you've ever gone camping, or you're very, very hungry, the food tastes that much better. And that's actually because of the way that deprivation states increase the way that dopaminergic circuits work. Our perception of dopamine is heightened when the receptors for dopamine have not seen much dopamine lately, they haven't bound much dopamine. So when you fast, fast, fast, fast, fast, and then you finally eat, it evokes more dopamine release. So this is the big reward that comes at the end. Even bigger because you deprived yourself. This is true for all rewarding behaviors and activities by the way. The longer you restrict yourself from that activity, the greater the dopamine experience when the dopamine is finally released, because of an upregulation of the receptors for dopamine. but I just spent five minutes or more telling you that you should avoid too much reward at the end, and you should actually focus on the dopamine that you can consciously evoke from the deprivation strain and effort. And in fact, this is what happens for many people that start doing fasting and take a liking to it. Many people say that their state of mind when they fast is clearer, that they actually start to enjoy the period of fasting. In fact, some people start pushing out their eating window or skipping entire days of eating more and more in order to get deeper into that state of mind where surely it's not just dopamine, but dopamine is released. They will track their clock. Oh, I've been fasting 12 hours, 16 hours, et cetera. They are starting to attach dopamine release or create dopamine release from the deprivation, not from the food reward itself. And this I think makes it an interesting practice. And one that certainly has been practiced by for centuries in different cultures and different religions of deliberately restricting food, not just to increase the rewarding properties of food itself, but also to increase the rewarding properties of deprivation. And I should emphasize that a lot of the subjective aspects of the knowledge of the benefits of fasting serve as reinforcing dopamine amplifying aspects to fasting, meaning if somebody does intermittent fasting and they are deep into their fast and they're telling themselves, oh, my blood lipid profiles are probably improving. And my glucose management is probably improving. My insulin sensitivity is going up, and I'm going to live longer. All these things that have some basis from animal studies and some basis or not from human studies, it's all kind of still an emerging literature, but it does seem to be pointing in that direction that fasting can encourage things like autophagy, the engulfment of dead cells and things of that sort. Well, as people tell themselves these things, they are enhancing the rewarding properties of the behavior of fasting. And so this is a salient example of where knowledge of knowledge can actually help us change these deep primitive circuits related to dopamine. And this illustrates how the forebrain, which carries knowledge and carries interpretation and rational thought can be used to shape the very circuits that are involved in generating reward for what would otherwise just be kind of primitive behaviors, hardwired behaviors. And that's the beauty of these dopamine circuits. That's the beauty of dopamine. It's not just attached to the more primitive of food, sex, heat, et cetera. It's also attached to the things that we decide are good for us and are important for us. So telling yourself that exercise or fasting or studying or listening better or any kind of behavior is good for you will actually reinforce the extent to which it is good for you at a chemical level. And a somewhat eerie example of what I just mentioned was a study that was published last year in the journal Neuron, Cell Press journal, excellent journal. That showed that hearing something that reinforces one's prior beliefs actually can evoke dopamine release. So the dopamine pathway is so vulnerable to subjective interpretation that it actually makes it such that when we see something or hear something that validates a belief that we already have, that itself can increase dopamine release. Along the lines of how dopamine and dopamine schedules and our perception of things can shape the way that we experience things as pleasureful or not. There are beautiful studies mainly looking at sugar appetite and our sense of pleasure from sweet things, but also for savory foods, et cetera. And essentially the results that come out of this are the following. If you ingest something that you like, it tastes good to you, but then you ingest something that's even sweeter or even more savory. And then you go back to the food that you ate previously. Well, you don't like it as much, and that might seem like a duh, obviously. But that shift in perception can be blocked by blocking the shift in dopamine. And so this really speaks to these peaks and valleys in dopamine that I mentioned before and how your experience of anything is going to depend on your prior experience of other things that evoke dopamine. Big dopamine release makes it more challenging to experience more big dopamine release. So dopamine is one of those things that you don't want too high or too low for too long. It's all about staying in that dynamic range and that's going to be different for everybody. So for the very savory foods that are now everywhere, those highly savory foods or I think they call them highly palatable foods are making more bland foods, whole foods, meaning foods that aren't processed. It's making those tastes less good at least for a while. And all it takes is a short period of time, even just days, two days or so of not consuming any highly palatable foods and suddenly broccoli with just a little bit of seasoning tastes delicious to you. All right? So again, this just speaks to the fact that dopamine is this universal currency. It establishes value based on, not just what you're experiencing in the moment, but what you experienced in the days and minutes before. Now, that you understand how your previous level of dopamine relates to your current level of dopamine, and how your current level of dopamine will influence your future level of dopamine, it should become obvious why things like pornography, not just the accessibility of pornography, but the intensity of pornography can negatively shape real world romantic and sexual interactions. This is a serious concern. The discussion is happening now. The underlying neurobiological mechanisms you now understand. And this isn't to pass judgment on whether or not people like or don't like pornography, that's an ethical discussion, and it's a moral discussion that has to be decided for each individual by virtue of age, et cetera. But again, any activity that evokes a lot of dopamine release will make it harder to achieve the same level and certainly the greater level of dopamine through a subsequent interaction. So yes, indeed many people are addicted to pornography and yes, indeed many people who regularly indulge in pornography experienced challenges in real-world romantic interactions. You now understand the mechanisms behind what I'm telling you. Now, there are circumstances in which increasing levels of dopamine is desirable and advantageous and clinically helpful. Good example of this would be the drug Welbutrin also called bupropion which increases dopamine and norepinephrine. Wellbutrin bupropion was developed as an alternative treatment for depression because some people who take the so-called SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors which as the name suggests increased serotonin suffer from serotonin related side effects. Things like decreased appetite, decreased libido, or sometimes increased appetite or other side effects that they don't want. And Wellbutrin seems to avoid the sexual side effects. It can blunt at appetite and these sorts of things because of the increase in norepinephrine and dopamine increases levels of motivation and craving, but also can create a state of elevated alertness that can sometimes get in the way of healthy eating and things of that sort. So one has to work with their clinician as psychiatrist. It is a prescription drug in order to find the dosage of Welbutrin that's correct for them. In addition, things like Welbutrin bupropion can increase anxiety because of the way that dopamine and norepinephrine are stimulating and tend to place people into heightened levels of alertness. Nonetheless, many people have gained terrific relief from depression from Wellbutrin bupropion, and many of those same people had serious trouble with some of the SSRI. So it does seem to be a very useful drug in certain contexts, both for depression and for the treatment of smoking for people desiring to quit smoking. And of course there are a lot of people out there who are seeking to increase their baseline levels of dopamine without taking any prescription pharmaceutical compounds. And nowadays there exist a lot of supplements to do that. The two most common ones that are directly within the dopamine pathway are Macuna Pruriens which is actually a velvety bean whose contents are l-DOPA. Believe it or not, the content of this being is the precursor to dopamine. So Macuna Pruriens is sold over the counter at least in the United States. And it literally is the precursor to dopamine. Meaning if you take it, you will experience very large increases in dopamine. Those increases are transient and very, very intense. And in fact, if you look at the constellation of effects of Macuna Pruriens, what you find is that they're pretty striking and they look a lot like if not identical to l-DOPA. The most obvious of those is in the context of Parkinson's disease. There are at least five studies that have shown that Macuna Pruriens can reduce the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, much in the same way that l-DOPA can reduce the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. And that shouldn't come as any surprise given what I just told you that is essentially l-DOPA. It also can reduce a particular hormone called prolactin. Dopamine and prolactin tend to be in somewhat push pull fashion. When dopamine is up, prolactin is down and vice versa. Prolactin is involved in milk letdown in women. It's involved in setting the refractory period for sex after ejaculation in males. The reason mating can occur and then not occur after a ejaculation is because of an increase in prolactin. Macuna Pruriens is often used a blunt prolactin, and they're actually a couple of studies showing that it can indeed do that. Macuna Pruriens has a number of other effects that lie in the sex and reproduction pathway that are worth noting. Sperm concentration, sperm quality is actually greatly increased by Macuna Pruriens. These are kind of curious effects until you understand a little bit more about the biology of dopamine which I'll mention in a moment, but there are several studies, four in fact that describe how Macuna Pruriens can increase sperm count, sperm quality, and sperm motility. So for those of you seeking to conceive children, Macuna Pruriens might be an interesting choice if you're interested in exploring non-prescription compounds. However, I should mention that any time you consume a substance that increases dopamine by mimicking dopamine or acting as a direct precursor to dopamine, there's almost inevitably a crash or a reduction in the baseline in dopamine that we referred to previously. So many people who take Macuna Pruriens feel really elevated, really motivated, really alert, all the sorts of things that one would expect from a dopaminergic drug which Macuna Pruriens is. And then they feel a low or a reduction in drive and excitement and enthusiasm after the drug wears off. Just like they would with other dopamine increasing compound. For that reason, many people have turned to the use of L-tyrosine. L-tyrosine is an amino acid precursor to l-DOPA. So it lies further up the dopamine synthesis pathway. And nowadays it's very common because all L-tyrosine is sold over the counter in the United States that people will take L-tyrosine as a way to get more energized alert and focused. Indeed, there are data that L-tyrosine will accomplish that. L-tyrosine is typically taken in capsule form or powder form anywhere from 500 to 750 to a 1000 milligrams. It is a potent stimulus for increasing dopamine. And the timescale for increasing dopamine is about 30 to 45 minutes after ingestion. Dopamine levels start to peak. The classic study that really nailed down the fact that tyrosine has this effect was published way back in 1983, Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism that directly compared L-tyrosine supplementation with tryptophan ingestion on plasma dopamine and serotonin. Tryptophan being a precursor to serotonin. And indeed what they found is that ingestion of L-tyrosine can increase the amount of dopamine circulating in the blood and in the brain too, of course. The L-tyrosine ingestion induced dopamine increases within 45 minutes and they were short-lasting after about 30 minutes the effect had dissipated, meaning the levels of dopamine had dropped down to baseline. And even though they didn't look at levels of baseline dopamine past that time point, the expectation based on everything we know about dopamine biology is that it would then drop below baseline due to the depletion of the readily reservable pool of dopamine vesicles that we talked about way back at the beginning of this episode. The nice thing about this study is it does show specificity of effect because ingestion of tryptophan did not increase dopamine instead it increased serotonin. So there's really specificity of these pathways that rule out any placebo type effects. I'm not suggesting that anybody, everybody increase their dopamine levels by way of tyrosine or Macuna Pruriens. For those of you that are seeking to increase your dopamine levels without prescription drugs, those are the most direct route to that. Of course, if you have a pre-existing dopaminergic condition, so schizophrenia or psychosis of any kind, bipolar, anxiety, things like Macuna Pruriens and L-tyrosine will not be good for you. And if you don't, you should just understand and expect that it's going to lead to an increase in dopamine. You'll certainly feel an elevated state for some of you that might be agitating, for some of you that might be really pleasureful, and then you will feel a crash afterwards. How deep is that crash will really depend on your biology and where your dopamine baseline began. So I personally am not a fan of using things like Macuna Pruriens at all for myself for the reasons I mentioned earlier, just too intense and too much of a crash. I do use L-tyrosine from time to time for enhancing focus and motivation, but I want to emphasize from time to time. So I might use it once a week, occasionally twice a week, but I've never been one to take L-tyrosine regularly in order to focus or train or do any kind of mental work. I just don't want to rely on any exogenous substance in order to get my dopamine circuits activated. And I don't want to experience the drop in dopamine that inevitably occurs some period of time afterwards. I should also mention things that can reduce your levels of baseline dopamine. One that is rarely discussed is melatonin. I have talked before on this podcast about melatonin, why I am not a fan of using melatonin in order to enhance sleep. It can help one get to sleep, but not stay asleep. Dr. Matt Walker sleep expert from University of California, Berkeley. I think I don't want to put words in his mouth, but in our discussion about melatonin on this podcast when Matt was a guest in his book and on other podcasts, Matt has generally stated that the use of melatonin except for treatment of jet lag is generally not a good idea. And I agree. I think that melatonin is not often thought about as impacting the dopamine pathway, but there's at least one study published in 2001 first author is Nishiyama just as it sounds. It's spelled just as it sounds. Acute effects of melatonin administration on cardiovascular autonomic regulation in healthy men. So the study wasn't specifically about dopamine, but they looked at norepinephrine and dopamine levels, and they found a statistically significant decrease in dopamine 60 minutes after melatonin administration. I've talked before about how viewing bright lights between the hours of 10:00 p.m and 4:00 a.m has been shown in studies by Dr. Samer Hattar, David Bersin, excellent circadian scientists to reduce levels of dopamine for several days after that light exposure. So dim the lights at night, if you can avoid exogenous melatonin, meaning if you don't have to take melatonin and you can find a better alternative that would be a good idea if you want to maintain healthy levels of dopamine. Now, there is one compound that you are all familiar with, and you've probably actually taken without realizing it, that increases dopamine. And that's something called PEA for phenethylamine, technically beta phenethylamine. And PEA is found in various foods. Chocolate just happens to be one in enriched in PEA and can increase synaptic levels of dopamine. I personally take PEA from time to time as a focus and work aid in order to do intense bouts of work. Again, I don't do that too often. This might be once a week or once every two weeks. I might use it for training, but typically I don't, it's usually for mental work. And I will take 500 milligrams of PEA and I'll take 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPC. That's something that I personally do. That's what's right for me, it's within my margins of safety for my health. Again, you have to check with your doctor and decide what's right for you. It leads to a sharp but very transient increase in dopamine that lasts about 30 to 45 minutes. And at least in my system I've found to be much more regulated and kind of even than something like L-tyrosine and certainly much more regulated and even and lower dopamine release than something like Macuna Pruriens. One of the lesser talked about compounds that's out there, but that's gaining popularity for increasing dopamine and as a so-called nootropic is something called huperzine A. Huperzine A is a compound sold over the counter at least in the United States that can increase acetylcholine transmission, a different neuromodulator entirely. But what's interesting is that huperzine A somehow by way of interactions between the cholinergic system and the dopaminergic system leads to increases in dopamine in the medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. Hippocampus, of course, being an area of the brain associated with learning and memory. And prefrontal cortex being associated with the mesolimbic pathway, decision-making focus, et cetera. And so I think the reason why we're seeing an increase in popularity of companies including huperzine A and nootropic compounds is both for the cholinergic stimulating properties, but also for stimulating dopamine release. I personally have never tried huperzine A. You can go to www.examine.com or put huperzine A into PubMed if you'd like to search around and see some of the science behind it. Again, I'm not recommending anyone take these things. In fact, I recommend against anyone just diving in, and starting to consume things without gaining knowledge about how they function, whether or not they're right for you. But nonetheless, I think in the years to come, we are going to see a lot more of L-tyrosine, PEA phenethylamine and huperzine as a way of tapping into the dopaminergic and cholinergic circuits certainly along with things like Alpha-GPC as non-prescription, short-lived somewhat milder alternatives to things that really spike dopamine, things like Adderall, Ritalin, modafinil, armodafinil and similar. And I can't help but share with you one more result. It's not related to pharmacology. It's related to behaviors and social interactions. And that's the very interesting and I would say important finding that was made a few years ago by my colleague, Rob Malenka, who's in our department of psychiatry at Stanford, showing that oxytocin and social connection is actually directly stimulating the dopamine pathway. I think for many years, all of us including me would hear and thought that oxytocin was in the serotonergic pathway that it was about pair bonding, and it was about some of these neuromodulators that were more associated with things related to feeling good with what we have in the present moment. That's typically what we think of when we think of the opioid system or the serotonergic system. The dopamine system is really about seeking and reward, but in a paper published in 2017 in the journal Science, excellent journal. The papers titled gaining of social reward by oxytocin, excuse me, in the ventral tegmental area. You now know what the ventral tegmental area, it's that area of the mesolimbic pathway. What this paper essentially showed is that, oxytocin social connection and pair bonding itself triggers dopamine release. And as everyone read this result, we all realized, ah, this makes total sense that for the evolution of our species, indeed for any species where social connections are important, it's also important to go seek social connections. And so, while it's fun to think about pharmacology and underlying neurocircuitry and cold water baths and all these different things related to dopamine schedules and reward mechanisms and attaching reward to effort and all the various things that we've talked about today in terms of science and tools and protocols, I'd be remiss if I didn't include description of this result and just emphasize that social connections, close social connections in particular that evoke oxytocin release. So those are romantic type, those are parent-child type, those are friendship related, and those can even be just friends at a distance related, right? It doesn't actually require skin contact to get oxytocin release, but oxytocin release is central to stimulating the dopamine pathways. So the take home message there is quite simple, engage in pursue quality, healthy social interactions. I know I've covered a lot of material today. I've really tried hard to focus on things that lie directly within the dopamine pathway and circuitries, as well as things that directly stimulate those pathways and circuitries. What I haven't talked about are all the things that indirectly serve the dopamine pathways. And out there on the internet and indeed in the scientific literature, you will find for instance, that things like Maca root can increase dopamine. Things like the gut microbiome can influence dopamine. And indeed they can, but they do that through indirect mechanisms. By creating a environment, a milieu in which dopamine and dopamine circuits can flourish. Maca is a good example of that. It will reduce cortisol and through some indirect pathways related to cortisol can increase dopamine. But it's not a direct increase in dopamine. And so as a consequence, it's rather subtle compared to the various compounds and behaviors that I talked about today. Indeed cold water exposure leads to huge increases in dopamine as we talked about before, and very sustained ones at that. I realize in giving you a lot of information about science and mechanism all the way from psychological biological to circuitry and synaptic transmission, volumetric transmission and so forth, that it might seem overwhelming. The most important thing is to understand, or that these dopamine pathways really are under your control. And the locus of control resides in the fact that your previous levels of dopamine are influencing your levels of dopamine right now. And your current levels of dopamine and where you take them next, will influence your dopamine levels in the next days and weeks to come. So I hope both with the mechanisms that you now have in hand plus some of the tools to tap into the dopaminergic system, both behavioral, pharmacologic prescription, and non-prescription, et cetera, that you'll feel that you have more control over your dopamine system. And certainly that you have a better understanding of your dopamine system so that you can modulate and adjust your levels of dopamine in the ways that serve you best. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific way to support us. In addition, please leave us a comment or a suggestion for a guest you'd like us to interview or a topic you'd like us to cover. In addition, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review and to leave us a comment there as well. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. In addition, if you'd like to support the Huberman Lab and research at Stanford on stress, stress mitigation and human performance, you can do that by going to, www.hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving. And there you can make a tax deductible donation to the research in my laboratory. In addition, we have a Patreon. It's www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Today and on previous podcast episodes we talked a bit about supplements. Supplements certainly aren't necessary, but many people find them beneficial for things like adjusting their levels of dopamine or for other purposes. If you're going to use supplements, it's very important that the supplements you use be of very high quality, and that the quantity of ingredients that are on the label match what's actually in those bottles. For that reason, we've partnered with Thorne. T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency with respect to quality and how much of each supplement they put in the products that they sell. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, www.T-H-O-R-N-E.com/u/huberman. And there, you can see what I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate into the Thorne site through that portal, then you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. If you're not already following us on Instagram at Huberman Lab, please do so. There I teach neuroscience tools and information. Oftentimes, it's tools and information that I don't cover on the podcast. We're also on Twitter, also at Huberman Lab. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [energetic music]

========================================

--- Video 309 ---
Video ID: GzvzWO0NU50
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GzvzWO0NU50
Title: Dr. Matthew Johnson: Psychedelics for Treating Mental Disorders
Published: 2021-09-20 12:00:09 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss medical research on psychedelic compounds with Dr. Matthew Johnson, Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. We discuss the biology and medical clinical-trial uses of psilocybin, MDMA, ayahuasca, DMT, and LSD. Dr. Johnson teaches us what the clinical trials in his lab are revealing about the potential these compounds hold for the treatment of depression, addiction, trauma, eating disorders, ADHD, and other disorders of the mind. Dr. Johnson describes a typical psychedelic experiment in his laboratory, start to finish, including the conditions for optimal clinical outcomes. And he explains some of the potential hazards and common misconceptions and pitfalls related to psychedelic medicine. Dr. Johnson explains flashbacks, the heightened risks of certain people and age groups using psychedelics and the ever evolving legal and pharmaceutical industry landscape surrounding psychedelics. Dr. Johnson also explains how the scientific study of psychedelics is likely to set the trajectory of psychiatric medicine in the years to come. Dr. Johnson is among a small handful of researchers who have pioneered the clinical study of these powerful compounds. He has unprecedented insight into how they can be woven into other psychiatric treatments, changing ones sense of self and of reality. 

Thank you to our sponsors:
Athletic Greens - http://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman
InsideTracker - http://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Dr. Matthew Johnson Social Media: 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/Drug_Researcher
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/drug_researcher

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Dr. Johnson’s Website at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine - https://hopkinspsychedelic.org/johnson
Chris Letheby’s forthcoming book - https://amzn.to/3nMTaAs 

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Matthew Johnson
00:02:10 Supporting Sponsors
00:06:40 ‘Psychedelics’ Defined
00:14:09 Hallucinations, Synesthesia, Altered Space-Time Perception
00:19:56 Serotonin & Dopamine 
00:23:50 Ketamine & Glutamate 
00:28:00 An Example Psychedelic Experiment
00:37:30 ‘Letting Go’ with Psychedelics
00:44:10 Our Mind’s Eye
00:48:00 Redefining Your Sense of Self 
00:58:56 Exporting Psychedelic Learnings to Daily Life
01:04:36 Flashbacks
01:12:10 Ayahuasca, & ASMR, Kundalini Breathing
01:15:54 MDMA, DMT
01:26:00 Dangers of Psychedelics, Bad Trips, Long-Lasting Psychosis
01:38:15 Micro-Dosing
01:56:45 Risks for Kids, Adolescents & Teenagers; Future Clinical Trials
02:03:40 Legal Status: Decriminalization vs. Legalization vs. Regulation
02:18:35 Psychedelics for Treating Concussion & Traumatic Brain Injury 
02:27:45 Shifting Trends in Psychedelic Research, Academic Culture
02:44:23 Participating in a Clinical Trial, Online Survey Studies, Breathwork 
02:50:38 Conclusions, Subscribing & Supporting the HLP, Supplements

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 310 ---
Video ID: hFL6qRIJZ_Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hFL6qRIJZ_Y
Title: ADHD & How Anyone Can Improve Their Focus
Published: 2021-09-13 12:00:32 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss ADHD (Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder): what it is, the common myths, and the biology and psychology of ADHD.

I discuss both behavioral and pharmacologic treatments for ADHD, and brain-machine interface tools. I also discuss behavioral training protocols that can improve focus in people with ADHD and those without ADHD, and for people of different ages. I discuss the role of dopamine in coordinating 'default-mode' and 'task-related' neural networks, attentional "blinks" (lapses of attention) and how to overcome them, and the role of actual blinks in time perception and attention. Finally, I review some of the prescription and over-the-counter compounds for increasing focus such as Adderall, Ritalin, Modafinil and Armodafinil, the racetams, Alpha-GPC and phosphatidylserine and the role of diet for managing ADHD (and the controversies of diet for ADHD). 

The role of cell phones/technology in ADHD and ADHD-like challenges with focus are also discussed. Throughout, both basic science and clinical scenarios, as well as applicable tools and resources are covered.

#HubermanLab

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Support Research in the Huberman Lab at Stanford:
https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Review of Compounds for ADHD, Smart Drugs & Focus - https://www.fbscience.com/Landmark/articles/10.52586/4948
Review of Atypical Compounds for ADHD - https://www.hindawi.com/journals/np/2016/1320423/
Study of Focus Protocol In ADHD & Non-ADHD Children - https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/17/13/4780

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction & Note About Diagnosis
00:03:27 Sponsors 
00:07:56 ADHD vs. ADD: Genetics, IQ, Rates in Kids & Adults
00:13:00 Attention & Focus, Impulse Control
00:14:57 Hyper-focus 
00:16:45 Time Perception
00:18:25 The Pile System
00:20:00 Working Memory
00:24:10 Hyper-Focus & Dopamine 
00:26:40 Neural Circuits In ADHD: Default Mode Network & Task-Related Networks 
00:32:57 Low Dopamine in ADHD & Stimulant Use & Abuse
00:37:10 Sugar, Ritalin, Adderall, Modafinil & Armodafinil 
00:47:00 Non-Prescribed Adderall, Caffeine, Nicotine
00:49:18 How Stimulants “Teach” the Brains of ADHD Children to Focus
00:52:00 When To Medicate: A Highly Informed (Anecdotal) Case Study
00:56:35 Elimination Diets & Allergies In ADHD
01:04:46 Omega-3 Fatty Acids: EPAs & DHAs 
01:07:00 Modulation vs Mediation of Biological Processes
01:10:50 Attentional Blinks 
01:16:56 Open Monitoring & 17 minute Focus Enhancement 
01:22:50 Blinking, Dopamine & Time Perception; & Focus Training 
01:30:10 Reverberatory Neural & Physical Activity
01:33:40 Adderall, Ritalin & Blink Frequency
01:35:00 Cannabis 
01:37:30 Interoceptive Awareness 
01:41:15 Ritalin, Adderall, Modafinil, Armodafinil; Smart Drugs & Caffeine: Dangers
01:48:05 DHA Fatty Acids, Phosphatidylserine
01:50:54 Ginko Biloba 
01:51:45 Modafinil & Armodafanil: Dopamine Action & Orexin
01:56:19 Acetylcholine: Circuits Underlying Focus; Alpha-GPC
01:59:04 L-Tyrosine, (PEA) Phenylethylamine 
02:01:23 Racetams, Noopept 
02:05:15 Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation; Combining Technology & Pharmacology 
02:09:14 Smart Phones & ADHD & Sub-Clinical Focus Issues In Adults & Kids
02:14:30 Synthesis/Summary
02:16:10 Support for Podcast & Research, Supplement Resources

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine. Today, we are going to talk all about attention deficit, hyperactivity disorder, or ADHD. We are also going to talk about normal levels of focus. What are normal levels of focus and how all of us, whether or not we have ADHD or not can improve our ability to focus our ability to rule out distraction. It turns out those are two separate things, as well as remember information better. We are also going to talk about how we can learn to relax while focusing, which turns out to be a critical component of learning new information and for coming up with new creative ideas. So whether or not you have ADHD or know someone who does, or if you're somebody who feels that they do not have ADHD, but would simply like to improve their ability to focus or to be more creative. This episode is definitely for you as well. We are going to talk about drug based tools that are out there. We are going to talk about behavioral tools. We will talk about the role of diet and supplementation, and we will talk about new emerging brain machine interface devices, things like transcranial magnetic stimulation. If you don't know what that is, don't worry, I will explain it to you. These are non-invasive methods for rewiring your brain in order to make focusing more natural for you and to teach you how to increase your depth of focus. Now, just a quick reminder that any time we discuss a psychiatric disorder, it's important that we remember that all of us have the temptation to self-diagnose or to diagnose others. So, as I list off some of the symptomology of ADHD, some of that symptomology might resonate with you. You might think, oh, maybe I have ADHD or you might decide that someone you know, definitely has ADHD. However, it is very important that you don't self-diagnose or diagnose somebody else the clear and real diagnosis of ADHD really should be carried out by a psychiatrist, a physician, or a very well-trained clinical psychologist. There are clear criteria for what constitutes full-blown ADHD. However, many of us have constellations of symptoms that make us somewhat like somebody with ADHD and if you're struggling with focus nowadays, as a lot of people are because of stress, because of smartphone use, which turns out can induce adult ADHD. We'll talk about that. We'll then pay attention to the symptomology. You may actually require professional treatment you might not, equally important is to remember that some of the terms that we cover, like impulse control and attention and concentration are somewhat subjective and they can change over time. Sometimes we have a better level of attention than others. Maybe it depends on how we slept or other events going on in our life where something that we're entirely unaware of. The important thing to remember is that we can all improve our attentional capacity. We can all rewire the circuits that make heightened levels of focus, more accessible to us. We can do that through multiple types of interventions, and we are going to cover all those interventions today. Before we march into the material, I'd like to remind that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. And keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the utmost quality. I've spent a lifetime working on the visual system and I can tell you that there are many features built into our visual system that allows us to see things clearly, whether or not we are in shade or bright sunlight, et cetera. A lot of sunglasses have the problem that you have to constantly take them off and put them back on again, because of changes in background luminance, as we call it, Roka, sunglasses have solved this problem. It doesn't matter if you're standing in tree shade or a bright light, or what have you, you can always see things with perfect clarity and that shows that they really understand the way that the visual system works and their eyeglasses are built accordingly. I wear readers at night, so I wear eye glasses to read at night, or when I drive at night and their readers and eyeglasses are terrific as well. One thing I like so much about their eyeglasses and their sunglasses is that despite being, "Performance glasses" mean you can wear them on running or swimming or biking, they don't fall off your face, even if you get sweaty, they're very lightweight. You don't even notice that they're on is that the aesthetic is really good. A lot of performance glasses, they look kind of ridiculous, frankly, they make people look like cyborgs, but their aesthetics are terrific, they have a lot of different styles, you can select from. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their sunglasses and eyeglasses were designed with optical clarity and performance in mind. If you'd like to try Roca, you can go to roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic grass fed and finished certified humane meat. I tend to eat meat about once a day. So typically I'll fast until about noon or one and then my lunch consists of a small piece of steak or chicken and some salad and then I tend to eat my carbohydrates in the evening before I go to sleep. Sometimes and especially lately I'm eating my protein earlier in the day because I'm playing around with some of the findings related to protein intake early in the day. But regardless, I'm eating meat about once a day. For me, it's extremely important that any meat that I consume come from humanely raised animals and that the meat be of the very highest quality. So with Belcampo meets the animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, which results in meats, that's much higher in nutrients and healthy fats, including omega-3s, which I've talked a lot about on this podcast, the importance of omega-3s for heart health, for brain health, for mood, et cetera. Personally, I love their rib eye steaks, their New York steaks, their chicken is terrific and I also liked the organic meatballs. All the elk meat is organic and grass fed, and grass-finished, if you'd like to try Belcampo, first time customers can get 20% off by going to belcampo.com/Huberman and using the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix sleep. Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are absolutely second to none. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress about eight, nine months ago, and I've never slept better in my life. If you go to the Helix site, they have a short two minute quiz, and that quiz asks you questions like, do you sleep on your back? Do you sleep on your side? Do you sleep on your stomach? Do you tend to run hot or cold in the middle of the night? Maybe you don't know and they actually have an option to select, I don't know and Helix will match you to a mattress that specific to your sleep needs. It turns out to be really important. Some people have the tendency to run hot and sleep on their stomach. Other people lie on their back and they're waking up cold in the middle of the night. So you really need a mattress that's matched to your sleep needs. I did that and I matched to the dusk mattress, D-U-S-K and it turns out to be perfect for me and my sleep needs as well their pillows are really terrific. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two minutes sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off any of their mattresses and you'll get two free pillows with your order. They have a 10 year warranty. You have to try it out for 100 nights risk-free it's more than three months and if you don't like it, they'll pick it up for you and they'll take it away and you get all your money back. So if you're interested, go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off your mattress and two free pillows. So let's talk about ADHD, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Let's also talk about focus and attention and everybody's ability to focus and attend not just people with ADHD. We are also going to talk about tools that would allow anyone, whether or not they have ADHD or not to enhance their level of concentration and focus. Now, ADHD used to be called ADD Attention Deficit Disorder. We have record of ADD in the medical literature dating back to as early as 1904. Now there's nothing special about 1904. That's just the first time that it showed up in the standard medical literature. We have to believe that ADD, which we now call ADHD existed before 1904 and probably long before 1904, why? Well, because it has a strong genetic component. If you have a close relative that has ADHD, there's a much higher probability that you will have ADHD and that probability goes up depending on how closely related to that person you happen to be. So for instance, if you're an identical twin and your twin has ADHD, there's a very high concordance as we say, a very high probability that you will have ADHD up to 75% chance. If you have a fraternal twin with ADHD, that number goes down a bit in the 50 to 60% range and so on. If you have a parent with ADHD, that number ranges anywhere from 10 to 25% likelihood, that you will have ADHD if you have two parents and so on and so on, okay? So there's a genetic component that genetic component it turns out, relates directly to how specific neural circuits in the brain wire up, the chemicals they use and the way they use those chemicals, a topic that we are going to discuss in depth today. Now, if you have a close relative with ADHD, that does not mean that you are faded to have ADHD and if you happen to have ADHD, there are ways to overcome those symptoms of lack of attention, impulsivity and so on. Another important point about ADHD is that it has nothing to do with intelligence, whether or not we're talking about intelligence measured by a standard IQ test a rather controversial issue as many of you probably know, there are lots of forms of intelligence that a standard IQ test just wouldn't pick up emotional intelligence, musical intelligence, spatial intelligence, all sorts of intelligences. None of them are related to ADHD. Being very high functioning doesn't make you more likely to have ADHD and being ADHD doesn't necessarily mean that you have a low IQ. So there are people with ADHD who have low IQs people with ADHD with high IQ, people with ADHD with high emotional IQ or with low IQ in the emotional scale, it's all over the place. The important point is that your ability to attend and focus does not relate to how smart you are or your IQ of any type, not just a standard IQ. The renaming of the ADD to ADHD took place in the mid to late 1980s when the psychiatric community and the psychological community started taking better notice of the fact that so-called hyperactive kids also had attentional issues. This might seem obvious, but there's been extensive and ongoing revision of the criteria for designating a psychiatric disorder and this is still an ongoing process even today. So in the mid eighties, we started hearing about ADHD and then gradually that term ADD has been dropped away. However, just the renaming of ADD to ADHD has led to much better diagnosis and detection of ADHD. So right now the current estimates are that about one in 10 children and probably more have ADHD. The current estimates are anywhere from 10%, one in 10 to as high as 12%. Now, fortunately about half of those will resolve with proper treatment, but the other half typically don't. The other thing that we are seeing a lot nowadays is increased levels of ADHD in adults and there's some question as to whether or not those adults had ADHD that went undetected during their childhood or whether or not ADHD is now cropping up in adulthood due to the way that we are interacting with the world in particular smart phone use, the combination of email, text, real-world interactions, multiple apps and streams of media and social media all coming in at once trying to manage life. All of the things that are going on are creating a kind of cloud of poles on our attention and so there is this question to whether or not we are creating ADHD in adults that never had ADHD prior to being an adult. So let's talk about attention and first let's just define what we mean by attention out there in the scientific literature and in discussions about ADHD, we will hear things like attention and focus and concentration and impulse control for sake of today's discussion, attention, focus, and concentration are essentially the same thing, okay? We could split hairs and the scientific literature does split hairs about these. But if we want to understand the biology and we want to have a straightforward conversation about ADHD, if I say attention or focus, I'm basically referring to the same thing, unless I specify otherwise, okay? So people with ADHD have trouble holding their attention. What is attention? Well, attention is perception. It's how we are perceiving the sensory world. So just a little bit of neurobiology 101, we are sensing things all the time. There's information coming into our nervous system all the time. For instance, right now you're hearing sound waves. You are seeing things, you are sensing things against your skin, but you're only paying attention to some of those and the ones that you're paying attention to are your perceptions. So if you hear my voice, you are perceiving my voice. You are not paying attention to your other senses at the moment, okay? You might even be outside in a breeze and until I said that, you might not be perceiving that breeze, but your body was sensing it all along. So attention and focus are more or less the same thing, but impulse control is something separate because impulse control requires pushing out or putting the blinders on to sensory events in our environment. It means lack of perception, impulse control is about limiting our perception. People with ADHD have poor attention and they have high levels of impulsivity they're easily distractable. But the way that shows up is very surprising. You might think that people with ADHD just simply can't attend anything. They really can't focus, even if they really want to, but that's simply not the case. People with ADHD yes, they are distractable. Yes, they are impulsive. Yes, they are easily annoyed by things happening in the room. They sometimes have a high level of emotionality as well. Not always, but often however people with ADHD can have a hyper focus and incredible ability to focus on things that they really enjoy or and are intrigued by. Now, this is a very important point because typically we think of somebody with ADHD as being really wild and hyperactive, or having no ability whatsoever to sit still and attend and while that phenotype as we call it that contour of behavior and cognition can exist, many people, if not all people with ADHD, if you give them something they really love, like if the child loves video games or if a child loves to draw, or if an adult loves a particular type of movie or a person very much, they will obtain laser-focus without any effort. So that tells us that people with ADHD have the capacity to attend, but they can't engage that attention for things that they don't really, really want to do and as we all know much of life, whether or not you're a child or an adult involves doing a lot of things that we don't want to do, much of our schooling involves doing things that we would prefer not to do and sort of forcing ourselves to do it, to attend, even though we are not super interested in what we are attending to. There are a couple other things that people with ADHD display quite often. One is challenges with time perception. Now time perception is a fascinating aspect of how our brain works and later we're going to talk about time perception and how you can actually get better at time perception. It's very likely that right now you are doing things that get in the way of optimal time perception and I will tell you how to adjust your ability to measure time with your brain. People with ADHD often run late. They often procrastinate, but what's interesting and surprising is that if they are given a deadline, they actually can perceive time very well and they often can focus very well if the consequences of not completing a task or not attending are severe enough. It's a little bit like the way that people with ADHD can really focus if they like something. Well, if they're scared enough about the consequences of not attending, oftentimes not always, but oftentimes they can attend. If they're not really concerned about a deadline or a consequence, well, then they tend to lose track of time and they tend to underestimate how long things will take. Now many people do that, not just people with ADHD, but people with ADHD have challenges, understanding how to line up the activities of their day in order to meet particular deadlines even if it's just a simple thing, like finishing one set of tasks before lunch, oftentimes they will remember that lunch starts at noon, but somehow they aren't able to fill the intervening time in a way that's productive and they can obsess about the upcoming deadline for instance, we will talk about how to remedy this. In addition, their spatial organization skills are often subpar, not always, but often you will find that somebody with ADHD uses what's called the pile system in order to organize things, they will take many belongings and this could be in the kitchen or in their bedroom or in their office or in any space and they will start piling things up according to a categorization system that makes sense to them and only them. It doesn't really have any logical framework. Now, many people use the pile system and if you use the pile system, that doesn't mean that you have ADHD in fact, if you're unpacking a house or you've moved recently, or you've received a lot of presence recently, the pile system makes perfect sense to organize your space. But people with ADHD tend to organize things according to the pile system all the time and that pile system doesn't work for them. Okay, so that's the key distinction that they use a filing system, and it's not really files, they're piling things up in a way that makes sense to them, but then it doesn't work for them in terms of what tasks they actually need to perform. They can't find things or if anyone moves one thing then it's very disruptive to their overall plan because their overall plan doesn't really work in the first place. So that's a common phenotype as we call it. A phenotype by the way, is just an expression of a particular set of underlying genetic or psychological components, okay? So we say the phenotype. So a phenotype can brown hair and green eyes, like for me, a phenotype could also be that somebody uses the piling system, okay? The other thing that people with ADHD have real trouble with is so-called working memory. Now you might think that people with ADHD would have really poor memories, but in fact, that's not the case. People with ADHD often can have a terrific memory for past events, they can remember upcoming events quite well. Their memory is clearly working. However, one aspect of memory in particular that we call working memory is often disrupted. Working memory is the ability to keep specific information online, to recycle it in your brain over and over again, so that you can use it in the immediate or short term. A good example of this would be you meet somebody, they tell you their name, they give you their phone number verbally, and you have to walk back to your phone and enter it into your phone. People without ADHD might have to put some effort into it, it might feel like a bit of a struggle, but typically they will be able to recite that phone number in their mind over and over, and then put into their phone. People with ADHD, tend to lose the ability or lack the ability to remember things that they just need to keep online for anywhere from 10 seconds to a minute or two, okay? So a string of numbers like 6, 4, 3, 7, 8, 1 for most people would be pretty easy. 6, 4, 3, 7, 8, 1, 6, 4, 3, 7, 8, 1, you could probably remember that a minute from now without writing it down. But if you add one more number to that 6, 4, 3, 7, 8, 1, 3, it gets tougher, okay? So there's a reason why phone numbers typically have seven digits in them, of course, there's an area code, but remembering information that strings out longer than seven numbers or a sentence or two that's challenging for most people, people with ADHD have severe challenges, even with much smaller batches of information over even much smaller batches of time. Deficits in working memory are also something that we see in people who have frontotemporal dementia, so damage to the frontal lobes or age-related cognitive decline and so it will come as no surprise that later when we discuss treatments, supplements, and other tools for ADHD, that many of those treatments, supplements and tools for ADHD are similar to the ones that work for age-related cognitive decline. Okay, so we've more or less established the kind of menu of items that people with ADHD tend to have some have all of them. Some have just a subset of them. Their severity can range from very intense to mild, but in general, it's challenges with attention and focus, challenges with impulse control, they get annoyed easily. They have kind of an impulsivity, they can't stay on task. Time perception can be off, they use the piling system or a system that doesn't work well for them in order to organize their things in physical space and they have a hard time with anything that's mundane that they're not really interested in. But again, I just want to highlight that people with ADHD are able to obtain heightened levels of focus, even hyper-focus for things that are exciting to them and that they really want to engage in. So now you have the contour of what ADHD is, and if you're somebody who doesn't have ADHD, you should also be asking yourself which aspects of ADHD are similar to things I've experienced before. Because what we know about the healthy brain is that there's also a range of abilities to focus. Some people focus very well on any task. You give them a task, they can just laser in on that task. Other people that have to kind of fight an internal battle, they have to convince themselves that it's important or interesting. They have to kind of incentivize themselves internally. Other people doesn't matter, they could be bored to tears with the information, but they can do it just because they are, "Very disciplined people." We tend to admire those people but as you'll see a little bit later, it's not clear that that's the best way to run your attentional system. There might be something to this business of having heightened levels of attention for the things that you are most interested or excited by. So let's drill into this issue of why people with ADHD actually can focus very intensely on things that they enjoy and are curious about. Now, enjoyment and curiosity are psychological terms, they're not even really psychological terms. They're just the way that we describe our human experience of liking things, wanting to know more about them. But from a neuro-biological perspective, they have a very clear identity and signature and that's dopamine. Dopamine is released from neurons, it's what we call a neuromodulator and as a neuromodulator it changes the activity of the circuits in the brain, such that certain circuits are more active than others and in particular, dopamine creates a heightened state of focus. It tends to contract our visual world and it tends to make us pay attention to things that are outside and beyond the confines of our skin. That's what we call exteroception. Dopamine also tends to put us in a state of motivation and wanting things outside the confines of our skin. So whether or not we're pursuing something physical in our world, or whether or not we're pursuing information in our outside world, dopamine is largely responsible for our ability and our drive to do that. But dopamine as a neuromodulator is also involved in changing the way that we perceive the world. So, as I mentioned earlier you have all these senses coming in and you can only perceive some of them because you're only paying attention to some of them. Dopamine when it's released in our brain tends to turn on areas of our brain that narrow our visual focus and our auditory focus, so it creates a cone of auditory attention, that's very narrow, creates a tunnel of visual attention that's very narrow. Whereas when we have less dopamine, we tend to view the entire world, we tend to see the whole scene that we are in, we tend to hear everything all at once. So as I describe this, hopefully you're already starting to see and understand how having dopamine release can allow a person, whether or not they have ADHD or not to direct their attention to particular things in their environment, all right? So now what we're doing is we're moving away from attention as this kind of vague ambiguous term, and we're giving it a neurochemical identity dopamine, and we are giving it a neural circuit identity and just to put a little bit of flavor and detail on which neurocircuits those are, I want to discuss two general types of neurocircuits that dopamine tends to enhance. So let's talk neurocircuits and for those of you that love hearing neuroscience, nomenclature, you're going to eat this part up and for those of you that don't like a lot of names of brain areas I invite you to tune out or just try and grab the top contour of this. I will describe it in pretty general terms, but I will give some detail because I know there are some of you out there who really want to dig deeper into what the exact structures and connectivities are, okay? So there are two main types of circuits that we need to think about with respect to ADHD, attention and dopamine. The first one is called the default mode network. The default mode network is the network of brain areas in your brain and my brain and in everybody's brain that is active when we're not doing anything when we're just sitting there idle at rest. Now it's very hard to not think about anything, but when you're not engaged in any type of specific task, so you're not driving, you're not playing a video game, you're not trying to study, you're not trying to listen, you're just sitting there letting your brain kind of go wherever it wants to go. Your default mode network underlies that state of mind. The other set of circuits that we're going to think about and talk about with respect to ADHD are the task networks, the networks of the brain that make you goal oriented, or that are at least trying to make you goal oriented and those are a completely different set of brain areas. However, the default mode network and these tasks networks are communicating with one another and they're doing that in very interesting ways. So first I want to describe how these two sets of brain areas, the default mode network and the task networks normally interact, okay? So little bit of naming here again feel free to ignore it if you don't want this level of detail, but the default mode network includes an area called the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, frontal cortex, no surprises in the front and you have a dorsal, the top and side lateral part dorsolateral, prefrontal cortex. You got one on each side of your brain, right? And then you have a brain area called the posterior cingulate cortex and then you have an area called the lateral parietal lobe. Again, you don't need to remember these names for, these are three brain areas that normally are synchronized in their activity. So when one of these areas is active in a typical person, the other areas would be active as well. So it's a little bit like a symphony or a band like a three-piece band is like drums, guitar, and bass they're playing together, okay? That's how it is in a typical person and in a person with ADHD, or even a person who has subclinical ADHD or in any human being who hasn't slept well, what you find is the default mode network is not synchronized. These brain areas are just not playing well together. Now the task networks include a different set of structures. It still involves the prefrontal cortex, but it's a different part of the prefrontal cortex, okay? Tends to be the medial prefrontal cortex and there are some other brain areas that the medial prefrontal cortex is communicating to all the time, mainly to suppress impulses. It's shutting down the desire to stand up or to scratch the side of your cheek or your nose, if you're trying not to do that, anytime you're restricting your behavior, These task directed networks are very active, okay? Now normally in a person without ADHD, the task networks and the default mode networks are going in kind of Seesaw fashion, they are actually what we call anti-correlated. So it's not just that they are not correlated, they're actually opposing one another they are anti-correlated. In a person with ADHD, the default mode networks and the tasks networks are actually more coordinated. That might come a surprising, I think that we all have this tendency to kind of jump to conclusion and assume that somebody who doesn't have an easy time paying attention or has ADHD, that their brain must be completely incoherent that it's not working well and because everything's out of whack, but there's something interesting about people with ADHD whereby the task networks and the default mode networks are actually working together in a way that's correlated and that is what's abnormal. So this would be like the guitar bass and the drums playing together in a way where the bass isn't keeping the backbeat and the drums, aren't keeping the backbeat that they're playing together, they're all playing the melodies and harmonies in a way that just doesn't sound right. That's what's going on in the brain of somebody with ADHD and we can now confidently say based on brain imaging studies, that when somebody gets better, when they're treated for ADHD or when they age out of ADHD, as sometimes it's the case that the default mode networks and the task networks tend to become anti-correlated again, okay? So that's the underlying neurobiology, but you'll notice that I didn't mention dopamine at all. What dopamine is doing in this context is dopamine is acting like a conductor. Dopamine is saying this circuit should be active then that circuit should be active. It should be default mode network and then when the default mode network is not active, then it should be the task network. So it's really acting as a conductor saying, you go, now you go, now you go, now you go. And in ADHD, there's something about the dopamine system that is not allowing it to conduct these networks and make sure that they stay what, the engineers or physicists or mathematicians would say out of phase to be anti-correlated, okay? Out of phase and anti correlate, essentially the same thing, at least for purposes of this discussion. So that raises two questions, could it be that dopamine is not at sufficiently high levels or could it be that dopamine is just doing it all wrong? In other words, is there no conductor or is the conductor playing with like little tiny toothpicks and so the instruments can't see what they're supposed to do. They can't get the instruction 'cause it's just not loud enough, so to speak, or could it be that the information is getting out, but the information that's getting out is wrong, the conductor's there, but the conductor is in very good at conducting. Now we can gain insight into how the system works and fails and how to treat it by looking at some of the current and previous treatments for ADHD, as well as some of the recreational drugs that people with ADHD tend to pursue and like now I'm certainly not a proponent of people with ADHD taking drugs recreationally, that's not what this is about, but if you look at their drug seeking behavior and you couple that drug seeking behavior to their desire to remedy their attention deficit, you start gaining some really interesting insight into how dopamine is regulating these circuits in normal circumstances and in people with ADHD. So what exactly is going on with the dopamine system, in people with ADHD and what's going on with the dopamine system in people that have terrific levels of attention for any task? Well, in the year 2015, an important paper came out. The first author is Spencer, and it came out in a journal called Biological Psychiatry, and it formalized the so-called low dopamine hypothesis of ADHD. The idea that dopamine was somehow involved or not at the appropriate levels in people with ADHD had been around for a pretty long time, but a formal proposition of the low dopamine hypothesis led to some really important experiments and understanding of what goes wrong in ADHD. It turns out that if dopamine levels are too low in particular circuits in the brain, that it leads to unnecessary firing of neurons in the brain that are unrelated to the task that one is trying to do and that is unrelated to the information that one is trying to focus on. So if you think back before you've got this default mode network and a task-related network, and they need to be in this kind of concert of anti-correlation and an ADHD they're firing together. Well, the problem seems to be that when dopamine is low, certain neurons are firing when they shouldn't be, this is like a band, right? We'll go back to our band, that's a guitar bass in it, and the person playing the drums and it's as if one of those or several of those instruments are playing notes when they shouldn't be playing, right? The pauses and music are just as important as the actual playing of notes. When dopamine is too low neurons fire, more than they should in these networks that govern attention. This is the so-called low dopamine hypothesis and if you start looking anecdotally at what people with ADHD have done for decades, not just recently since the low dopamine hypothesis has been proposed, but what they were doing in the 1950s and then the 1940s and the 1960s. What you find is that they tend to use recreational drugs, or they tend to indulge in non drug stimulants. So things like drinking, six cups of coffee or quadruple espressos, or when it was more prominent smoking a half a pack of cigarettes and drinking four cups of coffee a day or if the person had access to it using cocaine as a recreational drug or amphetamine as a recreational drug. All of those substances that I just described in particular cocaine and amphetamine, but also coffee and cigarettes increase levels of multiple neurotransmitters, but all have the quality of increasing levels of dopamine in the brain and in particular, in the regions of the brain that regulate attention and these task related and default mode networks okay? Now young children, fortunately don't have access to those kinds of stimulants most of the time and those stimulants all have high potential for abuse in adults. So we will talk about the potential for abuse in a few minutes. But if you look at children, even very young children with ADHD, they show things like preference for sugary foods, which also act as dopamine inducing stimulants. Now, of course, once they get access to soda pop and coffee and tea, they start to indulge in those more than other people. For a long time, it was thought that children with ADHD consumed too many sugary foods or drank too much soda or adults with ADHD would take recreational drugs like methamphetamine or cocaine or would drink coffee to excess or smoke cigarettes to excess because they had poor levels of attention and because they couldn't make good decisions, they were too impulsive and so forth and while that certainly could be the case, knowing what we now know about dopamine, and the fact that having enough dopamine is required in order to coordinate these neural circuits that allow for focus and quality decision-making an equally valid idea is that these children and these adults are actually trying to self-medicate by pursuing these compounds, right? Things like cocaine lead to huge increases in dopamine. Well, what happens was when somebody with ADHD takes that drug, it turns out they actually obtain heightened levels of focus, their ability to focus on things other than things they absolutely care intensely about goes up, likewise, children who consume anything that increases their levels of dopamine, if those children have ADHD, they tend to be calmer, they tend to be able to focus more. Now, this is very different than children who do not have ADHD. When they consume too much sugar, they tend to become super hyperactive. When they consume any kind of stimulant, they tend to go wild and run around like crazy. Actually, I have an anecdote about this just to illustrate it. I have a friend, he has two children that are now in their teens and twenties, but when they were little, one time, I brought them some chocolate just as a gift, when I showed up at their house and within 30 minutes, the kids were running around like crazy I mean they were pretty high energy kids, but they were going bonkers and that's actually when the mother, my friend at the time, unfortunately, still now looked at the chocolate, realized that it was chocolate with espresso beans in it. It was like dark chocolate with espresso beans so I was really at fault there, you don't want to give kids dark chocolate with espresso beans, but what you're really seeing that hyperactivity that is dopamine, okay? It's the sugar combined with the caffeine in this case, combined with a few other compounds that exist in chocolate, that really increase our levels of alertness and our tendency to want to move around a lot, okay? So dopamine and low levels of dopamine apparently are what's wrong in people with ADHD, that dopamine hypothesis is what led to the idea that treating people, children and adults included with dopaminergic compounds would somehow increase their ability to focus and if you look at the major drugs that were developed and now marketed by pharmaceutical companies for the treatment of ADHD, those drugs have names like Ritalin. Nowadays, it's typically things like Adderall, Modafinil and some of the other derivatives, they all serve to increase levels of dopamine in particular dopamine in the networks that control task directed behavior, and that coordinate the default mode network and these task-related networks. So many of you have probably heard of Ritalin. Ritalin is a prescription stimulant that is prescribed for ADHD as well as for narcolepsy. Narcolepsy is a condition in which people tend to fall asleep during the day time, quite a lot, excessive daytime sleepiness, not due to lack of sleep at night, but also tend to fall asleep when they get excited, if they're really emotionally excited or about to eat or any other kind of activity that would normally get somebody really aroused and alert people with narcolepsy tend to fall asleep, or they tend to become what's called cataplectic. They tend to just sort of go limp in the muscles. So it's this invasion of sleep into the daytime. It's dysregulated by emotion. You can imagine why a stimulant, something that would wake you up, make you very alert, focused and motivated would be a good treatment for narcolepsy. Adderall also is used to treat ADHD and to treat narcolepsy things like Modafinil also used to treat ADHD and narcolepsy. So you're sensing a theme here. So what are the differences and similarities between these drugs and what can that tell us about ADHD? Well, Ritalin was one of the first-generation drugs that was prescribed for ADHD in order to deal head on with this dopamine hypothesis. This idea that in ADHD, dopamine levels are too low. Nowadays, Adderall is the more typically prescribed drug for ADHD that has to do with some of the so-called pharmacokinetics, the rate at which those drugs enter the system and how long they last in the system. So for instance, Ritalin was a drug that was packaged into various time-release formulas. Whereas initially Adderall was only released in a form that had a very short life, So meaning that it wasn't in the bloodstream very long and didn't affect the brain for very long and so the dosages could be controlled in a more typical way without going into a lot of tangential detail. As you all know, at different times of day, you tend to be more or less alert. So a long sustained release drug while that might sound like a really terrific thing. If that drug is having an effect of making you more alert and it's released across very many hours of your day, there might be periods of your day when you feel too alert, periods of your day, when you feel just right and periods of your day, when you wished that you were more alert. These are some of the pharmacokinetics, kinetics, meaning movement of the different compounds within the bloodstream and brain that could, you could imagine in a very real way, would impact whether or not someone would feel really good on one of these drugs or whether or not they would feel too anxious or too sleepy and so on. Let's take a step back for a second and just ask, what are these drugs? We know they increase dopamine, but what are they really? Well, Ritalin also called methylphenidate is very similar to amphetamine speed, or what's typically call speed in the street drug nomenclature. Adderall, which goes by various other names, okay? So Adderall, Adderall XR, my dialysis, things like that. Adderall is basically a combination of amphetamine and dextroamphetamine. Now some of you probably realize this, that Adderall is amphetamine, but I'm guessing that there a good number of you out there, perhaps even parents and kids that don't realize that these drugs like cocaine and amphetamine methamphetamine, which are incredibly dangerous and incredibly habit forming and have high potential for abuse. Well, the pharmaceutical versions of those are exactly what are used to treat ADHD and they're not exactly like cocaine or methamphetamine, but they are structurally and chemically very similar and their net effect in the brain and body is essentially the same, which is to increase dopamine primarily, but also to increase levels of a neuromodulator called epinephrin or norepinephrine also called noradrenaline and adrenaline those names are the same and to some extent to increase levels of serotonin in the brain and blood, but not so much serotonin, that's just kind of a small smidgen of effect, okay? So dopamine way up norepinephrine and adrenaline way up. So that's motivation drive, focus and energy and to some extent, a little bit of serotonin, which is really more about feeling calm and relaxed and you can imagine why that would be a good balancing effect for dopamine and norepinephrine. So what I'm essentially saying is that the drugs that are used to treat ADHD are stimulants, and they look very much alike. In fact, nearly identical to some of the so-called street drugs, stimulants that we all here are so terrible. However, I do want to emphasize that at the appropriate dosages and working with a quality psychiatrist or neurologist or family physician does have to be a board certified MD that prescribes these things, many people with ADHD achieve excellent relief with these drugs, not all of them, but many of them do, especially if these treatments are started early in life. So now knowing what these drugs are, I want to raise the question of why prescribe these drugs? I mean, everyone has to make a decision for themselves or for their child as to whether or not they're going to take these things or not. I also want to acknowledge that many people out there, many, many people out there are taking these drugs, even though they have not been clinically diagnosed with ADHD when I say these drugs, I'm specifically referring to Ritalin and Adderall and Modafinil, but more typically it's Adderall, okay? People using cocaine and amphetamine for recreational purposes, that's a completely different beast and it is indeed a beast and it's something that I strongly discourage. However, I'm aware that up to 25% of college students, and perhaps as many as 35% of all individuals between the ages of 17 and 30 are taking Adderall on a regular or semi-regular basis in order to work, in order to study and in order to function and focus in their daily life. Even though they have not been diagnosed with ADHD, there's a whole black market for this. They're getting it from people with prescriptions. I'm not here to pass judgment. I just want to emphasize how these drugs work. Some of the things that they do to enhance cognition and focus that actually serve the brain well in certain individuals and how they can be very detrimental in other individuals. I sort of blew right past it. But the fact that in upwards of 25% of young people are taking things like Adderall, despite not having a clinical diagnosis of ADHD. Well, that's a ridiculously high number. A few years ago, it was estimated that Adderall use and Ritalin use without diagnosis of ADHD was second in incident only to cannabis, but actually now the consumption of Adderall without prescription is higher than the consumption of cannabis in that age group. So what that means is that there's a lot of stimulant use in that age group and there are a lot of adults also using and abusing stimulants in order to gain focus. Then we can have a whole discussion about whether or not life is becoming more demanding, whether or not the need for focus is excessive and that's why people are doing that. But frankly, it's an interesting discussion, but it's not one that would deliver us to any answers. Rather, I'd like to focus on the ways that people now and people have always been self-medicating to increase, focus, right? Caffeine, which I can indulge some, I don't think to access has long been used as a stimulant to increase dopamine, increase norepinephrine, increased focus and energy and in addition to that, it works through the so-called cyclic amp, phosphodiesterase pathway, remember anytime you see, you hear an ASE, that's an enzyme. Phosphodiesterase is involved in the conversion of things like cyclic amp into energy for cells and so forth. Basically coffee gives you energy it makes you feel good and it increases focus because of the circuits that it engages in the brain. People have been taking caffeine and continue to take it caffeine for ages. People also used to smoke cigarettes, nicotine in order to gain focus. Nowadays, that's less common because of the concerns, quite valid concerns about lung cancer from smoking, but there's a lot of vaping out there. There are a lot of people now consuming nicotine, which is the active substance in cigarettes and in most nicotine vapes that stimulates the brain to be more focused and more alert. So the idea of taking stimulants of consuming things or smoking things in order to increase alertness is not a new idea. It's just that in ADHD, it's surprising that these things would work, right? I mean, if the problem is Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, what we're really talking about here, or children that are prescribed a drug that ought to be a stimulant, it ought to make them hyper hyperactive and rather than doing that, it actually somehow serves to calm them a bit, or at least allow them to focus. Here's the reason, children have a brain that's a very plastic meaning it can remodel itself and change in response to experience very, very quickly compared to adults. Taking stimulants as a child, if you are a child diagnosed with ADHD allows that forebrain task related network to come online, to be active at the appropriate times and because those children are young, it allows those children to learn what focus is and to sort of follow or enter that tunnel of focus. Now, by taking a drug, it's creating focus artificially, it's not creating focus because they're super interested in something it's chemically inducing, a state of focus, and let's face it a lot of childhood and school and becoming a functional adult is about learning how to focus even though you don't want to do something. In fact, when I was in college, I had this little trick that may or may not work for some of you, which is if I couldn't focus on the material I was trying to learn, I would delude myself into thinking that it was the most interesting thing in the world. I would just kind of lie to myself and tell myself, okay, this, I won't mention the subjects, I absolutely love this. I would just, I would tell myself that I loved it and I noticed that just that selective or deliberate engagement of that desire to know circuit, whatever that is in my brain, no doubt involves dopamine, allowed me to focus and remember the information and somewhat surprisingly or perhaps not surprisingly, I would often fall in love with the information. I find that that was my favorite class. So it was what I wanted to learn the most. So that's one way you can do it artificially, but kids with ADHD, they can't do that, right? They're told to sit still and they end up getting up 11 times. They are told that they can't speak out in class or that they have to remain in their seats for 10 minutes and they just, despite their best effort, they simply cannot do it, they're highly distractable. So what are we to make of this whole picture that we need more dopamine, but these kids with ADHD, they're getting their dopamine by way of a drug, which is for all the world amphetamines, right? It's speed, that's really what it is. What are the long-term consequences, where the short-term consequences and what should we make of people taking these drugs without a clinical need? What are the consequences there? Well, in order to get to some of those answers, I went to one of my colleagues, this is a colleague that I've actually known for a very long time, I was their teaching assistant when they were an undergraduate, they went on to get an MD, a medical degree, as well as a PhD and become a pediatric neurologist that specializes in the treatment of epilepsy and ADHD in kids of all ages, from age three to 21, that's the age range, pretty broad age range and has extensive knowledge in this and what makes them particularly interesting for sake of this discussion is that they have a child, a young boy, who's now showing signs of ADHD and they are on the threshold of trying to decide whether or not they will prescribe Adderall or something similar. So we had a discussion about this and prior to learning that their child may have ADHD. I asked the following questions. First of all, I asked, what do you think about giving young kids amphetamine? And their answer was, on the face of it, it seems crazy, but provided that the lowest possible dose is used and that that dosage is modulating as they grow older and develop those powers of attention, their observation was that they've seen more kids benefit than not benefit from that. Now I'm certainly not saying what people should do. You obviously have to go to a doctor because as I always say, I'm not a doctor, I don't prescribe anything, I'm a professor so I profess things and here I'm professing that you talk to your doctor, if you're considering giving Ritalin or Adderall or any type of stimulant to your child, of course, what could be more important than the health of your child. But it was a very interesting answer because typically we hear yes, medicator don't medicate. Rarely do we hear that the medication should be adjusted across the lifespan and in any particular kind of way. Now the fact that this person, this now friend of mine and colleague of mine has so much expertise in the way that the brain works and is considering putting their child on such medication. I said, why wouldn't you wait until your kid reaches puberty? I mean, we know that in boys and in girls, there are increases in testosterone and estrogen during puberty, that dramatically change the way that the body appears. But also that dramatically change the way that the brain functions in particular we know this, that puberty triggers the activation of so-called frontotemporal task related executive functioning. That's just fancy science speak for being able to focus, being able to direct your attention, being able to control your impulses, look at a small child, or look at a puppy and then look at an older child, or look at a dog, very different levels, patterns of spontaneous behavior. Young children move around a lot they're, I don't want to say shifty, cause that makes it sound like they're up to something bad, which they might be, but they don't have to be up to something bad, they fidget a lot. So to puppies, everything's a stimulus as animals and humans get older, they learn how to control their behavior and sit, still, listen and focus even if they don't want to. So giving a drug that allows a child to access that stillness early on it's thought will allow them to maintain that ability as time goes on. But I decided to push a little bit further, I said, well, why would you do it now as opposed to during puberty or after puberty? And their answer was very specific and I think very important, what they said was look, neuroplasticity is greatest in childhood and tapers off after about age 25, but neuroplasticity from age three until age 12 or 13 is exceedingly high and they're right, when you sit back and you look at the literature on neuroplasticity, you'd say childhood plasticity and young adult plasticity is much greater than adult plasticity, but that early childhood plasticity is far and away the period in which you can reshape the brain at an accelerated rate. So this lines up really well with the clinical literature. Not surprisingly, there are clinician that early treatment is key. If you have the opportunity to work with a quality physician and treat these things early, these drugs can allow these frontal circuits, these task-related circuits to achieve their appropriate levels of functioning and for kids to learn how to focus in a variety of different contexts. Now, is that the only thing that they should be doing? Of course not. So the next question I asked was what should we make of all this diet related stuff, right? I've heard before that the so-called elimination diet or ingesting no sugars or no dairy or no gluten, that all of these things have been purported to improve symptoms of ADHD and people and parents with ADHD go to fanatic lanes to try and find the exact foods that are causing problems and the exact foods that the kids can eat in order to try and get their brain wired up right, and correctly, and to avoid lifelong ADHD and their answer was really interesting. But before I tell you their answer, I want to tell you the studies and the data related to this question of whether or not food and the constellation of foods that one avoids and will eat has anything to do with our levels of attention and in particular, whether or not that can be used as a leverage point to treat ADHD. So you can imagine the challenges of exploring the role of diet and nutrition in any study, but especially in a study on ADHD, why? Well, because as I mentioned before, children with ADHD, and it turns out adults with ADHD tend to pursue sugary foods or any types of food that increase their levels of dopamine. They are naturally drawn to those foods, whether or not they realize it or not, presumably as a way to try and treat their lack of focus and impulsivity. So in this study that I'm about to share with you, there was no drug treatment, it was just a study, manipulating diet and involved 100 children, 50 in the so-called elimination diet group, the special diet where certain foods were eliminated and 50 in the so-called control group. However, being a well-designed randomized controlled trial, this study also included a crossover, meaning where the kids would serve as their own control or control group at a certain portion of the study. So there'll be in one group where they eliminated certain foods and then after a period of time in the study, they would swap to the other group. This is a powerful way to design a study for reasons that you can imagine, because you start to eliminate changes and effects due to individual differences. In any case, 100 children total 50 in each group at any one period in time and the effects that they observed were extremely dramatic. In the world of statistics and analysis of scientific data, we talk about P-values, probability values. What's the likelihood that something could happen according to chance and typically the cutoff would be something like P less than 0.05, that's less than 0.05 chance essentially, of the effect being due to chance. However, in this study, every single one of the effects is P less than 0.0001, very, very infant decimally small probability that the effect observed could be due to chance. So what were these effects? These effects were enhanced ability to focus, less impulsivity, even less tendency to move when trying to sit still. So everything from mental focus to the ability to control their bodies improved when they were in the elimination diet group, what was eliminated? Well, the elimination diet in this particular study was a so-called oligoantigenic diet. It was a diet in which each kid took a test to determine which foods they had antibodies for, meaning that they were mildly allergic to. Now in this study, it was very important that the kids not be extremely allergic to any food because as I mentioned before, they actually served as a control at one point in the study where they were eating all sorts of foods, including foods that had mild allergies to. So basically what the study said was that eliminating foods to which children have allergies can dramatically improve their symptoms of ADHD. And this study, not surprisingly because it was published in such a high quality journal Lancet, et cetera, large number of subjects set the world on fire. People were extremely excited about these results because here in the absence of any drug treatment, there was a significant improvement in ADHD symptoms observed and then came the criticisms. So many papers were published after this specifically dealing with re-analysis of these data and I want to be fair in saying that the data in the paper look good, but there are criticisms of the overall structural design of the study. I don't want to go into all the details exactly 'cause it gets really nuanced about some of the statistics and the way that one examines these types of data, but there was skepticism and in science, skepticism is healthy, especially when making decisions about whether or not to treat or feed children one food or another, or give them one drug or another. Now I want to return to the story of my friend, who is a pediatric neurologist and treats ADHD and has a child who is on the precipice of perhaps starting to take drugs for the treatment of ADHD. I asked the simple question, do you see an effect of diet? Meaning when parents control the diet of their children, does it make a positive or negative or no difference in terms of the way that the kids respond to ADHD, drugs like Ritalin and Adderall or whether or not it can help them avoid treating with those drugs entirely? And her response was very straightforward, she said, elimination of simple sugars has a dramatic and positive effect. She's observed that over and over and over again in many dozens, if not hundreds of patients, okay? Now that's not a peer reviewed study, that's a statement that I'm conveying to you anecdotally, but it's a highly, highly informed one. I said, what about these elimination diets? She said, and I found other sources to support this, that these oligoantigenic diets are controversial. There are many people who really believe in identifying all the things that you're allergic to and making sure that you and especially your kids avoid those foods. However, there's another camp that's starting to emerge in the peer reviewed scientific literature, showing that when kids are not exposed to certain foods in particular nuts and things of that sort, they develop allergies to those foods and then when exposed to them later, they cause real problems. So there's a whole galaxy of discussion and controversy and outright fighting about allergies and kids and whether or not the oligoantigenic diet is the appropriate one. However, out of the four neurologists and psychiatrists that I spoke to about ADHD in preparation for this, every single one said children with ADHD, as much as possible, should be encouraged to avoid high sugar and simple sugar foods of most kinds and if they can find particular foods that exacerbate their symptoms, obviously eliminating those foods is beneficial and the foods that exacerbate their symptoms change over time. So I don't like giving a complicated answer, but I also don't like giving an incomplete answer. What this tells me is that children, especially young children who have ADHD should probably not eat much sugar in particular simple sugars. In addition to that, exploring whether or not they have existing allergies to foods, they already consume might be a good idea. At least that's what this paper, the Pelsser et. al Lancet paper seems to speak to and I should mention that that paper was published in 2011. Since then there have been many dozens of studies exploring the same thing, as well as meta analysis of all those data and it does appear that diet can have a highly significant role in eliminating or at least reducing the symptoms of ADHD so much so that some of the children are able to not take medication at all, or eventually wean themselves off medication as young adults and as adults. One interesting question is whether or not adults should modify their diet in order to increase their levels of focus, if they're already having normal levels of focus, but we'd like more or would like to reduce existing adult ADHD, that's an interesting, and even more controversial topic, it brings us right into the realm of what are called omega-3 fatty acids. I've talked many times on this podcast about the known benefits of omega-3 fatty acids in particular, getting a one gram 1000 milligrams or more even as much as 2000 milligrams each day of the so-called EPA component of omega-3 fatty acids known to have antidepressant effects, mood elevating effects, known to have important effects protecting the cardiovascular system. I think it's now clear that the immune system also benefits that omega-3 fatty acids that include a gram or more of EPA that are very beneficial typically that's done through fish oil, liquid fish oil is going to be the most cost efficient, but they're capsule forms for those of you that don't like fish oil, you can ingest this through other means you can get it from certain algaes or krill, et cetera. You have to make it compatible with your particular diet, whether or not you're vegan or vegetarian or omnivore, et cetera. Omega-3s have shown, been shown to have all these positive health benefits. Do they have positive effects on focus and attention? And the answer is you can find studies that support that statement and the effects are significant, but the effects are modest. You can also find studies that show no effect, however much like with omega-3s and antidepressants, whereby ingestion of omega-3 fatty acids of a gram or more of EPA per day allows people with major depression to get away with taking lower doses of antidepressant medication. It does seem that ingestion of omega-3 fatty acids in adults that include EPA is of 1000 milligrams or more can allow adults with ADHD or mild attention deficit issues to function well on lower doses of medication and in rare cases to eliminate medication entirely. So what this says is once again, that the omega-3 fatty acids are beneficial, will they cure or eliminate ADHD? I think it's safe to say, no, they are playing a supportive or what we call a modulatory role. Just like good sleep, plays a supportive and modulatory role for essentially everything, your immune system, your ability to think your ability to regulate your emotion, it's modulating that process. This component of modulation is extremely important to highlight and I think I want to spend a moment on it because this is especially important in the context of ADHD and all the information that's out there. There are biological processes that are mediated by particular compounds like dopamine. So for instance, the ability to feel motivated, to attend to focus is mediated by the circuits in the brain that release dopamine. However, attention is also modulating by how rested you are. If you want to eliminate your ability to think well at all, just stay up for two nights and don't sleep at all right? If you do that, you will have modulating the circuits in your brain that respond to various things and you will be highly distractible. You'll be highly emotional. You will feel like garbage, but that doesn't mean that sleep mediates, focus and attention. It modulates it indirectly. Likewise, I think these omega-3 fatty acids in particular the EPA is which are so beneficial for mood and apparently also for attention, they directly mediate attention and mood, what they do is they modulate those circuits, they make dopamine more available. They make whatever dopamine is available, more likely to bind to the various receptors that are present on neurons and so forth and I think this is very important because likewise diet in any discussion about nutrition has to include this framework of is the diet, the elimination diet, or whether or not it's some other diet or esoteric diet, ketogenic diet, is it modulating or mediating a process? And most likely in the context of ADHD, it's modulating that process. So if the ADHD is mild or if it's caught early enough, or if it's in conjunction with pharmacology with a prescription treatment, well, then it might help guide the child or adult to a better place of being able to focus. But it's not going to be the switch that flips everything. Now that does not mean that consuming the wrong foods, sugary foods or foods that you happen to be allergic to is a good idea it will still be detrimental. So I hope that conceptual framework helps because if you go online, if you're somebody with ADHD or not your going to be bombarded with the ADHD diet, the oligoantigenic diet, the elimination this, this supplement that EPA and I think it's very important to understand whether or not you're talking about something mediating a process or modulating a process. Now drugs like Ritalin, drugs like Adderall, they are tapping into the circuitries and the neurochemistries that mediate attention and focus. They are not the only alternatives or the only choices rather for treatment of these circuits and enhancement of the circuits for focus. I'm going to talk about other alternatives and some behavioral alternatives that are not very well known, but are very, very effective in a few minutes. But I really want to make this clear distinction between modulation and mediation, because it's vital for anyone that's trying to modulate or mediate anything within their own brain. If any of you are interested in this oligoantigenic diet, as it relates to ADHD, and you want to explore a more recent study besides that classic 2011 Lancet study, that's rather controversial. There's a paper that was published in frontiers in psychiatry just last year, 2020. The title of the paper is, "Oligoantigenic diet improves children's ADHD rating scale scores reliably in added video rating." The added video rating is just that they're using an additional measure of focus and attention. Again, that's Frontiers in psychiatry, 2020, I'll put a link to it in the caption, and that's a more recent study for you to peruse. So we've talked about the neural circuits of focus and the chemistry of focus, but we haven't talked yet about what would make us better at focusing and what focusing better really is. So let's take a step back and think about how we focus and how to get better at focus and I'm going to share with you a tool for which there are terrific research data that will allow you in a single session to enhance your ability to focus in theory forever. What am I about to read you is from an excellent book that I recommend, if any of you are interested in neuroscience and things like meditation and default mode networks and things of that sort, the book is called, "Altered Traits." Science reveals how meditation changes your mind, brain and body and no, I'm not going to try and convince you to meditate. I'm going to share with you a small passage in the book that relates some research data related to focus that are very important. If you want to meditate, that's your choice. That's a separate matter. This is a book by Daniel Goleman and Richard Davidson and I should just mention that Goleman is a well-known author has written books on emotional intelligence and so forth. Richard Davidson is also a PhD. He's a professor of psychology and psychiatry, and he's at a University of Wisconsin Madison, he's done terrific work on brain states and modulation of brain states and so forth. What we're about to talk about is when attention works and when attention falters and what we are specifically going to talk about are what are called attentional blinks, not actual eye blinks. We're going to talk about that in a few minutes, but we're going to talk about attentional blinks. I'm paraphrasing here because Goleman and Davidson wrote about this so beautifully. I'd rather paraphrase from them than try and just make up a new way to say it that is less interesting or less good, but I want to credit them. Attentional blinks are really easy to understand, if you think about a where's Waldo task, you know this task where's Waldo where, there are a bunch of people and objects and things in a picture and somewhere in there is Waldo with the striped hat and the glasses and go skinny dude, and you have to find Waldo and so it's a visual search and it's visual search for an object that has distinct features, but is embedded in this ocean of other things that could easily be confused as Waldo. So you tend to look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, look, and then you find Waldo. Kids can do this they enjoy doing this. Adults may or may not enjoy it, but they can do it too. They find Waldo, when you find Waldo or when you search for a target in some other visual search task at that moment, your nervous system celebrates a little bit and it celebrates through the release of neurochemicals that make you feel good, you found it and you pause. Now, the pause is interesting because when you pause, what we know from many experiments is that in that moment of pause and mild celebration, however, mild you are not able to see another Waldo sitting right next to it. So what this means is in attending to something in searching and in identifying a visual target your attention blinked it shut off for a second and there's a more formal and more laboratory type way that we look at this. The more typical way to do this is to give someone a string of letters or a string of numbers and beforehand you tell them be on the lookout for the letters R and Z, okay? You're just going to watch this string of numbers go by and there will be a letter R in there, and there will be a letter Z in there and try and spot them both and what you find is when you present that string of numbers, and then they see the R, they see the R they register it consciously and they tend to miss the Z, just like in the Waldo type example. Now, of course the numbers are going by pretty quickly, but they can spot the R. They could also spot the Z, if you told them beforehand, just spot the Z and the numbers are moving through at the same rate in both conditions. So what that means is that in every case, you are capable of seeing the R or the Z it's when you try and see both that seeing the first one prevents you from seeing the second one, it's what we call an attentional blink. We do this all the time and people with ADHD tend to have many more attentional blinks than people that don't and this is true for children and for adults. This is an important point. So important that I want to emphasize it twice in case you attentionally blinked. If you see something that you're looking for, or you're very interested in something, you are definitely missing other information in part because you're over focusing on something and this leads to a very interesting hypothesis about what might go wrong in ADHD, where we've always thought that they cannot focus and yet we know they can focus on things they care very much about, well, maybe just maybe they are experiencing more attentional blinks than people who do not have ADHD and indeed, there are data now to support the possibility that that's actually what's happening and that should be exciting to anyone that has ADHD. It should also be exciting to anyone that cares about increasing their focus and their ability to attend. What this is saying is that these circuits, that underlie focus in our ability to attend and our ability to eliminate distraction, they aren't just failing to focus. That's just a semantic way of describing the outcome. They are over focusing on certain things and thereby missing other things. And so our distractability or the distractability of somebody with ADHD could exist because they are over focusing on certain elements and there are there for missing other elements that they should be attending to. So what they really need is this property that we call open monitoring. Now open monitoring is something that's described in the book that I just referred to and that typically is associated with people who have done a lot of meditation, so called Vipassana meditation, or have spent a lot of time learning how to do what's called open gaze visual analysis and open gaze thinking. But there's a simpler version of this that allows us to bypass all that. First of all, your visual system has two modes of processing. It can be highly focused, a soda straw view. So looking for the R in this string of numbers in the example that I just gave, or if you're very excited about something you're in that soda straw view of the world, and you're missing other things, okay, that's high levels of attention. However, there's also a property of your visual system that allows you to dilate your gaze, to be in so-called panoramic vision. Panoramic vision is something you can do right now, no matter where you are, and I can do it right now, you won't know that I'm doing it, but even though I'm still looking directly at you, I'm consciously dilating my gaze so that I can see the ceiling, the floor and the walls all around me. That panoramic vision is actually mediated by a separate stream or set of neural circuits going from the eye into the brain and it's a stream or set of circuits that isn't just wide angle view. It also is better at processing things in time. Its frame rate is higher. So you've seen slow motion video, and you've seen standard video, slow motion video gives you that slow motion look, because it's a higher frame rate. You're thin slicing time, okay? You can use panoramic vision to access the state that we call open monitoring. When people do that, they are able to attend to and recognize multiple targets within this string of numbers. They can see the R and they can see the Z and they can see additional things. So this is something that can be trained up and people can practice whether or not they have ADHD or not. What involves is learning how to dilate your gaze consciously, that's actually quite easy for most people, whether or not you wear corrective lenses or contacts or not you can consciously go into open gaze and then you can contract your field of view as well. There have also been studies done where people were taught to think in a particular way for a very short period of time, and that forever changed their ability to limit or reduce the number of these attentional blinks. There are now published accounts in the literature of a simple practice done for about 15 minutes, where subjects were asked to just sit quietly eyes closed and do what is sort of akin to meditation, but to not direct their mind into any particular state or place, but simply to think about their breathing and to focus on their so-called interoception, focus on how their body feels, their mind drifted to bring it back, okay? So it's basically meditation for about 15 minutes. That might not seem like a significant or unusual practice or that it would have any impact at all. But remarkably, just doing that once for 17 minutes, significantly reduced the number of attentional blinks that people would carry out. In other words, their focus got better in a near permanent way without any additional training. There's something about that practice of reducing the amount of visual information coming in and learning to pay attention to one's internal state, what we call interoception that allow them an awareness, such that when they needed to look for visual targets, when they need to focus on multiple things in sequence, they didn't experience the same number of attentional blinks and I should mention not incidentally as people age and their working memory gets worse and their ability to focus gets worse, the number of attentional blinks that they carry out goes up, and there are now studies exploring whether or not the simple meditation like practice of 15 to 20 minutes or so of sitting and just quietly resting and paying attention to one's breathing and internal state can also offset some of that age-related what is called cognitive decline. So what these data tell me is that regardless of whether or not you're a child or you're an adult, whether or not you have ADHD or not, whether or not you're experiencing age-related cognitive decline, or you would simply like to avoid age-related cognitive decline, a simple practice of taking 17 minutes sitting and paying attention to your internal state, just interocepting, registering your breathing, registering the contact of your skin with whatever surface you're on, can forever rewire your brain to be able to attend better and possibly even offset some of that age related attentional drift. Now, I don't expect anyone to start meditating regularly. I don't expect anyone to do anything they don't want to do, but I think most of us could handle one meditation's session of 17 minutes or so and so if ever there was a tool that stood to rewire our attentional circuitry in a powerful way. This seems to be it and in addition, the ability to engage in panoramic vision, to dilate our gaze, the so-called open monitoring that allows the brain to function in a way that it can detect more information faster, that's a powerful tool as well and the beauty of that tool is that it works the first time and it works every time. Now, how exactly it works is a little bit unclear. Is it for instance, orchestrating this synchrony or asynchrony between the default mode network and the task related networks we don't know. Those studies have not yet been carried out. Nonetheless, the effects are significant, they are long lasting and they appear to exist after just one session of this quiet 17 minute interoception, which to me makes it seem like a very worthwhile thing to do for everybody. So we just talked about attentional blinks, which are essentially blinks of thinking it's your mind shutting off for a moment and missing information. Now let's talk about actual blinks, the sort that you do with your eyelids. Now, this might come across as somewhat obvious, but you can do fast, what are called spontaneous blinks and they're always coordinated between the two eyes or you can do long blinks like when you go to sleep at night, you do one very long blink, and I'm not being facetious. When you go to sleep at night, you are shutting your eyelids and you are limiting the amount of information coming in and your perception of time starts to drift as you go into sleep. Your perception of time changes from very fast, at one moment to very slow meaning the frame rate at which you are analyzing information dreaming, et cetera, is variable when you were in sleep, sometimes it's very fast. Meaning you experienced things in slow motion. Sometimes it's very fast. In waking to your experience of time can sometimes be very fast sometimes be very slow. Typically the more alert you are, the higher the frame rate, your thin slicing your experience. You've probably had this happen. If you're ever very stressed and you're waiting for something or somebody, it seems like it takes forever because your frame rate is higher you're analyzing time more finely. Conversely, if you are very relaxed or even sleepy, you wake up and you have to think of all the things you have to do. It will seem like the world is going by very, very fast and that you are moving very slow. Time is going at the same rate, but your perception of time is what's changed. Believe it or not. Your perception of time is also changed on a rapid basis. Moment to moment basis by how often you blink. This is a well-established literature in the world of neuroscience that unlike the literature and claims about blinking and sociopathy, which have no basis, the science of blinking as it relates to time perception has some very good data to support it. I want to just emphasize one study in particular, which is quite appropriately titled, "Time dilates after spontaneous blinking." This is a paper that was published in current biology. The first author is Terhune, T-E-R-H-U-N-E. It's a wonderful paper. They examine the relationship between fluctuations in timing and blinking and to make a long story short what they found is that right after blinks, we reset our perception of time, okay? So blinks in that sense are a little bit like the curtain coming down on a scene between scenes in a play or takes in a movie, and they clap the clap thing, they started take in our, what do they say, action and then at the end they do the thing and they click it down and they say, it's a take that's one take when you blink it's a take, okay? Now what's interesting and will immediately make sense to you as to why this is important is that the rate of blinking is controlled by dopamine. So what this means is that dopamine is controlling attention. Blinks relate to attention and focus, and therefore the dopamine and blinking system is one way that you constantly modulate and update your perception of time and fortunately, it's also one that you can control. So the basic takeaway of this study was that blinking controls time perception, but also that levels of dopamine can alter your sense of time and stay with me here, and that blinking and dopamine are inextricably linked. They are working together to control your attention. When dopamine levels go up, people tend to overestimate how long something lasted, why? Because they are processing time more finely it's slow motion mode. When dopamine levels are lower, they tend to underestimate time intervals. Let's remember back to the very beginning of the episode, what's going on in people with ADHD, they are not good at managing their time, they tend to run late, or they are disorganized. They are not just disorganized in space, meaning in that physical space, around them, they're disorganized in time. Their dopamine is low, we know that as well and so they are underestimating time intervals and so it makes perfect sense that they would be late. It makes perfect sense that they would lose track of time or the ability to focus. This is really exciting because what it means is that children with ADHD, adults, with ADHD or people with normal levels of focus that want to improve their ability to focus can do so through a training that involves learning how often to blink and when, and how to keep their visual focus on a given target and it turns out this study has actually been done. There's a study again, I'll link to the study, entitled "Improvement of attention in elementary school students through fixation focused training activity." I won't go through all the details, but what they found was a short period of focusing on a visual target, allowed the school children to greatly enhance their ability to focus on other types of information and a significant component of the effect was due to the way that they were controlling the shutters on their eyes, their eyelids, and controlling their blinks. So what they did in this study is they had these kids focus their visual attention on some object that was relatively close, like their hand for a minute or so, which actually takes some effort if you try and do that, they were allowed to blink. However, it's known from other work that if people can consciously override the desire to blink, at least to the point where they feel like they have to, or else their eyes were dry out, that actually can increase attention even further and they had conditions where they would look at a point further across the room and even further across the room. It only took a few minutes each day to do this 30 seconds in one condition, or maybe a minute and then at another station of looking a little bit further out and a little bit further out, however, there was an important feature of this study that is definitely worth mentioning, which is before they did this visual focus, task or training, they did a series of physical movements with the kids so that the kids could sort of eliminate or move out some of their desire to move and would thereby enhance their ability to sit still. Now it's long been known that kids need a recess, they need time to run around and play and roll around, do whatever it is that they do in order to be able to sit still at all. Adults probably need this too, frankly, but kids need it more because the circuits in the brain that control reflexive movements and as we say, kind of rhythmic undulating behavior and things like that, that's an active suppression and kids have less of that circuitry built up until they hit about age 15 or 16. So they had the kids move around a bit and then do this focus training. That brings me to another treatment that's actively used nowadays in schools for kids with ADHD, but also is starting to be used by many kids and by parents in order to keep their kids focusing and not going crazy in the car or not acting out in general and that's the prevalence of these so-called fidgeter toys or things that kids can do actively and repetitively in order to move out some of their underlying reverberatory activity in their nervous system. So what you will find is that some kids with ADHD are now given a rubber band on their desk, literally a rubber band that's attached to their desk and they're able to pull on it, even snap it against the desk, if I had done that when I was a kid, I think my teachers were throw me out of class, but I think it's great that they're allowing them to do this now as a way of moving some of their physical energy out or engage their physical energy, rather, as opposed to trying to sit statue still all the time and attend and it turns out that does enhance these children's ability to focus mentally when they have some physical activity to attend to and it turns out it also can work for adults. I'll share with you I related anecdote because it illustrates the underlying mechanism. I've had the great privilege of being able to do a number of surgeries, brain surgeries during my career. So one thing you find when you do brain surgeries, is that the brain's pretty small regardless of the species that you're working on and you're in there and you're trying to do something very specific and the more you try and hold your hands really steady, the more they want to shake, all right? So it's not natural for any of our limbs to sit perfectly still, depending on how much coffee you had, how well rested you are and your sort of baseline level of autonomic arousal. Some of you may find that you can hold out your hand, absolutely rock solid, others will shake a little bit more. It doesn't mean you're if you're shaking, doesn't mean you're calm if you're still. What it relates to is the amount of what we call premotor activity, the number of commands to move that are being sent through the system and that's what I mean by reverberatory activity and it does seem that kids with ADHD and adults with ADHD have a lot of reverberatory activity in their nervous system and so that's that constant desire to move it's hard for them to sit still and therefore it's hard for them to attend, to harness their attention. When you do a surgery and you find that your hands are shaking, what you learn from your mentors, which I did and what works extremely well, whether or not you're doing a surgery or not, is that you simply tap your foot or you bounce your knee a little bit, which you might think would make your hand shake even more, but provided that it's subtle. What it does is it actually shuttle some of the activity from those premotor circuits to elsewhere in the body and then you're able to sit much more still with your hand, you're able to perform the surgery with much more precision. You are able to write with much better handwriting and for those of you who engage in public speaking, if you ever too nervous, that's why pacing while you public speak helps if you're nervous, that's why bouncing your knee behind the podium works as well. That's why nodding your head and gesticulating can help. It's not a matter of, "Moving energy out of the body." That doesn't actually happen, what it is you're engaging those premotor circuits that are sending through commands. It's like trying to stuff, a bunch of stuff through a funnel, and it creates this tension, so you're giving it an outlet for the neural circuitry to be able to move something so that you can keep other components of your body and your mental attention engaged and locked onto something what we call focus. One thing related to this whole business of blinking and focus and training yourself to focus and not blinking, et cetera, is that most all of the drugs, Ritalin, Adderall, and recreational drugs that increase dopamine, even coffee and tea and other forms of caffeine, they tend to make us blink less and when we get tired, we tend to blink more. Now this is sort of a duh, right? But being wide-eyed with excitement or fear or with your eyes, barely being able to keep them open, now it should make perfect sense that these shutters on the front of your eyes, they aren't just there for winking and they aren't just there for cosmetic purposes. They are there to regulate the amount of information going into your nervous system and they're there to regulate how long you are bringing information into your nervous system and in what bins, how widely or finely you are binning time is set by how often you blink and how widely or specifically you are grabbing attention from the visual world is set by whether or not you're viewing things very specifically like a cross area through a soda straw view like this, or whether or not you were in this panoramic sort of whole environment mode, this kind of fisheye lens or wide angle lens mode and in fairness to the pharmacology and the circuitry, while dopamine and heightened levels of alertness and excitement tend to make us blink less and attend more. There's actually a study that's looked at the other neurochemical systems and drugs and how those relate to blinking and so this will all be obvious by the title of the paper I'm about to share with you. This is a paper entitled, "Decreased spontaneous eyeblink rates in chronic cannabis users, evidence for stride or cannabinoid, dopamine interactions." Okay, I'm not going to go into all the details here, but one thing that is somewhat surprising is that many people with ADHD use or abuse cannabis, you might think, well, why would they do that? Because I thought that a increase in dopamine is actually what's going to lead to heightened levels of attention and that's what these people in children crave. Well, it turns out that cannabis also increases dopamine transmission in the brain, but because of the other chemicals, it increases namely serotonin and some components of the cannabinoid and opioid system, it creates that kind of alert, but mellow feel and again, here I'm not a proponent of this, I personally am not a THC or cannabis user. It's just not my thing and obviously it's illegal some places and so you have to determine that for yourself it does have medical purposes in some places it is legal, but THC increases dopamine and increases neurochemicals that can also create a state of calm. So it's that sort of middle ground and this paper has a beautiful demonstration whereby not just while people are using cannabis, but depending on how long they've been using cannabis across their lifespan, the rates of eye blinking change. So if you look at the number of years that people have been using cannabis on a regular basis, either daily or up to excuse me, weekly, or up to daily, what you find is that for people that have not been using cannabis at all, or have only been using it for about two years, their rates of eye blinks are much higher than people who've been using it chronically for 10 years. In other words, people who may be using cannabis for 10 years, don't blink very often at all. Now cannabis has well known effects in depleting memory, but it does seem to engage the focus and blinking system in a way that increases focus. So basically what I'm saying is marijuana seems to increase people's focus, but then they can't remember what they were focusing on. Something I'd like to discuss just briefly is the so-called interoceptive awareness that's present in people with ADHD, both children and adults. Interoceptive awareness is one sense of one's own internal state heartbeat, breathing contact of skin with a given surface, et cetera. For a long time, there was this hypothesis, this idea that people with ADHD, were just not in touch with how they felt that somehow they weren't registering all the stuff that was going on inside them changes in heart rate and so forth and so they were behaving in a way that was dysregulated or appear dysregulated, and that if they could just learn to attend to their internal state better, that somehow they would function better in the world. Now, before we described a process, literally a 17 minute interoceptive exercise that does seem to lead to improvements in one's ability to focus for a longer period of time. However, it's very unlikely that that was due to increasing interoceptive awareness per se. It probably wasn't because people gain a much heightened or improved ability to understand what's going on internally. In fact, you can imagine how that might actually prevent one's ability to pay attention to things in the outside world. So while there is benefit to just sitting there and being in stillness, as they say, or focusing on one's breathing and internal state for sake of then accessing information in the external world, a really nice study called interoceptive awareness and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder explored whether or not interoceptive awareness was different in people with ADHD or did not have ADHD and the findings were essentially that there's no difference that people with ADHD, children, and adults, they are aware of what's going on inside them just as much as anyone else's and the typical measure of interoceptive awareness is one's ability to count their own heartbeats. This is actually challenging for some individuals and very easy for other individuals, regardless of their attentional capacity. Some people just can really feel their heartbeat without taking their pulse other people cannot and these studies are pretty straightforward to do. You ask people to sit there and to count their heartbeats, and then you are monitoring their heartbeats and you get to gauge how accurate they are. So it's important to understand that people with ADHD are in touch with how they feel. It's really a question of whether or not they can take the demands that are placed upon them and enter a cognitive state of mental state that allows them to access the information they need to access in other words, whether or not they can focus, but it is absolutely wrong to think that the child that's getting up 11 times during a short six minute interaction at the table, or whether or not a child who somehow has to venture off every moment or a coworker of yours who's an adult who's constantly fidgeting or moving things around that somehow they are unaware that they are oblivious, they're not oblivious to how they feel. Chances are they're very challenged in the situations that they're in and they're doing everything they can to try and regulate their attention. So I think it's an important study to highlight because it really underscores the fact that something else is going on and that something else has everything to do with this ability to coordinate these tasks directed networks, and to coordinate that in the proper way with that default mode network and that is a process as you now know, that's regulated exquisitely by certain neurochemicals and in particular the neurochemicals, dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin, and a fourth one I'd like to throw into the mix, which is acetylcholine, which is very vital for cognitive focus. So now I want to switch back to talking about some of the drugs that are typically used to access those systems, prescription drugs and I want to talk about some of the new and emerging non-prescription approaches to increasing the levels of dopamine, acetylcholine and serotonin in the brain using various supplement type compounds, because several of them are showing really remarkable efficacy in excellent peer reviewed studies. So before moving to some of the newer atypical compounds and things sold over the counter, I'd like to just briefly return to the classic drugs that are used to treat ADHD. These are the ones I mentioned earlier, methylphenidate also called Ritalin, Modafinil or armodafinil is another one and Adderall, again, all of these work by increasing levels of dopamine and norepinephrine. Typically they're taken orally in pill form, or sometimes in capsule form the dosages that are appropriate vary, according to severity of the condition for a given person and the age of the person. This is a complicated landscape for each individual. They have to figure out the pharmacology that's best for them. Some individuals are even layering long or time to release Ritalin with Adderall in smaller doses, it can get quite complex or it can be quite straightforward if you are really interested in these drugs and how they work and you'd like to get a glance at a table of all the results from all the studies of which there are now hundreds, there's an excellent review about these drugs and their use and their comparison to similarly structured drugs in particular MDMA and cocaine and amphetamine, meaning Street Amphetamine to really illustrate the similarities of action and some of the problems associated with long-term use. I don't expect you to read this article in full I'm here so that you don't have to go read these articles, but in case you want a ton of information, the paper is Esposito et al Frontiers and bio-sciences, it's an excellent, excellent review of the entire literature. It is quite long. I can put a link to that study in our caption, and it essentially describes all the studies that have been done, peer reviewed and published, and it refers to these drugs in an interesting way. It doesn't just refer these drugs as for treatment of ADHD. It actually refers to them using language that ordinarily I'm not very fond of, but I'll agree to here, which is so-called smart drugs or nootropics. It also covers caffeine, which again as I mentioned earlier, increases dopamine norepinephrine and to some extent serotonin, but what I like about this review so much is that in putting, these drugs of abuse, methamphetamine, and cocaine, right alongside these drugs, like Ritalin and Adderall and also caffeine, we start to realize that the distinction between drugs of abuse and the distinction between drugs of treatment is actually a very fine and sometimes even a blurry line and in thinking about whether or not one wants to use these prescription, I want to emphasize prescription, not drugs of abuse, but prescription drugs for treatment of one's own attentional capacity. I think it is important to understand the extent to which they all carry more or less the same side effects. The one exception being caffeine caffeine side effects can be anxiety if you ingest too much of it, insomnia, if you drink it too late in the day, but typically it will not cause the major side effects of the other drugs, such as high propensity for addiction and abuse. Amphetamines of any kind as well as cocaine can cause sexual side effects because they're vasoconstrictors. So, men have trouble achieving erection, there can often be the intense desire or libido for sex, but an inability to actually perform. So that's an issue with any kind of stimulant. So these drugs are not without their consequences. In addition, and here I'd lump caffeine back into the mix. In addition, they almost all carry cardiac effects, right? They increase heart rate, but they also have effects on constriction of blood vessels and arteries and veins and so forth in ways that can create cardiovascular problems. Now, caffeine is a bit of a complicated one. I talked about this on a podcast long ago, but I'll just remind you that it turns out that if you are caffeine adapted, in other words, if you are used to drinking caffeine then the ingestion of caffeine, most often will cause vasodilation who actually allow more blood flow through. However, if you are not caffeine adapted, it will cause vasoconstriction due to an increased stress response. So if you're familiar with caffeine, caffeine can actually have a little bit more of a relaxation response although if you drink enough of it, it will make you amped up. These other drugs, almost always lead to vasoconstriction, increased heart rate dilation of the pupils, less blinking, heightened levels of attention, which looks very much like stress and at its extremes looks very much like the effects of street drugs, like cocaine and amphetamine. Because of the large amounts of dopamine that released in the brain. People tend to crave that state over and over and yet with each subsequent use are able to get less and less of that euphoric feeling or that really, really focused feeling. So one thing that's being explored quite extensively now in the treatment of ADHD are drug schedules. Whether or not people should take Adderall every day or every other day, whether or not they should take it only every once in a while, whether or not young children can take it just a few times and engage in behavioral training of the sort that I talked about before, where they're doing, maybe it's a 17 minute meditation type exercise, but more likely it would be the movement followed by the visual focusing, cause that's only done for 20 or 30 or 60 seconds. Why would you do that? Well in a chemically enhanced state, your brain is more plastic. The circuits are able to modify and learn better. That's the optimal time to engage in focus in a very deliberate way. So just taking a drug and expecting focus to just work at any point and being able to turn focus on and off at will, that's an unrealistic expectation, right? More likely the best use of things like Adderall, Modafinil, armodafinil and Ritalin is going to be to combine those treatments with behavioral exercises that actively engage the very circuits that you're trying to train up and enhance and then perhaps I want to highlight perhaps tapering off those drugs so that then one can use those circuits without any need for chemical intervention. So despite any controversy that might be out there, I think it's fair to say that the consumption of omega-3 fatty acids can positively modulate the systems for attention and focus. So then the question becomes how much EPA, how much DHA does that differ for, what's helpful for depression, et cetera and actually it does differ in reviewing the studies for this it appears that a threshold level of 300 milligrams of DHA turns out to be an important inflection point. So typically fish oils or other sources of omega-3s will have DHA and EPA and typically it's the EPA that's harder to get at sufficient levels, meaning you have to take quite a lot of fish oil in order to get above that 1000 milligram or 2000 milligram threshold to improve mood and other functions. But for sake of attention, there are 10 studies that have explored this in detail and while the EPA component is important, the most convincing studies point to the fact that getting above 300 milligrams per day of DHA is really where you start to see the attentional effects. Now, fortunately, if you're getting sufficient EPA for sake of mood and other biological functions, almost without question, you're getting 300 milligrams or more of DHA. So that usually checks that box just fine. What's interesting is that there's another compound phosphatidylserine that has been explored for its capacity to improve the symptoms of ADHD. Again, I don't think this is any direct way, but rather in a modulatory way, but it appears that phosphatidylserine taken for two months for 200 milligrams per day, was able to reduce the symptoms of ADHD in children. It has not been looked at in adults yet as, at least as far as I know, but that this effect was greatly enhanced by the consumption of omega-3 fatty acids. So now we're starting to see synergistic effects of omega-3 fatty acids and phosphatidylserine again that was 200 milligrams per day. This is something that sold over the counter in capsule form, at least in the U.S. there were two studies, both were double-blind studies. I carried out for anywhere from one to six months on both boys and girls and it really was boys and girls, not men and women. This was kids age one to six or seven to 12, and it was a fairly large number of subjects. So 147 subjects in one case in 36 in the other, the takeaway is that getting sufficient levels of EPA and particularly there's 300 milligram threshold of DHA, plus, if you are interested in it and it's right for you, 200 milligrams of phosphatidylserine can be an important augment for improving the symptoms of ADHD. You'll also find literature out there and many claims about so-called Ginkgo Biloba, which has been shown to have minor effects in improving the symptoms of ADHD, not nearly as effective as Ritalin and Adderall. Ginkgo Biloba is not appropriate for many people. I am one such person, I don't have ADHD, but when I'd taken Gingko, even at very low doses, I get absolutely splitting headaches. Some people do not experience those headaches, but it's known to have very potent vasoconstrictive and vasodilating properties that vary depending on when you took the compound. So for those of you that are exploring Ginkgo Biloba, and you will see a lot of claims about Ginkgo Biloba for attention in ADHD definitely take the vasodilation vasoconstriction headache issue into consideration. So I'd like to talk about the drug Modafinil and the closely related drug armodafinil that's AR Modafinil. Because Modafinil and armodafinil are gaining popularity out there, both for treatment of ADHD and narcolepsy, but also for communities of people that are trying to stay awake long periods of time. So it's actively used in the military by first responders, it's gaining popularity on college campuses and people are using it more and more as an alternative to Adderall and Ritalin and excessive amounts of coffee. It does increase focus and to a dramatic extent, Modafinil typically was very expensive, I don't know if it's still this expensive, but when one has a prescription for it, it could still cost as much as eight or $900 even $1000 a month. Armodafinil is a far less expensive version, that's chemically slightly different than Modafinil. Regardless of price people are taking Modafinil and armodafinil. Want to emphasize that unlike Ritalin and Adderall, Modafinil and armodafinil are weak dopamine re-uptake inhibitors, and that's how they lead to increases in dopamine. So, whereas Ritalin and Adderall, amphetamine, and cocaine lead to big increases in dopamine also through re-uptake mechanisms and so forth Modafinil is a weaker dopamine re-uptake stimulator and so what that means is that it leaves more dopamine around to be active at the synopsis, the gaps between neurons, however, it also activates other systems. It acts on the orexin system, which is actually a peptide that we talked about in the episode on hunger, because it regulates hunger and appetite, and it regulates sleepiness and feelings of sleepiness. In fact, the, excuse me, orexin also called hypocretin system, the orexin hypocretin system is what's disrupted in narcolepsy. That was the important discovery of my colleagues, Emmanuel Mignot and Seiji Nishino at Stanford some years ago, they identified the biological basis of narcolepsy and it's a disruption in the so orexin hypocretin system and Modafinil is one of the primary treatments for narcolepsy. It also has these other effects on the dopamine system and on the norepinephrine system, even though it doesn't lead to quite as intense levels of dopamine and arousal and focus, it does have the property of raising levels of attention and focus, and that's why people are using it. So it's a somewhat milder form of Adderall. Armodafinil for some people works as well as Modafinil and as I mentioned before, it's much lower cost for other people it doesn't. I have an experience, meaning I do have an experience that I'll share with you with armodafinil. A few years ago, I was suffering from jet lag, really terribly and I was traveling overseas. I went to a meeting to give a talk, I took half of the prescribed dose of armodafinil. It was prescribed to me. I took that half dose and I gave my lecture and then I stayed around to answer questions and then four hours later, a friend of mine came up to me and said, you've been talking for four and a half hours, and they're only a few people still here. Luckily there were still a few people be a lot weirder, if the room was completely empty, 'cause it wasn't being recorded. So I have firsthand knowledge of the sorts of cognitive effects that it can create. I personally would not want to be in that state for sake of studying or learning or for doing this podcast, for instance and I can honestly say that today, all I've adjusted is some coffee and some Yerba latte tea and some water. I'm not on any of the compounds that I've described during the course of today's episode. You might ask why I took half the recommended dose of armodafinil and the reason is that I'm somebody who's fairly hypersensitive to medication of any kind, what you find if you look in the literature, is that about 5% of people are hyper hyper sensitive to medication. They require far lower doses of any medication than other people in order to experience the same effects. I'm somebody that I think has, or modest a hyper if that sort of oxymoronic statement, but a modest hypersensitivity to medication. So I've almost always been able to get by, on taking less of whatever was prescribed for me and feel just fine or in this case to feel like it was still too much, it turned out that the right dose of armodafinil for me was zero milligrams. Now you may notice that I haven't talked much about acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that at the neuron to muscle connections, the so called neuromuscular junctions is involved in generating muscular contractions of all kinds for all movements. Acetylcholine is also released from two sites in the brain. So a little bit of nomenclature here again, feel free to ignore the nomenclature, but there is a collection of neurons in your brain stem that send projections forward, kind of like a sprinkler system that's very diffuse to release acetylcholine and those neurons reside in an area or a structure that's called the pedunculopontine nucleus, the PPN and then there's a separate collection of neurons in the basal forebrain called unimaginatively nucleus basalis the nucleus at the base and they also hose the brain with acetylcholine, but in a much more specific way. So one is sort of like a sprinkler system and the other one is more like a fire hose to a particular location and those two sources of acetylcholine, collaborate to activate particular locations in the brain, and really bring about a tremendous degree of focus to whatever is happening at those particular synapses. So it could be a focus on visual information or auditory information, if you're listening closely to what I'm saying right now, and you just heard closely step out from the rest of my sentence, no doubt there was acetylcholine released at the sites in your brain where the neurons that represent your recognition of the word closely occurred, okay? So now you have an example and you have an understanding and hopefully a picture in your mind of how all this is working, not surprisingly then drugs that increase cholinergic or acetycholine transmission will increase focus and cognition. One such compound is so-called alpha GPC, which is a form of choline and increases acetycholine transmission dosages as high as 1200 milligrams per day, which has a very high dosage spread out, typically it's 300 or 400 milligrams spread out throughout the day have been shown to offset some of the effects of age-related cognitive decline, improved cognitive functioning people that don't have age-related cognitive decline that's a very high dose. Typically when people are using alpha-GPC to study or to enhance learning of any kind, they will take somewhere between 300 and 600 milligrams that's more typical. Again, you have to check with your doctor, you have to decide if the safety margins are appropriate for you obviously you'll want to check that out, but alpha-GPC is effective in creating more focused by way of this cholinergic system, It stimulates acetylcholine release from both of those locations, the PPN in the back of the brain and nucleus basalis in the front of the brain. There are two other over the counter compounds that are in active use out there for treatment of ADHD and in use for simply trying to improve focus and the first one is L-Tyrosine it's an amino acid that acts as a precursor to the neuromodulator dopamine and now knowing everything you know about dopamine, attention and the circuits involved, it should come as no surprise as to why people are exploring the use of L-tyrosine for that purpose. L-tyrosine does lead to increases in dopamine. They are fairly long lived and L-tyrosine can improve one's ability to focus, however, the dosaging can be very tricky to dial in. Sometimes it makes people feel too euphoric or too jittery or too alert that they are then unable to focus well. So the dosage ranges are huge, you see evidence for 100 milligrams all the way up to 1200 milligrams. It's something that really should be approached with caution, especially for people that have any kind of underlying psychiatric or mood disorder, because dysregulation of the dopamine system is central to many of the mood disorders such as depression, but also especially mania bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, things of that sort. So it's something that really should be approached with caution, nonetheless, in exploring what's out there and even some studies online that were done in either animal studies or human studies, it's clear that L-tyrosine is being explored for that purpose as is PEA and Phenethylamine, which is a essentially PEA, but some related compounds. So there's a whole class of dopaminergic or dopamine stimulating supplements that people are using to try and get their dopamine levels up and again, it's kind of a fine line between too little enough and too much. If you want to get the literature on those two compounds there, I will refer you to this great website at examine.com just as it sounds and you can put in L-tyrosine or PEA, and you can get the details on that. But I highly recommend also going to their section on ADHD to see how those particular comment OENs relate specifically to ADHD and cognitive focus. And last but not least in terms of these different compounds, I do want to mention the Racetams. These are somewhat esoteric and probably most of you haven't heard about them, but some of you probably know a lot about them and they are becoming more popular. They go by names like New pepped and things of that sort. The Racetams. are illegal in certain countries. They are gray market in other countries, and they are sold over the counter in this country, in the U.S. so they have different margins for safety you definitely need to consult your doctor, especially if you have ADHD, but new pepped has been shown when taken, at 10 milligrams, twice daily can be more effective than some of the other Racetams. What is Noopept? Noopept taps into the cholinergic system, the acetylcholine system in ways, very similar to alpha-GPC, but seems to have a slightly higher affinity for some of the receptors involved and can lead to those heightened states of cognitive capacity and there are these studies one in particular, comparative studies of new pepped, Racetams in the treatment of patients with mild cognitive disorders and brain diseases of vascular and traumatic origin. That's a mouthful. What this study basically points to is the fact that people who are experiencing some degree of inability to focus due to prior concussion or some vascular event, a stroke or a schemey of any kind, because neurons need blood, when the blood supply is cut off to neurons, or when there's a bleed in the brain. Subsequent to that, often there are challenges in maintaining focus. This is very common for people who have done sports, where there's a lot of running into each other with your head like rugby football, hockey, and so forth, but also people who have experienced head blows or often overlooked is the fact that most traumatic head injury is not actually from sports, even football it's from things like construction work from high-impact work of that kind. So there does seem to be some efficacy of new Pepped and Racetams. and things like it. It's an emerging area and as I mentioned in the U.S. these things are sold over the counter. Again, you have to figure out if it's right for you, but they are beginning to show some promise, and I'm intrigued by them because of the way that they tap into the cholinergic system, which is both directly involved in focus, and the ability to focus, but is also important for things related to age-related cognitive decline. So a decline in cholinergic transmission or acetylcholine as we call it in the brain is one of the things associated with cognitive decline and it does seem that increasing cholinergic transmission can offset some of that cognitive decline and perhaps even more so in conditions such as vascular damage or concussion to the brain. If you're interested in atypical treatments for ADHD compounds or improve focus and related themes, and you like reading about this stuff, there's an excellent review article that I can refer you to it's by Ahn et al, AHN it was published in 2016 so it's a little bit behind the times, although it's surprisingly comprehensive given that, which lines up all the various drugs that I've discussed, Racetams., and Adderall and Ritalin, and various forms of dopaminergic agents and cholinergic agents spells out whether or not they are sold over the counter by prescription, and really lines them up in all their effects, their drawbacks, et cetera. I'll refer you to that study. It's available in its full length form online for free it's Hen et al the journal is neuro plasticity, neural plasticity, 2016 should be very easy to find if you put those keywords in, and while it is a review, it is a very comprehensive review and if you're really into this stuff, and you also want to learn a thing or two about how these things interact with neurofeedback, et cetera, there's some information in there as well. I know I've already covered a lot of information, but there is one more category of technology for the treatment of ADHD and for enhancement of focus in anyone that I would like to emphasize and that's transcranial magnetic stimulation. Transcranial magnetic stimulation also called TMS is achieving increasing popularity nowadays for the treatment of all sorts of neurologic conditions and psychiatric conditions. It is a non-invasive tool, it involves taking a coil it's a device with a coil that's placed over particular locations in the brain, and then sends magnetic stimulation into the brain and it can actually pass through the skull without having to drill through the skull and nowadays can be used to both lower the amount of activity or increase the amount of activity in specific brain areas. It's spatial, precision is not remarkable. That doesn't mean it's not of use, but it is not a super fine green tool, okay? It's not a canon, but it's also not a needle. It is somewhere in between. It can direct the activity of particular brain regions at particular depths and as I mentioned, it can increase or decrease that activity. So for instance, I've had a TMS coil placed on my head, not for therapeutic purposes, even it was, I wouldn't tell you, but rather just for, well, I'm a neuroscientist and I worked in a lab with one for entertainment, exploratory purposes, please don't do this at home. It was placed over my motor cortex, which generates voluntary action and it was a coil that at that time could only inhibit neurons and so what I was doing as I was moving objects around on a table, just like I am now, it was actually a pencil, not a pen and I was tapping the pencil and then the TMS coil was turned on and for the life of me, I could not move that pencil, okay? Because it was inhibiting my upper motor neurons in the portion of my cortex that controls voluntary activity. As soon as the coil was turned off, I could return to tapping the pencil again, nowadays it's possible to stimulate motor cortex or any area of the brain with some degree of precision that could create the impulse to move without actually making the decision to move. So you can literally engage certain neural circuits and therefore behaviors and certain thought and emotional patterns by way of transcranial magnetic stimulation. This has far reaching and vast implications, as you can probably imagine in discussing ADHD with a colleague that uses TMS, what they are doing is they are taking the TMS coil to children and adults that have ADHD, and they're using it to stimulate the portions of the prefrontal cortex that we talked about earlier that engage task directed focused states. So rather than using a drug that generally increases dopamine, and some of the other chemicals involved there you using directed TMS stimulation of the circuits and fortunately, I was quite relieved to hear this, they are combining that with a focused learning task. So they're literally teaching the brain to learn in a noninvasive way, no drug at all and right now there are experiments clinical trials going on, comparing TMS of this sort to the drug treatments of the sort that we described earlier that engaged these circuits through pharmacologic mechanisms. So very exciting times for TMS, very exciting times for pharmacology related to ADHD and for enhancing focus in general and when I say very exciting times, I mean, no drug is perfect, but the constellation of drugs that's out there is getting much larger, but because they tap into different aspects of their circuitry, I do think that we are well on our way to identifying the ideal combinations of drug treatments, technological treatments, and behavioral paradigms for increasing focus in both children and adults with ADHD. And as a final final point, I also want to mention something about technologies that are making it harder for all of us to focus, regardless of whether or not we have pre-existing ADHD or not. You can probably guess where this is going. Everybody nowadays seems to have a smartphone. I'm sure there are a few individuals out there that don't have a smartphone. Nonetheless, most people have them. Most kids want one, as soon as they can get them and they are small, they grab our attention entirely. But within that small box of attention, there are millions of attentional windows scrolling by, right? So just because it's one device that we look at does not mean that we are focused, we are focused on our phone, but because of the way, in which context switches up so fast within the phone, it's thought that the brain is struggling now to leave that rapid turnover of context, right? Many, many shows, many, many Instagram pages, many, many Twitter feeds many, many websites. Basically the whole world, at least in virtual format is available within that small box. Unlike any other technology humans have ever dealt with before, even though there are trillions infinite number of bits of information in the actual physical world, your attentional window, that aperture of constriction and dilating that visual window is the way in which you cope with all that overwhelming information typically. Well within the phone, your visual aperture is set to a given width it's about this big, typically the phone seem to be getting bigger, but nonetheless, it's about that big and within there, your attentional window is grabbing it near infinite number of bits of information, colors, movies. If a picture is worth 1000 words, a movie is worth a billion pictures, the brain loves visual motion and so the question is, does that sort of interaction on a regular basis lead to deficits in the types of attention that we need in order to perform well in work, in school, relationships, et cetera and the short answer is yes, it does appear so we are inducing a sort of ADHD and while the studies on this are ongoing because prominent use of smartphones really took off right around 2010 and we're only in 2021 longstanding studies take time, which is essentially to say the same thing as long standing. There are some studies and one in particular that I'd like to highlight one was actually carried out pretty early in 2014. This is a study that explored smartphone use at the time they called it mobile phone use, but smartphone use and inattention, difficulties in attending in 7,102 adolescents that's a huge study, a population based cross-sectional study and you will be probably surprised and somewhat dismayed to hear that in order to avoid this decrease in attentional capacity, adolescents needed to use their smartphone for less than 60 minutes per day, in order to stay focused and centered on their other tasks. Otherwise they started to really run into significant issues. So 60 minutes is not much, I've a feeling that most young people are using their phone more than 60 minutes per day, I know I am. I think for adults, the number's probably higher meaning if you're an adult, I'm going to just extrapolate from what I read in this study. It seems that probably two hours a day on the phone would be the upper limit beyond which you would probably experience pretty severe attentional deficits. I'm a big fan of Cal Newport who wrote the book "Deep work." He's also written an excellent book, "A world without Email." I've never met him, but I'm a huge admirer of his work and I will paraphrase something that he said far more eloquently than I ever could, which is that the brain does not do well with constant context switching, meaning it can do it, but it diminishes our capacity to do meaningful work of any other kind. And so Cal, as I understand is very he's our computer science professor at Georgetown, by the way, is very structured and very disciplined in his avoidance of cell phone use. I think we're all striving to do that. I'm not here to tell you what to do, but I think whether or not you have ADHD or not, if you're an adolescent limiting your smartphone use to 60 minutes per day or less and if you are an adult to two hours per day or less is going to be among the very best ways to maintain, just to maintain your ability to focus at whatever level you can now and as I always say, most of the things that we get recognized for in life success in life, in every endeavor, whether or not it's school relationships, sport, creative works of any kind are always proportional to the amount of focus that we can bring that activity. It is important to rest of course, to get proper sleep. But I stand behind that statement and I leave you with that study about attention and cell phones and how cell phones are indeed eroding our attentional capacities. So I realized I covered a lot of information about ADHD and the biology of focus and how to get better at focusing. We talked about the behavioral and psychological phenotypes of ADHD. We talked about the underlying neural circuitry. We also talked about the neurochemistry and we talked about the various prescription drug treatments that are aimed at that neurochemistry and aimed at increasing focus in children and adults with ADHD. We also talked about over the counter compounds, the role of particular types of diets and elimination diets and we talked about interactions between these various features in dictating outcomes for ADHD and enhancing focus in general, we also talked a little bit about emerging neurotechnologies and how certain technologies like the smartphone are no doubt hindering our ability to focus and put us at greater risk of developing ADHD at all ages. I do acknowledge the irony and somewhat the contradiction of doing a two hour plus episode on ADHD If indeed, people who are watching this have challenges with attention, I want to emphasize that this podcast, like all of our podcast episodes are timestamped for a specific reason. They are designed to be digested in whatever batch one chooses, right? You don't have to watch or listen to the entire thing all at once however, if you've gotten to this point in the podcast, I want to thank you. I do hope that you've learned a lot about this condition. I hope you've also learned a lot about your own capacity to focus and things that you can do to enhance your focus. We even talked about a tool that takes just one 17 minute session to enhance your ability to focus thereafter, presumably forever. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel that really helps us. In addition, in the comment section on YouTube, you can leave a suggestions for future podcast guests and suggestions for future podcast topics that we may have not covered, or that you'd like to see covered in the future. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify and on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us a comment and up to a five-star review. In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, that's a terrific way to support us and for those of you that would like to support research on stress, neurobiology and human performance, you can go to hubermanlab.stanford.edu, and there you can make a tax deductible donation for research on neurobiology in my laboratory. In addition, we have a Patreon it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support the podcast at any level that you like. During today's episode we talked a lot about supplement based compounds. If you're interested in supplements and you want to see the supplements that I personally take, you can go to Thorn that's T-H-O-R-N-E slash the letter U slash Huberman and you can see everything that I take and you can get 20% off any of those supplements or if you navigate into the Thorn site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorn makes, supplements aren't for everybody, you by no means have to take supplements. But if you are going to take supplements, it's important that you take supplements from a source that's reputable and which the ingredients are very high quality and in which the amount of the ingredients that listed on the bottle actually matches what's in the bottle. That's why we partnered with Thorn because they have the highest levels of stringency in terms of quality and specificity of the ingredients. And finally, I want to thank you for your time and your attention, and as always thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 311 ---
Video ID: 2XGREPnlI8U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XGREPnlI8U
Title: Healthy Eating & Eating Disorders - Anorexia, Bulimia, Binging
Published: 2021-09-06 12:00:02 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss what drives hunger and satiety, and the role our brain, stomach,  fat and hormones play in regulating hunger and turning off the desire to eat more. I also address how protein is assimilated better early in the day than it is later in the day, and why those using intermittent fasting might want to shift their feeding window to earlier in the day.

Then I delve into the topic of disorders of eating: Anorexia Nervosa, where people starve themselves and Bulimia Nervosa where people binge and purge their food. I discuss some common myths about Anorexia such as the role of media images increasing the rates of anorexia and the myth of the "perfectionist" anorexic. I also review the symptoms, and the brain and chemical systems disrupted in this condition. I explain how anorexics become hyperaware of the fat content of foods and develop reflexive habits of fat-hyperawareness. Then I discuss the most effective treatments ranging from family-based models to those that target the habitual nature of low-fat/calorie food choices. I also discuss new more experimental clinical trials on MDMA, Psilocybin and Ibogaine for Anorexia, and both their promise and risks.

I review the latest work on binge eating disorder and brain stimulation, drug treatments and thyroid disruption in Bulimia and why the treatments for Bulimia are so similar to those for ADHD. Finally, I discuss "cheat days," body dysmorphia and the growing list of novel forms of eating disorders start to finish. As always, science and science-based tools are discussed.

Thank you to our sponsors:
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Support Research in Huberman Lab at Stanford:
https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join Newsletter - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Ingesting Protein in the Morning Supports Muscle Maintenance & Growth: https://bit.ly/3DPlms7

Studies Using Virtual Reality to Explore Eating & Hunger & Body Image: 
https://bit.ly/3BGaDya

https://bit.ly/2WWGRq8

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction: Fasting, & Defining Healthy Eating
00:08:55 Morning Protein Is Important 
00:22:04 Sponsors
00:26:29 Defining & Diagnosing Eating Disorders
00:29:00 Anorexia Nervosa (Overview & Myths)
00:33:44 Bulimia (Overview & Myths)
00:37:35 Binge Eating Disorders, EDNOS, OSFEDS, Pica
00:39:44 What is Hunger? What is Satiety?
00:42:00 Neuronal & Hormonal “Accelerators & Brakes” on Eating
00:46:17 Fat, Leptin & Fertility & Metabolic Dysfunctions in Obesity
00:50:30 Why We Overeat
00:55:30 Homeostasis & Reward Systems/Decisions 
00:59:58 Anorexia
01:04:28 The Cholesterol Paradox
01:06:13 Psychological vs. Biological/Genetic Factors in Anorexia
01:09:44 Chemical Imbalances, Serotonergic Treatments
01:12:56 Altered Habits & Rewards in Anorexia: Hyperacuity for Fat Content
01:18:28 Brain Areas for Reward Based Decision Making vs. Habits
01:24:06 Habit-Reward Circuits Are Flipped in Anorexics: Reward for Deprivation
01:28:30 How Do You Break a Habit? 
01:33:23 Family Based Models, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
01:35:39 MDMA, Psilocybin, Clinical Trials, Ibogaine 
01:40:35 Anabolic vs. Catabolic Exercise, Spontaneous Movements, NEAT
01:43:23 Distorted Self Image in Anorexia 
01:47:54 Bulimia & Binge-Eating, “Cheat Days”, Thyroid Hormone
01:53:05 Inhibitory Control, Impulsivity, Adderall, Wellbutrin
01:58:00 Direct Brain Stimulation: Nucleus Accumbens
02:04:28 Anorexia/Reward. vs Bulimia/Binging  
02:05:45 Healthy Eating Revisited
02:10:55 Synthesis, Body Dysmorphias
02:14:15 Support: Podcast, & Research Studies


Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. - I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we are going to talk all about healthy and disordered eating. And indeed, we are going to talk about clinical eating disorders, such as anorexia, bulimia, and binge eating disorder, as well as some other related eating disorders. However, before we get into this material, I want to emphasize that today's discussion will include what it is to have a healthy relationship with food. We're going to talk about metabolism. We're going to talk about how eating frequency and what one eats influences things like appetite and satiety, as well as whether or not we have a healthy, psychological relationship to food and our body weight and so-called body composition, the ratio of muscle to fat, to bone, et cetera. So, as we march into this conversation, I'd like to share with you some interesting and what I believe are important findings in the realm of nutrition and human behavior. I know these days, many people are excited about or curious about so-called intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting is as the name implies, simply restricting one's feeding behavior, eating to a particular phase of the 24 hour or so-called circadian cycle. Other forms of intermittent fasting involve not eating for extended periods of time for an entire days, or some people will extend to two days or three days typically. And hopefully they will drink water during those times, sometimes referred to as water fasting, which means that they are ingesting fluids. And hopefully they are ingesting electrolytes such as salt, potassium and magnesium as well, because well one can survive for some period of time without ingesting calories, it is extremely important to continue to ingest plenty of fluids and electrolytes. And the reason for that is that the neurons of your brain and body that control your movements, your thoughts, clarity of thinking in general, et cetera, is critically dependent on the presence of adequate levels of sodium, potassium and magnesium, the electrolytes. And that's because neurons can only be electrically active by way of movement of particular ions, which include things like sodium potassium and magnesium. So, without those, you can't think, you can't function and it actually can be quite dangerous. So, why all the excitement about intermittent fasting? Well, a lot of the excitement relates to work that was done by a former colleague of mine, down at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in San Diego, named Satchin Panda, Satchin's lab identified some very important and impactful health benefits of restricting one's feeding window to particular within the 24 hour cycle, or even to having extended fasts that go for a day or two days, or maybe even three days. What they saw was an improvement in liver enzymes and improvement in insulin sensitivity, which is something that is good. It means that you can utilize the calories and the blood sugar that you happen to have, being insulin insensitive is not good, and is actually a form of diabetes. What Satchin's lab and subsequently other labs showed, was that restricting one's feeding window to anywhere from four to eight or even 12 hours during each 24 hour cycle was beneficial in mice. And some studies in humans have also shown that it can be beneficial for various health parameters. However, the excitement about intermittent fasting seems to be related to the foundational truth about metabolism and weight loss and weight maintenance and weight gain, which is that regardless of whether or not you intermittent fast or whether or not you eat small meals all day long, or you eat one meal in the evening and snack up until then, it really doesn't matter in the sense that the calories that you ingest from whatever source, are going to be filtered through the calories that you burn, by way of exercise, basal metabolic rate, which is just the calories that you happen to burn, just being alive and thinking and breathing and your heart beating, et cetera. And the reason why many people will prefer intermittent fasting to other forms of let's just call it what it is diet or nutritional framework is that many people find it easier to not eat, then to limit their portion size. And here I'm not talking necessarily about eating disorders. I'm talking about the general population. So, I think that's one reason why there's so much excitement about intermittent fasting. Now, within the context of intermittent fasting on a circadian timescale, once every 24 hours, you generally find two categories of people, people who prefer to not eat in the morning, either because they are not hungry in the morning, or because they find it relatively straightforward to just drink things like coffee or water, et cetera, and push their feeding window out to noon or 2:00 P.M. or 3:00 P.M. and then they'll eat between, say 1:00 P.M. and 8:00 P.M. or 9:00 P.M.. It depends on the individual. Other groups of people find that they are very hungry when they wake up in the morning, they don't feel well if they don't eat breakfast. And so they prefer to eat early in the day, but then they limit their feeding window such that they cut off their food intake or stop ingesting any calories of any kind, somewhere around 5:00 P.M. or 6:00 P.M., et cetera. So, the duration of the feeding window has not been broken down into the kind of nuanced type of information that one would really want. At least not in human studies saying, well, a six hour feeding window or an eight hour feeding window is ideal. It really is going to vary based on lifestyle and circumstances, for instance, some families really want to eat dinner together every night. So, do you want to be the person that's sitting there watching everybody eat? Because you're fasting from 5:00 P.M. onwards? I don't know. That's an individual difference. What you can start to identify, however, is that people tend to fall into either one category. The other people who prefer to skip eating in the morning or people that prefer to, or managed to skip eating in the evening. And there has been no evidence thus far, that one is better or worse, at least in terms of weight loss or overall health parameters. Now, you can imagine that some people might eat breakfast and dinner. And indeed I have several many colleagues in fact who just choose to skip lunch, because they're busy during the day, they eat breakfast and dinner, that doesn't afford the long, fast associated with sleep. What do I mean by that? Well, if you went to sleep at 11:00 P.M. and you wake up at 6:00 A.M. by extending your fast until 1:00 P.M. in the afternoon, you get quite a long period of no ingesting any calories. Whereas when you don't eat during the middle of the day, you are getting a fasting period. That's probably anywhere from four to seven hours, but it's not linked to the longer fasting period of not eating while you are asleep, because most, all people and I want to emphasize most, do not eat while they are asleep. But we are going to talk about any new disorder that does exist, where people actually eat in their sleep. I know it sounds pretty wild, but indeed it, that eating disorder does exist. And it has a very interesting underlying mechanism. So, why are we talking about this? And in particular, why are we talking about this during an episode that includes a discussion about eating disorders? The reason is, nobody not the government, no nutritionists, no individual, no matter how knowledgeable they are about food and nutrition and food intake, can define the best plan for eating for any one individual. I'm going to repeat that. Nobody knows what truly healthy eating is. We only know the measurements we can take, liver enzymes, blood lipid profiles, body weight, athletic performance, mental performance, whether or not you're cranky all day, whether or not you're feeling relaxed, nobody knows how to define these. And these have strong cultural and familial and socio-societal influence. So, if you hang out with people that intermittent fast all day, that will seem normal. If you spend time with people that have never heard of intermittent fasting, intermittent fasting is going to seem very abnormal. Now we are going to talk about eating disorders that really fall into the category of clinically diagnosable eating disorders, for which there's actually serious health hazards and even the serious risk of death, we will get to that topic. But for the time being, I want to emphasize a new set of findings that I think many people will find interesting. And at least we'll want to consider in light of their current nutritional plan or pattern of eating, whether or not you're intermittent fasting or not. And I want to cue up an important framework for the rest of the conversation on healthy and disordered eating, which includes an understanding of thinking, decision-making and what we call homeostatic processes, meaning regulation of things that are going on in our brain and body and reward mechanisms. So, I'm going to return to that in a moment, but first I want to share with you these new findings that were just published in the Journal Cell Reports, a Cell Press Journal, excellent journal. This was a study that was performed both in mice and it included a crossover study with a human population. The human population was women, but it relates to a previous study that was also carried out in men. I'm going to simplify this study. We will provide a link to the full study so you can explore it in more detail. And if you're really excited about the results, I would encourage you to explore some of the references within that paper as well. What was the study? The study looked at giving mice or humans, two meals. And explored whether or not putting those meals early in the day or late in the day, had an impact on muscle hypertrophy, muscle growth and overall protein synthesis of muscle. So, when we eat, the amino acids from various foods are broken down and synthesized into different types of tissues. They can be utilized for energy, burned up for moving about and thinking et cetera, or it can be synthesize. Those amino acids can be synthesized into skeletal muscle. The sorts of skeletal muscles that allow you to move your limbs. This study explored how protein intake, which included what are called branch chain amino acids, and amino acids, like leucine, which are important for muscle protein synthesis. Explored whether or not emphasizing or skewing the protein intake toward early day or late day was better in terms of muscle hypertrophy. And they also looked at some parameters of strength, like grip strength. Now mice are nocturnal. So, before you say wait, mice are nocturnal, how did they look during the day? And it's completely, it doesn't apply because it's in mice. Of course they knew that. And they looked during the mice's active phase of their circadian cycle, which corresponds to our day. And in humans, they looked at whether or not eating most of one's protein early in the day, was better than if the protein intake and the sprint chain amino acids were placed later in the day. And yes, they had the mice do resistance training. They did that by emphasizing overload to one limb of the mouse. And that actually generates hypertrophy. It's a form of resistance training in mice. So, they don't have them weight training. They weren't doing curls and dips and squats and things of that sort. They were moving their own body weight, but they skewed that distribution of body weight by restricting a limb and forcing them to use one limb that did indeed grow in response to that. And then in humans, there was an exploration of grip strength. And then with resistance training that was also carried out through a peripheral study. Basically the takeaway from this study was that mice and humans can utilize amino acids that are ingested early in the day, better than they can utilize amino acids ingested later in the day in particular toward muscle hypertrophy and growth or maintenance of muscle, which for those of you that aren't interested in much muscle hypertrophy that aren't trying to grow your muscles. I've talked before in the episode on building strength and hypertrophy, that maintaining muscle, regardless of one's athletic prowess, regardless of one's age is extremely important because loss of skeletal muscle is one of the major causes of injury. As we age. It's one of the major causes, believe it or not, of cognitive and metabolic deficits as we age. So, maintaining muscle is important. Building muscle might be important to some of you, but what they found was ingesting protein early in the day. And these amino acids early in the day, led to more muscle hypertrophy than if the majority of amino acids and proteins were ingested late in the day. So, this translates to intermittent fasting, such that if you are interested in muscle hypertrophy, you might, and I want to emphasize, might consider making sure that you're getting sufficient protein intake early in the day. What sources of protein you use, is going to be highly individual. Some of you are meat eaters. Some of you don't eat red meat. Some of you eat chicken and fish and eggs. Some of you don't, some of you are vegans. It has been shown that the amino acid leucine is vital for the cell growth process, including muscle growth, because of its relationship to the so-called mTOR pathway, mammalian target of rapamycin. We can talk about that more if you like in a future episode, this means that if you're somebody who wants to maintain or increase the amount of muscle mass that you have, ingesting a high protein meal early in the day ought to be beneficial for that. Does it mean that you should not eat protein in the afternoon and evening? No. I think a lot of people might've misinterpreted this study and I don't want that to happen. This is only pointing out the fact that ingesting sufficient quality amino acids, including leucine, early in the day can be beneficial for maintenance and growth of muscle tissue. It does not say that you should avoid protein later in the day. Now for you intermittent fasters, this could be relevant. I, for instance, with somebody who for a very long time skipped breakfast, my first meal of the day would be in the early afternoon, mostly protein and salad, in my case, animal protein. 'Cause that's in alignment with my values. Then in the evening I would eat pasta, vegetables, et cetera. I might have some protein, some small piece of fish or chicken or something like that, but I didn't really emphasize that. On the basis of these results. I am experimenting with. I want to emphasize experimenting with, I haven't completely tossed out my old protocol, but I'm experimenting with eating proteins early in the day and eating lunch. And then dinner might be light supper of some sort, but not so much protein later in the evening. Again, if you want to eat six meals a day, you want to eat round the clock. I'm not going to stop you. I'm not telling anybody what to do. As I mentioned earlier, nobody knows exactly how to eat for one's particular goals. But this study was really interesting, because it really did show that we can utilize the proteins that are ingested early in the day, better than we can utilize the proteins that are ingested later in the day. And of course there will be factors that can shift that. For instance, if you work out very hard with resistance training later in the day, resistance training is known to increase protein synthesis. So, it stands to reason that ingesting amino acids after that training would be beneficial. However, in this study, it did not seem to matter when the resistance training fell within the 24 hour schedule. The morning ingestion or early day ingestion of amino acids seemed to be beneficial. How early? Between the hours of about 5:00 A.M. and 10:00 A.M. for humans. Now just a bit of mechanism to explain why this happens. So, why would it be that ingesting protein early in the day would lead to more synthesis of muscle than ingesting protein later in the day? And the reason it turns out is related to the circadian clock mechanism that is present in all cells, including muscle cells. So, muscles have fibers. I think most people are aware of that, that your muscles are not just one big blob of tissue. A lot of these little fibers that contract. Within those fibers, however, there are cells with nuclei. Those nuclei contained DNA. DNA is transcribed into RNA. RNA is translated into proteins. The DNA of your cells, including these muscle cells are under strong circadian regulation. Each one has a pattern of gene expression that is different at different times during the 24 hour cycle, this is an unescapable reality of all cells in your body, right from your hair cells to your brain cells, to your retinal cells, to your toe on both feet. These cells make a gene called, BMAL, BMAL, B-M-A-L is a clock gene. And the expression of this clock gene varies across the 24 hour cycle, and proteins that are downstream of this BMAL gene influence protein synthesis. The circadian regulation of this BMAL gene turns out to be vitally important for this protein synthesis mechanism. How do we know that? Well, in this particular study, because they had a mouse that lacked BMAL, the gene was knocked out, they had bunch of these mice. They were able to explore whether or not this early day feeding effect was present or absent in these mice that lack the gene BMAL. And indeed it was absent. In other words, the effect of increased protein synthesis early in the day was eliminated in the absence of the BMAL gene. So, what this means is that when you wake up in the morning, assuming you're following a standard schedule of being asleep at night and awake during the day, your muscle cells are primed to incorporate amino acids and synthesize muscle, regardless of whether or not you weight trained the night before 8:00 P.M., or you don't weight train at all, or you weight train afterwards or before. I said five to 10:00 P.M. is the sort of critical window for this increased protein synthesis. All this means is that if you are interested in maintaining or enhancing muscle tissue volume, that you might want to consider eating quality, protein and amino acids early in the day, you could train first. You could train after, you can not train at all. That's entirely different discussion. What is quality protein, well quality protein is going to be a protein that includes most of the essential amino acids. And in particular leucine. Now, there's a lot of debate as to whether or not you can get all the essential amino acids from a purely plant based diet or whether or not you need to ingest animal-based foods or not. The term quality protein has no strict scientific definition. Some people define quality protein as a protein that has a high essential amino acid to caloric ratio. Now, what that means is, a small piece of chicken or steak or eggs for instance, will have many essential amino acids with a low caloric content relative to say beans or plant-based food that can also get you essential amino acids, but it requires more calories to access those essential amino acids. Now that's that has many exceptions and nuances. And I for one, and perfectly respectful of the folks that just want to ingest plant-based foods in order to get their high quality protein. I think that actually can be done. One has to be careful and thoughtful in their choices about how to do that. So, this really isn't about animal based versus non-animal based foods. This is about getting quality amino acids early in the day from whatever foods are in alignment with your particular values in your particular eating plan. So, that's a lot of information, but the key takeaways are every cell in your muscles has a clock gene. The clock genes vary such that protein synthesis is greater early in the day than it is later in the day, such that in both mice and in humans, ingestion of quality proteins early in the day will be more so incorporated into muscle. Than the proteins that are ingested late in the day. And of course there are the caveats of if you're training hard late in the day, if you're adjusting your hormone status through whatever mechanism et cetera, protein synthesis can also be high later in the day. But for most people it's going to taper off due to this circadian BMAL gene related mechanism. Again, we will provide a link to the study and the other key takeaways were that nobody knows. Nobody can tell you what healthy feeding windows are, what the best feeding windows are. There's absolutely no information in that context, you talk to 10 nutritionists or academics or trainers or individuals about what healthy eating is, and you are going to get vastly different answers. And that's one of the reasons why I believe that the internet in particular social media, are so filled with contradictory opinions, but the calories in versus calories burned formula, is that more or less holy foundation of all things about nutrition, eating and weight. And as we transition today into the discussion about eating disorders, I'd like you to keep this in mind because for the treatment of eating disorders, it doesn't matter what psychological or early trauma based effects led to the eating disorder. If the person isn't adjusting their feeding behavior in a way that is going to ameliorate the symptoms of that disorder, which is ultimately the goal. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Belcampo, Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic grass fed and finished certified humane meats. I don't eat a lot of meat, but I eat meat about once a day. That means a small piece of steak or chicken, et cetera, and usually a salad. I usually do that for breakfast or for lunch. And then in the evening I tend to follow a more or less vegetarian diet. I tend to eat pastas and vegetables and things of that sort. Well I don't eat a lot of meat. It's important that the meat that I eat be a very high quality and that I am certain that the animals were raised and treated humanely up until the point of slaughter. Belcampo's animals, graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, their entire lives resulting in meat that's higher in nutrients and healthy fats. It also results in healthy happy cows. Often talk about how important omega-3 fatty acids are. They've been shown to be important for regulating mood, for the microbiome, for restricting inflammation in the brain and elsewhere in the body. Belcampo's meats are known to be high in omega threes. And given that the meat is grass fed and grass finished, that combines all the features of the nutrition and the animal wellbeing that I want to see for any meat that I ingest. If you'd like to try Belcampo, first-time customers can get 20% off by going to belcampo.com/huberman and using the code huberman@checkout, that's belcampo.com/huberman for 20% off. Your first order. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app. That's backed by 25 published studies and has over 600,000 five-star reviews. I've been meditating for a very long time. Although I admit I meditate on and off, meaning I'll go a few weeks or months meditating regularly. And then I tend to stop. A few years ago, I got into a regular meditation practice because I started using Headspace meditation app. The thing I really like about their meditation app is it has meditations of different durations. So, sometimes I'll just meditate for three minutes or five minutes, or ideally I'm doing two 20 minute sessions per day, but I confess I don't always manage that, but they have a ton of different meditations on the Headspace app that allow you to tailor your meditation practice to your particular schedule. And there are now a plethora of studies showing the benefits of a regular meditation practice. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/special offer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations. You get them all. That's the best deal offer by Headspace right now. So, again, if you're interested, go to headspace.com/specialoffer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink, and it's one that I've been drinking since 2012. The reason I started drinking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens is that it really helps me cover all of my nutritional basis with respect to vitamins and minerals and probiotics. And we now know that a healthy gut microbiome is supported by probiotics. And for me, Athletic Greens is the best way to get those probiotics. I also ingest some fermented foods, but by ingesting Athletic Greens, I'm certain to get all the things I need. And also, I just feel better when I drink it. I genuinely feel like I have more energy and I just feel better. And I happen to really like the way it tastes. I mix mine with some water and some lemon juice. And in doing that, I'm certain to get all my nutritional basis covered and the probiotics support a healthy gut microbiome, which is important for mood, regulating inflammation and so on. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs. In addition to your Athletic Greens order, those travel packs make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, in the car, on the plane, et cetera. And they will give you a year supply of vitamin D3, K2, vitamin D3 and K2 have been shown to be important for blood lipid profiles for metabolism and a whole bunch of other metabolic and neural processes. So, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs and the year supply of D3 and K2. So, let's talk about eating disorders. And as we do that, I want to emphasize again, that nobody can really define what healthy eating is, with a single protocol. However, there is some general agreement about what unhealthy and disordered eating is. There are clear criteria in the psychiatric and psychological communities to define things like anorexia bulimia, binge eating disorder, all of which we will talk about, but as we have that discussion, I want to emphasize that self-diagnosis can be both a terrific, but also a very precarious thing. We talked about this a little bit in the episode about depression, there's always a temptation as one learns about the symptomology of a given disorder. It doesn't really matter what the disorder is, to ask the question. Well, do I have that? Does so-and-so that I know have that, ah, I see this sort of behavior or that pattern of thinking. In that individual, it's tempting to diagnose them and or ourselves as either having or not having a particular disorder. However, diagnoses really need to be carried out by people who are trained in that particular field, and that have deep expertise in recognizing the symptomology, including some of the more subtle symptomology of eating disorders. So, if any of the symptoms resonate with you, by way of you thinking that you have this particular disorder or someone that, you know, has this disorder, I would take that seriously, but I would take that information to a qualified healthcare professional that could diagnose or rule out any of these possible disorders. I say that not to protect us, but to protect you, because information is valuable. And I do believe that knowledge of knowledge can be very valuable in navigating any topic and improving our thoughts and behaviors around that topic. But one doesn't want to, or I should say, one, shouldn't start to self-diagnose simply on the basis of information without running that through the filter of a qualified professional. So, what is an eating disorder? Well, we have to take a step back, and confess to the fact that every society, every culture, every family, and every individual has a different relationship to food, eating disorders, however, have particular criteria that allow us to define them and to think about different modes of treatment. As it relates to the particular symptoms and particular, the psychological and biological symptoms of those disorders. Now that's a mouthful, no pun intended. What are the major eating disorders? Anorexia nervosa, most commonly referred to as anorexia is perhaps the most prevalent and the most dangerous of all eating disorders. In fact, anorexia is the most dangerous psychiatric disorder of all, even more than depression. The probability of death for untreated anorexia is very high, and sadly the prevalence of anorexia is very high. So, what is anorexia and how prevalent is it? Anorexia, if you look it up online or you talk to a qualified professional, is essentially a failure to eat enough, to maintain a healthy weight. You can see all sorts of very troubling symptoms of somebody who's been anorexic for some period of time, a general loss of muscle mass because they're ingesting fewer calories than they burn. Muscle is very metabolically active. They tend to lose a lot of muscle mass. They will have a low heart rate. This is the body and brain's attempt to lower energy output. They will have low blood pressure. They'll sometimes have symptoms like fainting. They will have sometimes even hair growth on the face, something called lanugo, which is essentially the body's attempt to insulate the body because of loss of body heat. When you're that thin. Loss of bone density, osteoporosis, loss of periods in girls and women, and all sorts of disrupted gut and immune functions. So, there are just tons of terrible symptoms of anorexia that really placed the anorexic into a very risky state, which is why mortality from anorexia gone untreated is extremely high. Now, one of the misconceptions about anorexia, is that it stems from an overemphasis on perfectionism, or that because of all the images in social media and in advertising of extremely thin and fit or muscular people that individuals are looking at themselves and comparing themselves to those images and thinking that they don't match up and developing anorexia, that turns out to not be the case. If you look at the prevalence or the rates of anorexia, in the last 10 years or 20 years, and you compare that to when anorexia was first identified, which was in the 1600s, and perhaps even earlier, what you find is that rates of anorexia are not going up. So, this idea that the images that we're being bombarded with are causing anorexia doesn't seem to be true. Now, that is not to say that the images that we in particular young people are being bombarded with are healthy for the psychological state of mind. But classically define anorexia has existed at essentially the same prevalence for the last 100, 200, 300 and 400 years, which is incredible and really speaks to the likelihood that there's a strong biological contribution to what we call anorexia nervosa. Anorexia nervosa is extremely common. It's anywhere from one to 2% of women. And the typical onset is in adolescence close to puberty, but it can show up later in life as well. In fact, the identification and diagnosis of anorexia tends to be in the early '20s. But if you look back at the history of those individuals, there were typically signs of anorexia that back into their early teens. Or maybe even before that. Now, of course, men can be anorexic as well, but anorexia nervosa does seem to occur at 10 times the rate in women and young girls, than it does in men and young boys. So, while there does seem to be more of a prevalence of anorexia in boys and young men, these days, that's probably due to better diagnosis and detection than it is to some sort of societal shift related to imagery, et cetera. Later, we will talk about body dysmorphia and some of the images that are present in media and social media and how those are impacting other forms of eating disorders. But when you look at anorexia nervosa, this failure to maintain weight, even to healthy levels and often drops in weight that are very dangerous or even deadly, that has existed for a very long time, and seems to be somewhat hardwired into the biology of individuals that suffer from it. Now, when I say hard wired, that doesn't mean that it can't be treated or cured, and indeed it can. Bulimia which is defined as binge eating or overeating. Let me explain what that is. Binge eating is consuming vast amounts of calories in a short period of time. Overeating can be ingesting more calories than one needs, but over an extended period of time, both can exist of course, but bulimia is also very common. It's more common in young girls and in women that it is in young boys and in men, but it is present in both sexes. Bulimia and rates of bulimia might be increasing. That's sort of an interesting finding. It's not quite clear whether or not it's existed in its same form for a long period of time or within other new forms that are evolving or showing up, we're going to drill into bulimia and what it actually is and what it represents. But one thing I want to be clear about, just as the perfectionist mindset has been associated with anorexia, and it turns out that's not the case. It can be, but it's not always associated with anorexia. There was the idea that bulimia is associated with early trauma in childhood, in particular sexual trauma. And while that can be the case, there's no direct correlation between the two. Now, obviously psychological phenomena and trauma can have a profound impact on the way that the brain wires up and the way that people approach food and other types of behaviors. But the sort of classic idea was that all anorexics are perfectionists, they want to perform well. It's all about control and autonomy. And bulimics are kind of dysregulated and acting out against some early sexual trauma, those stereotypes of the psychological framework of anorexics and bulimics, doesn't hold up. When you look at the data, many, many meta analysis have been done. It just simply is not the case. And in both instances, both anorexia and bulimia, there are clear biological underpinnings, to what's driving the under-eating or the overeating. So, we're going to talk about the biology of under eating and overeating and appropriate levels of eating. And by doing that, we will start to identify some of the mechanisms that serve as entry points for the treatment of both anorexia and bulimia. And as some of you are probably aware, anorexia and bulimia can be comorbid, they can exist with one another. There are anorexics who will binge and then purge in order to maintain that unhealthily low weight. There are bulimics who fit the psychological criteria of anorexia. And so there's a lot of overlap between those two categories. Now let's talk about the categorization for a second and why the categorization has led to now a bunch of other eating disorders as defined by the psychiatric community. One of the classic symptoms of anorexia is a loss of menstrual cycles, loss of periods. And the reason for that is when the body is undernourished, the body fat stores, send signals to the brain to inform that the body is undernourished, or they turn off the signals that say, look, there are enough body fat cells out here to support healthy metabolism. And therefore let's shut down ovulation, literally signal sent from the fat and muscle to the brain and the brain, the hypothalamus and pituitary will send signals down to the ovaries, or they will turn off the signals heading to the ovaries to deploy eggs, to maturation of eggs in the follicle, et cetera. So, there are instances in which people have anorexia or have bulimia, but are still maintaining healthy menstrual cycles or at least menstrual cycles. And that has led to a whole set of other categorizations of eating disorders, like binge eating disorder, where there tends to be a lot of overeating, but not the purging or categorizations of anorexia, in which people are under feeding, but they are not losing their periods. And so these have a number of different names and acronyms. Some of them include things like, EDNOS, EDNOS is eating disorder, not otherwise specified. So, that's a sub categorization or OSFEDs. So, OSFEDs is or specified feeding or eating disorder. So, right now, if you were to look online or you're looking to the psychiatric and psychological textbooks, what you would find is that there's a huge constellation of eating disorders today. We're mainly going to talk about anorexia, bulimia, binge eating disorder and body dysmorphia. You can even find eating disorders like pica, where people actually ingest things like dirt or rocks or metal because they have a genuine appetite for those things. I certainly do not recommend sampling any of those non food items. As foods, is incredibly dangerous. People often poisoned themselves. They often can cause structural blockages some people have died from those sorts of things. But nonetheless, there are aspects of our brain and biology that when disrupted can lead to very bizarre types of eating behavior, sometimes pica is caused by malnutrition, but not always. And so today we're going to focus on the most prevalent eating disorders, but we are going to build up toward that understanding by looking at what healthy metabolism and eating and satiety and hunger looks like. Because one, I realized that not everyone out there has an eating disorder. And two, I want people to understand this relationship between how they think, the decisions they take about what they eat and how the body and the brain at subconscious levels are driving some of these behaviors healthy or otherwise. Because I do think that it can lead us to a better understanding of what healthy eating is for most of us, and to increase compassion and hopefully even increased improvement in treatment of eating disorders for those that are suffering from them. So, what is hunger and what is satiety? Satiety, of course being sated or feeling like we've had enough food. I want to remind people of the basic mechanisms by which the brain and body communicate. This is vitally important, not just for this discussion, but for any discussion, about how we think, how we behave, how we feel, the body is communicating two types of information to the brain on a regular basis, but in particular around feeding, and those two types of information are mechanical information, and chemical information. What do I mean by mechanical information? Well, if you take a deep breath, oh, and you hold your breath, what you'll find is that you can hold your breath a lot longer than if you exhale all your air and you hold your breath with lungs empty. And the reason is not because when your lungs are full, you have enough oxygen and therefore you can hold your breath. It's because when your lungs are full, a particular class of neurons called baroreceptors, send information to the brain and say, there's pressure in the lungs. And that means that there's probably oxygen in here. And so the trigger to breathe is actually suppressed, when your lungs are empty. Even if you have plenty of oxygen in your system, those baroreceptors send a different signal to the brain, which is there's no oxygen in here and you should breathe. And so the impulse to breathe comes earlier. Likewise, when your stomach is full, it sends signals to your brain that are purely based on this mechanical fullness, has nothing to do with nutrients, that says I'm full. And therefore don't be as hungry. Don't motivate to find or ingest food. Whereas when our gut is empty, even if we have plenty of nutrients or plenty of body fat stores, we tend to focus on food a bit more. So, volume and mechanical influences have a profound effect on how we think. And what consider doing or not doing, likewise chemical effects. When we ingest food, our so-called blood sugar or blood glucose levels go up. That information is signaled to the brain via neuronal pathways and hormonal pathways. And in particular, there are neurons within our gut, that signal to areas of our brain stem that are involved in satiety in our sense of having enough that there's food in our system. So, that's chemical information. So, how our hunger and feeding and satiety regulated by way of mechanical and chemical signaling. You have, I have, we all have neurons in our hypothalamus that trigger eating and neurons that trigger cessation or stopping of eating. We have an accelerator on eating and we have a break. And I covered all of this in a lot of detail in the episode on feeding and metabolism and hunger. So, if you want a lot more detail, see that episode, but right now, I'm just going to give you the top contour of how all that works. Your hypothalamus is an area of your forebrain, which tells you it's in the front, but it's at the base of your forebrain sits more or less above the roof of your mouth. The hypothalamus contains lots of different kinds of neurons, including neurons that stimulate sexual activity and desire, regulate your body temperature and control appetite and ceasing of eating and appetite. There are two types of neurons within a particular area of your hypothalamus that are relevant here. There are the so-called POMC neurons, okay? Pro-opiomelanocortin neurons that tend to act as more of a break on appetite, by way of another hormone called melanocytes stimulating hormone. And not so incidentally when you're getting a lot of sunlight and you're viewing a lot of sunlight, that system is ramped up. This is why appetite is lower in the summer months than it is in the winter months. This is true in animals. And this is true in humans. And you have a class of neurons called the AgRP neurons. The AgRP neurons are the ones that stimulate feeding, and they create a sort of anxiety or excitement about food, can be positive anxiety, or it can be negative anxiety. What do I mean by that? Well, if you ever seen kids heading in to get ice cream, they're absolutely excited. You see people getting raised, sit down and eat a big meal. They're excited to eat. Sometimes that's due to social factors, but they have an increase in overall levels of autonomic arousal. And depending on the context, they can feel excited or anxious, but it is a ramping up of energy. These AgRP neurons are what caused that, in fact so much so that if you eliminate or kill these neurons, which has been done in experimental mouse models in the laboratory, but also there are humans that have lesions or neurotoxic effects on these AgRP neurons. And what you find is that they don't want to eat. They essentially become anorexic, meaning they don't want to ingest food. They have no appetite for food whatsoever. Now that's not exactly what anorexia is, but these AgRP neurons are like an accelerator on wanting to eat. Whereas if you stimulate these AgRP neurons or in humans that have say a small tumor near these AgRP neurons, they become hyperphagic. They will eat to the point of bursting, both animals and humans that have elevated levels of these AgRP neurons are anxious. They want to eat, and they will ingest food to the point where they override those mechanical and chemical signals in the body. And I know it sounds horrible, and it is horrible. They will eat until the point that they burst. Now, there are signals coming back from the body to inform the brain about presence of different levels of nutrients. And that generally comes from three sources. First of all, is body fat. The more body fat we have, the more we secrete a hormone called leptin, L-E-P-T-I-N, leptin from body fat, leptin goes to the brain and suppresses appetite. This is a body to brain signaling mechanism that says, look, I've had enough, not incidentally, leptin signaling is disrupted in people that have bulimia and obesity and certain forms of binge eating disorder. So, that system has disrupted they have had enough signal or there's enough body fat here such that you don't need to eat more right here, I'm sort of in the voice of the body fat, trying to talk to the brain, that signal, that dialogue is mixed up or messed up. In some cases it's absent entirely. So, the body fat is signaling to the brain about how much reserve you have. It's sort of like a savings account for energy, 'cause that's what body fat is. You've got lipids in there and through lipolysis, that can be metabolized. If you're interested in that process, both how to increase it. And just generally how it works. You can see the episode on the science of fat loss. The body fat is doing something else really interesting that relates to anorexia, when they're sufficient levels of body fat and leptin circulating in the blood. And that leptin signal gets to the brain, the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland register that signal. And in a completely subconscious way, trigger the deployment of eggs in females and the production of sperm in males. So, when body fat stores are very low, the reason why periods shut off or sperm production is reduced or even shut off is because there's not enough leptin getting to the hypothalamus and to the pituitary. And they shut off the signals, the hormones, things like gonadotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, all these hormones. So, you don't have to remember the names of if you don't want to that travel to the ovary or to the testes and cause the ovary and testes to ovulate or to produce more sperm. So, the reason why anorexic stopped having periods, while they stopped cycling, is because there isn't sufficient leptin in the bloodstream. Now there have been attempts to give leptin to anorexics because leptin has been sequenced and the peptide has been synthesized. And so you can inject leptin into people. There are studies where they've done that, when that happens, it does not tend to alleviate the anorexia, does not cause people to start eating again. And that actually makes sense because leptin is also a way of shutting off the hunger signals saying, it's the body fats way of saying, hey, there's a lot of body fat here, or there is sufficient body fat. There doesn't even have to be a lot, but it has, in some cases been shown to rescue the menstrual, cycling in some anorexics, okay? So, body fat is signaling to the brain. The gut is signaling to the brain. There are neurons in your gut that are primarily responding to meaning they fire electrical signals. When there are sufficient fatty acids coming from fats you ingest, amino acids coming from proteins you ingest and sugars coming from carbohydrates and sugars. Things like fructose, glucose, et cetera. Those signals are being sent from the fat and from the gut up to the brain. And therefore your body has multiple signals of directing you toward eating more or eating less. So, you've got two categories of neurons. One that acts as an accelerator, the AgRP neuron saying, eat, eat, and get you excited to eat. And then you have a category of neurons. The POMC neurons that are suppressing hunger. They're acting like a break, and the body is informing the brain all the time about the status of the body and whether or not it needs more food or not. So, you might ask why is it that people who are overweight and have a lot of body fat, why they would continue to eat a lot, well past a certain threshold of body fat that's when you start getting into these so-called metabolic disorders, where blood glucose metabolism is disrupted, leptin signaling is disrupted and there are all sorts of changes on both the brain side and the body end of things, such that they're hungry, despite the fact that the body has plenty of energy on reserve. Okay, that I think is sufficient to explain the basics of hunger and satiety are kind of a biological mechanism. And the important thing again, to remember is that they're mechanical and chemical signals that come from fullness or absence of fullness that come in the presence of glucose in the blood or the absence of glucose in the blood. When you haven't eaten for a long time, glucagon levels go up, for instance, GLP1 levels go up and those will drive you to seek out food and want food. And then there are the signals that are coming from body fat and from neurons in the gut. So, there's a lot of convergence, in a lot of pathways. I don't offer you all those pathways to confuse you. I offer you those pathways to clarify the extent to which something as simple as eating or the decision to not eat is complicated. We've perhaps heard, or I've certainly heard that, oh, you know, it takes about 20 minutes for satiety to set in, so you should eat slowly that you won't realize that you're full until about 20 minutes. That's actually not true. I don't know where that got started, but we should probably all chew our food better and eat more slowly, be more mindful of what we're eating, et cetera. So, in anticipation of this episode, I consulted extensively with a colleague of mine at Stanford, who sadly for us is going off to University of Pennsylvania. So, our losses University of Pennsylvania's win. His name is Dr. Casey Halpern. He's a MD, Medical Doctor and Neurosurgeon, and a PhD who studies binge-eating disorder and other types of eating disorders and how they arise in the brain. And he's developed some really pioneering treatments for them. We'll talk more about his work a little bit later in the episode, but we got to the discussion of why a body that has sufficient energy levels would desire to eat more at all. And this is not just the case for binge eating disorder for bulimia, but why that would be the case. You know, this is primitive biology that evolved over many tens. If not hundreds of thousands of years, you see it in mice, you see it in humans, very similar types of pathways and effects. How is it that human beings who have plenty of fat on reserve and plenty of glycogen in their liver, et cetera. In other words, plenty of energy, why they would be hungry, why they would eat at all. It seems like that just shouldn't happen. And he had a very important, and I think clear and intuitive way of framing up all this stuff around eating and motivated behaviors and how they can go awry, not just in eating disorders, but in all of us. Basically what he said was, from an evolutionary standpoint, it makes sense that we should eat as often as we can, as much as we can, and as fast as we can. Well, that sounds crazy. I've was told to eat not too often, not too much, and to eat slowly and chew my food. But as Dr. Halpern pointed out, there are circuits in the brain to reward eating often eating fast and cramming as much food into you as possible. Because from a purely evolutionary standpoint, food was scarce, and seeking food was dangerous, whether or not it was from animal sources or not. And it's always been competitive, for those of you that grew up in families with a lot of siblings. This may resonate with you. I just one sibling, we were competitive about certain things, but typically not competitive about food, but I had friends that had a lot of siblings. It was really interesting to see how food was served up and how it was taken in those households. It was like food would hit the table and it was just an absolute war for portions and who got what and how much and who got a slightly bigger piece of cake, et cetera, turned out to be a frequent happening in these meals and that these birthday parties, whereas the only children perhaps were used to having more food presented to them without having to compete with other members of the species. Every animal, including humans has a hardwired circuit that we were born with that pays attention to how much food is available, how much we are getting now and how much we are likely to get in the future. And without going down the rabbit hole of arcuate nucleus biology, in two sentences, you have a hypothalamic area called the arcuate nucleus. It's a fascinating area. It's actually the area that houses, these PMOC neurons and these other types of neurons that regulate hunger and satiety. And these neurons in the arcuate nucleus start getting active. When we see food and think about food, they drive hunger, and they drive hunger in a way that's responsive to what the food looks like, what it smells like, but also our prior history of interactions with that food. And it takes into account social context, whether or not we are going to get the whole pizza to ourselves or whether or not there are going to be others that we are going to have to compete with. So, there are a lot of signals that this arcuate nucleus in your brain are paying attention to. So, Dr. Halpern pointed out that you actually have an accelerator that increases your level of awareness and anxiety and sort of constricts your field of view and all your senses. Anytime you interact with food and is driving a primitive reflex to ingest as much food as you can, as quickly as you can, and then move on from there, and presumably to do the same elsewhere. So, that changed the way that I think about eating behavior and eating disorders. In fact, we could think about eating disorders like bulimia as an unmasking of that mechanism without the so-called top-down control, without the mechanisms that we use to regulate our behavior. And indeed bulimia and binge-eating disorder are closely associated with impulsivity and with impulsive behaviors of other kinds, something that we also will discuss more. What's the pathway? How does this work? What is Dr. Halpern and his colleagues doing in order to try and treat things like binge eating disorder? Well, you can frame all of behavior, good decision making and bad decision-making. In a pretty simple box diagram model. And I realized that many of you are listening to this, not watching this. There is no diagram to look at. I'll just explain it so that you can conceptualize it in your mind. We have knowledge of what we should do, in one box, okay? We should eat that. We shouldn't eat that. We should wait for dinner. We shouldn't wait for dinner. And then we have what we actually do in another box, okay? Now this is true for all behaviors, we should say something or we want to say something, but we don't, we shouldn't say something, but we do anyway. That's the knowledge that kind of looping in your head. I should do my homework. I should go for a run. I shouldn't do this right now. I shouldn't be on social media, all those kinds of shoulds and shouldn'ts that are circulating your head. That's one box. Then there's what you actually do. The behavior, whether or not you suppress the behavior, you turn off your phone and you go read a book or you go to sleep or whether or not you stay up all night, or you stay up for another hour, even five minutes. In between those two boxes are two intervening forces. And those intervening forces are critically important. Those intervening forces are homeostatic processes, called by some processes, same thing, homeostatic processes, that regulate the balance of different systems in your body, hot and cold, awake or asleep, dopamine and the desire to pursue things, serotonin and the desire to just relax and chill. So, homeostatic processes and reward systems. And as we now move into discussion about anorexia, and bulimia specifically, what you'll see is that anorexia and bulimia are not a breaking of the mindset of what one should do or shouldn't do. It's a disruption of these homeostatic and reward processes, such that decision-making is completely disrupted. And in many cases is not available to the anorexic or bulimic. Now, I don't want to be abstract here. What I'm saying is that the person who starves themselves to the point where they might die and in some cases, sadly do die. They can know perfectly well that their behavior is leading to bad outcomes and possibly even death. And yet they are not able to intervene unless they get particular clinical help, because the homeostatic processes, the signals from the body and brain that say, you need food. Those aren't registering in the same way that they are for other individuals. and for the bulimic or the person that suffers from binge eating disorder. They don't necessarily want to eat that food. They simply cannot help it. It's like a reflex for them, because the homeostatic processes and the reward processes associated with food, are such that they can't intervene between the should do X, Y, or Z, or shouldn't do X, Y, or Z. And what their actual behavior is. Now, this isn't just a biological mechanistic explanation for what could have been summarized in two sentences. What this is, is a roadmap of where interventions can really make a difference. So, as we talk about different drug based interventions or behavioral interventions or social interventions, I'd like you to think about whether or not those interventions are breaking into, or tapping into this box of the thinking, the sort of pattern of thinking around food, whether or not it's the behavior, the actual ingestion or the restriction of food, or whether or not it's tapping into the homeostatic process, the balance of energy systems and kind of getting enough, but not too much, or it's tapping into the reward system. And just as a little teaser of where we're headed, what you'll find based on the data clinical data experiments done very carefully and very well by excellent groups. What you'll find is the anorexics have a sort of switch that's been flipped, such that their decision-making is actually pretty darn good. It might even be better than yours in terms of evaluating food, nutritional content, but their habits are disrupted. So, they're not even consciously aware of the fact that they're making terrible. And in some cases, very dangerous food choices, and turns out that habits. And the way that we build and break and rebuild new habits is one of the most effective treatments for anorexia. So, now let's talk about anorexia, this failure to consume enough energy, such that the individuals at risk of death, and if not death, then severe metabolic disorders, lack of bone density, et cetera. As I mentioned earlier, anorexia and things that almost certainly were, and are anorexia have been described as early as the 1600s. And maybe even earlier, there are some records from the saints, from the 1400s of people that refuse to ingest food. Another common myth is that anorexia is only the sort of thing that you see in rich societies. These are spoiled children with so much food that they decide they're only going to focus on how slim they are, how they look in bathing suits, et cetera, not true. A careful analysis through medical epidemiology has shown that you find anorexia even in cultures and societies where food is scarce. So, that really speaks to biological mechanism. Now it's hard to unveil in societies where food is scarce, because a lot of people are starving and hungry, but there are individuals that choose still to avoid food and seem to have some sort of reward mechanism that rewards them, where makes them feel better if they don't eat, despite the fact that their body is severely depleted of nutrients. So, that's very interesting and points again to some disruption in some biological mechanism. Now, I want to make sure that I'm emphasizing that I'm not in favor of people, in particular young children, adolescents, and teenagers being bombarded with unrealistic imagery about bodies. But the idea that that's the cause of, or is amplifying anorexia, the data just don't seem to support that, anorexia in its classic sense, requires that there be an endocrine, meaning a hormonal disruption, menstrual abnormalities, lack of sperm production, or low testosterone in males, in order to meet the classification for anorexia. But as I mentioned earlier, there are now nuanced and new classifications of anorexia that even for individuals that still menstruate or that maintain a sperm production anorexia, can still be considered a clinically diagnosable disorder. Now, typically anorexia starts in adolescence, right around puberty. Let's take a look at what puberty is. Puberty at a very broad level is the most significant and dramatic developmental step. Anyone goes through in their lifespan. The body changes, the brain changes, perceptions, change, one's own self perception, changes. And most of those changes are driven by changes in circuitry within the hypothalamus. So, neurons that are controlling the production of the so-called sex steroid hormones, things like testosterone, estrogen, and related hormones, prolactin, et cetera. Those are all changing at very rapid rates. Anorexia tends to show up around this time in a subset of individuals who on the face of it seem to find food, aversive, now the purely psychological theory of this is that they are fighting for autonomy. They want control. Puberty is also a time in which children and parents are in a tug of war over control. You were once a small child being told when to go to bed sent to your room. Now you're a child that can talk back and say, I don't want to, or I refuse to. And that happens a lot in various households, as I'm sure you're familiar with. Adolescence and puberty is also when girls start menstruating typically, or boys develop deeper voice, they start producing sperm, et cetera. So, there are a lot of bodily changes that also drive perceptual changes and perceptual changes that drive bodily changes. And it is a dramatic shift for a young girl or boy that doesn't nourish themselves sufficiently. During that period, there are a number of downstream negative effects. I'll list out some of them, these are just a subset of the effects, hypogonadism. That's the lack of sperm production or healthy egg production. There is amenorrhea, which is the lack of menstrual cycling, okay? So, a failure to have a menstrual cycle. Reduced insulin secretion, insulin is this hormone that's released in order to help shuttle glucose into various tissues for energy utilization. That's down because energy levels are down so much. One of the symptoms that's a little more cryptic, and that has actually interesting implications for sake of the cholesterol hypothesis is that anorexics who ingest very little food often have cosmically high levels of cholesterol, including LDL, low density, lipoprotein cholesterol. You say, well, how could that possibly be? We were all told and continue to be told from many sources that ingestion of dietary cholesterol is what drives high levels of bodily cholesterol. Cholesterol is manufactured by the liver and in anorexics who consume very little food. They often have cosmically high levels of cholesterol, which is one of the kind of wrinkles in the so-called dietary cholesterol hypothesis that all of our cholesterol that we see on a blood panel is due to what we eat. But the explanation for it is that under conditions where there's not sufficient cholesterol to synthesize the sex steroid hormones, things like testosterone and estrogen, which are required in both males and females, those are made from cholesterol that the body, the liver will start generating its own cholesterol will often overshoot the mark to a dramatic degree. So, the blood lipid profiles and anorexics are often very unhealthy despite the fact that they're eating very little food. In addition, they tend to have elevated levels of things like vasopressin, which are hormones that regulate body temperature and salt and blood volume. They tend to have low blood pressure. They can pass out. I mentioned some of the other symptoms earlier. In other words, there are a huge number of terrible things happening. Thyroid levels are down. Heart rates are down, if I'm painting a very bleak picture here is indeed a bleak picture. So, we have to ask ourselves what can be done for the anorexic, right? Let's say it's a failure of the AgRP neurons to stimulate appetite and feeding. Let's say it's too much anxiety around food. Let's say it's because of the way that food restriction was used for reward in the household, right? I'm making this up, but you can imagine a hypothetical scenario where let's just say the mother of a particular individual is very vocal about her avoidance of food. We've seen this before, right? You've probably seen somebody who loves to cook and prepare food, but then sits down and doesn't seem to eat. And they always seem to in air quotes have eaten earlier. I ate while I cooked, I ate while I cooked, right? These people that you never actually see eating, we all know people like this, are they anorexic? Possibly, we don't know. A child observes that kind of behavior. Maybe that individual is being always being told how beautiful they look or how wonderful or fit they look, what incredible meals they produce. And you could imagine a purely psychosocial set of events that could lead a child to be anorexic. That doesn't seem to be the case, at least not in terms of driving classic, anorexia, a really extreme deprivation of oneself from food. However, there is a strong genetic component for anorexia. So, you could imagine a mild form of anorexia in a parent that is supported or exacerbated by praise, so that the person feels good from the praise they're getting, that they want to be a low body weight for whatever reason, for aesthetic reasons or for whatever reasons that happened to appeal to them. And the child has a genetic predisposition, right? We never think about genes in terms of controlling behavior, genes, bias, probabilities for behavior, okay? So, you can have a gene for depression of schizophrenia, but it's not deterministic, in the same way that there are genes that determine your eye color, or your skin color or your hair color, okay? So, there's a genetic predisposition there. And that genetic predisposition could exist such that if one is rewarded enough times for a particular behavior, that behavior can start to ratchet in to our neural circuitry, because behavior drives neural changes, so called neuroplasticity. And you could imagine that that child could develop a full-blown case of anorexia. And this is why I raised at the beginning that no one really knows how to define healthy eating. And so therefore we have to rely on just identification of unhealthy behaviors, but what do we point people to in terms of what healthy replacement behaviors would be. So, rather than just look at anorexics and say, they're not eating enough. And there's this huge array of terrible things that they're doing to their body, and they need to eat more. We need to rescue them from themselves. Let's look under the hood. Let's look at, what's known about the neural circuitry and the sorts of perceptions and behaviors of the neural circuitry is driving, in order to understand what they are truly suffering from, at the level of cause ,not just symptoms, it's clear what they're suffering from at the level of symptoms, symptoms are how we diagnose. I listed off a number of those things, but let's look under the hood and try and identify where one could intervene in theory, in order to try and rescue the anorexic or help the anorexic rescue themselves. Because it turns out that the answer or at least one of the answers of how to do that is not intuitive at all. At least to me was very surprising. I would be remiss if I didn't start with the obvious, which is, is there a chemical defect? Meaning is there some disruption in one of the major chemical systems in the brain that makes anorexics anorexic and therefore, can we replace that chemical? Or can we reduce some chemical and essentially eliminate anorexia? And the answer is not really sort of maybe no, here's why, there are a lot of different chemicals in the brain and body, but there are a category of chemicals that are particularly important that if you've listened to this podcast before, even if you haven't are going to come up again and again and again, and that is the category of chemicals in the brain and body called the neuromodulators, neuromodulators are different than neuro-transmitters in the sense that neuromodulators modulator or change the activity of brain areas in neural circuits, you can think of them as microphones that are held between particular sets of connections in the brain that make those connections in the brain, more likely to be active relative to others, okay? They make them louder so to speak, there are many neuromodulators, but the ones that are important for sake of today's discussion are the classic ones, dopamine, acetylcholine, or epinephrin and serotonin. Let's focus on serotonin. Serotonin is a neuromodulator that tends to increase the activity of certain neural circuits, including within the hypothalamus, but also within the body that trigger a sense of satiety, of having enough, enough food, enough warmth, enough social connection, enough of any motivated goal or drive or any type of thing or behavior that one would want more of, serotonin tends to make those circuits quiet down. Now, there are many categories of drugs that emphasize the serotonergic circuitry, meaning they cause the release of, or the efficiency of serotonin in the brain and body. Things like Prozac, Zoloft, Paxil, things of that variety. Those drugs have been used to some degree of success. Although not much to treat things like anorexia nervosa. That should make sense, because if these drugs increase serotonin, if their general effect is to increase serotonin, it will be to lower anxiety. That sounds like a great thing. A lot of anorexics are really anxious around food. We'll talk about why, lowering anxiety you might think would lead to ingestion of more food, but that's not often what happens, increasing serotonin, by way of some drug regimen will tend to make one less hungry, because with heightened levels of serotonin in the blood and brain, there isn't the desire to go seek out the things that will raise serotonin on their own. Now, some anorexics do well or benefit from these serotonergic drugs, these drugs that increase the activity of these circuits that leads to satiety. But if you think about the major goal of treating an anorexic it's to get them to have more hunger, more appetite. So, now I want to focus on some of the work that's been done around the habits and behaviors of anorexics, because those turned out to be ideal places for intervention. The work I'm about to describe was done by Dr. Joanna Steinglass and colleagues at Columbia University in New York. And there are other groups as well. Of course, they're doing this type of work, but they did what I think are really some beautiful experiments and some beautiful explorations of potential treatments for anorexics. That seemed to have a quite high degree of effectiveness when they are applied correctly. First of all, there's a challenge in studying anorexia because in anorexia, what you're essentially studying is the absence of a behavior. It's very hard to study the absence of a behavior, as opposed to a behavior. So, they did some experiments with anorexics, giving them a gallery of pictures of different foods, and allowing those anorexia patients to arrange those foods, according to preference about what they would select, about food, nutrient content about caloric content. They essentially asked these anorexics to evaluate food, and in doing so, they were able to identify something that's very unique to anorexics at the level of their perception of food. What they found is the anorexics, rather than being anxious in the presence of food, and that anxiety driving and avoidance of food. What they found is that anorexics have a hyper acuity, a hyper awareness of the fat content of foods, almost to the point of being sort of fat content savant. Now they don't necessarily know that they're doing this. They're not looking at an avocado and thinking, okay, that's X number of grams of fat rather, or looking at an apple and saying, okay, that has no fat. They start to do this more or less reflexively. Now it's a well-known symptom of anorexia, especially young anorexics that they have kind of an obsession with food, caloric contents, macronutrient ratios, meaning fat protein and carbohydrate ratios. They know caloric numbers, but then they sort of pass that information into a memory system in their brain that allows their interactions with food, to be very reflexive in a way that they are actively avoiding high-fat content, foods, calorie rich foods, and defaulting towards very low calorie foods. If they have to eat. Now, this might seem like an almost trivial result on the face of it, you think, okay, they don't like to eat when they do eat. They eat low calorie, low fat foods, duh, but it's the way in which they are doing this subconsciously that they learn this information and then they pass it off to a reflexive habit. And that's very important because what that means is that we need to look at what processes in the brain, what brain areas, what chemicals drive decision-making and knowledge. And we also need to look at the areas of the brain that drive habit formation and habit execution, because for any of you that have habits. And that means all of you, the hallmark feature of a habit is that it's reflexive. You have a mosquito bite on your leg, you scratch it. You didn't necessarily even think, oh, I'm going to scratch that. In fact, just to take a little bit of a moment of respites and talk about habits in general, there's a beautiful study that was done out of Caltech University, looking at the parking lot of where people park in the morning, without designated parking spots, and the trajectories that they use to walk to their offices in the morning. So, they put cameras up on the roof of Caltech, is the kind of thing that the nerdy kids at Caltech do. I think at Caltech, if you call someone a nerdy is I think it's a compliment. So, my apologies to the non nerds at Caltech, I think there's one or two of you and for the nerdy ones of you at Caltech, you're welcome. They videotaped the behaviors of these faculty and students and staff. And what they found, is that people follow trajectories from their car that are remarkably stereotype. First of all, they tend to park always in the same spot. If they can, they tend to get out of their car. Of course, 'cause they're on the driver's side or passenger side in the same place. They turn and pivot their body at approximately the same rate every day. They close the door, they've put their bag on their shoulder or across their chest, or however it is that they carry their briefcase or whatever it is. And they follow trajectories onto campus that are so stereotyped. That you'd wonder if you just trace line, after line after line. What you'd find is that every day is almost exactly the same and you do this too. You don't realize it because if you're being videotaped in this kind of behavior, it's not being released to you, but your behaviors are so stereotyped to the point where if you were to see them laid out in front of you, in kind of diagrammatic format of the lines and the trajectories that you follow throughout the day, the lifting of your mug and how frequently you drink each hour, you would be amazed and probably a little bit scared by how much of a robot we all are. Now that robotic aspect of our neurocircuitry is vital, because it's what allows us to think about other things and do other things, and drive other behaviors. But the work of Dr. Steinglass and colleagues showed that in the case of the anorexic, those habits are exactly the place where things start to go awry. And that drive this very dysfunctional under-eating behavior that sadly often leads to death or certainly bad medical outcomes. And it turns out that the brain areas associated with habit formation and execution are the best point of intervention. So, what Dr. Steinglass and colleagues did, is they took anorexics and they of course had control groups and they put them in an FMRI scanner, which are these brain scanners that allow you to evaluate which brain areas are active, during particular tasks. And because when you're in one of those scanners, you actually, you know, I've actually been in one of these things. You're biting down on a bite bar and you're most of the time and most all of these scanners you're immobile. So, you're looking at things on a TV screen. Sometimes you can press buttons to select choices and so forth, but you can't really eat within those things. What they found was that reward based decision-making, the drive to pursue a particular food or the drive to perform a particular task, which is a lot of what we do throughout our day, that was controlled by a brain area called the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Let me simplify a little bit of this, but I'm going to simplify it by giving you a little detail, because it's the Huberman Lab Podcast. And I believe in mechanism, mechanism is the way that you get true understanding and that you can then be very quick and give overviews of things, but you need the mechanism. So, you have reflexes and you have neural processes that include what are called duration path and outcome type processes, a duration path, outcome type process, we can shorten with DPO. DPO is for all types of goal related behaviors. So, for instance, if you want to get a particular grade on an exam, you want to learn something, you want to complete a workout. You want to go to the grocery store and pick some stuff up and then head home. You're going to think duration. How long do I have, okay, do I have 45 minutes to get to the store? How long does it take to get to the store path? Which way am I going to drive there? Which way am I going to navigate through the grocery store, outcome, was able to get in and get the items I need and get home in time, okay? DPO, duration path outcome. It's a very conscious process. You tend to take into account different criteria related to what's preventing you from accomplishing what you want to do and what's helping you or assisting you. So, of course, as you get to the checkout line in the grocery store, you're going to select the shortest line for instance. So, that's all DPO stuff. It requires decision-making and it's reward-based, you use these DPO type processes in the short term to pick up groceries and pick a line at the grocery store and decide which trajectory to take home. And you use them for navigating long extended processes in life, trying to get a degree or raise children or get through a particularly challenging year, et cetera. So, duration path outcome, and that entire process relies on your fore brain. This prefrontal cortex, the prefrontal cortex is what allows you to take information from memory, combine it with information about what's happening in the present context, and then to direct your behavior, your speech, et cetera, toward particular outcomes. And if all that sounds like a mouthful, it is, and it's very metabolically demanding, decision-making is metabolically demanding. It takes effort, okay? Reflexes on the other hand, don't involve the prefrontal cortex in the same way, habits and reflexes. Like once you know how to walk, you get up and you walk, you don't have to think about right foot, left foot, right foot, left foot. You just do it. That doesn't rely on prefrontal cortex. It's subconscious as it's sometimes called, but basically you don't have to use the parts of the brain that are involved in duration path and outcome type analysis. Okay, so, in this particular study, they examined brain activity in anorexics who are selecting different foods. And as I mentioned earlier, they have a hyper acuity or awareness of which foods contain more or less calories than other foods and what the fat content of particular foods is, in particular, et cetera, they're doing all this while in a scanner. And then they look at what sorts of brain areas are active after that task is done. And what they found was really interesting, what they found was that the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex not surprisingly is involved in the decision-making and the evaluation of this food, which foods are going to be best to eat in this context, which foods are going to be appropriate for at least that anorexics framework about what's okay to eat and what's not okay to eat and how much. However, there are areas of the brain that were active after that decision-making process. And those are the brain areas that turn out to drive the habit of avoiding particular foods and approaching other foods. And in that case, it wasn't the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. It was an area of the brain called the dorsal lateral striatum. Now the striatum is a big area in the brain. It's involved in a lot of different things. It includes areas like the caudate and putamen. And I just want to mention, as I throw out all these names, you do not need to remember the names of these different structures. They're just there, if you are interested in that level of detail, but basically you have a brain area and anorexics have a brain area that's involved in evaluating and decision-making around food. And then another brain area that's involved in the reflexive consumption of particular foods and the reflexive avoidance of other foods. If you remember way back at the beginning of the episode, I feel like that was a long time ago now. When we talked about how you have these sorts of processes in the brain, but there are always homeostatic and reward systems influencing this kind of thing. Well, in the brain of the anorexic, it turns out that the reward systems have been attached to the execution of habits in a way that is unhealthy for body weight, but at least from a purely neural circuit perspective, the reward is now given this chemical reward in the brain, is given for avoiding particular foods and only approaching these very low calorie, low fat foods. So, there really does seem to be a flip in the switch, in the anorexic brain that rewards them internally. They feel good when they avoid certain foods and they approach others. So, it's not a deprivation based model where they are flagellating themselves or masochistic or actively avoiding food in order to punish themselves, which is interesting because a lot of psychological theories support that idea. Rather, once this transitions into a set of habits, they are actually getting a sense of reward. They feel good, presumably from the release of a different neuromodulator called dopamine, by approaching foods that are low fat, low calorie content. And so their whole brain circuitry is skewed toward avoiding particular things. And they actually are rewarded for that, and they feel good. They feel better than if they were eating in a healthy weight supporting way. Now the dorsolateral striatum is a structure that we should think about in a little bit more depth. It's part of a set of circuits that are involved in what are called go no-go tasks. And I don't want to go into this in a lot of detail right now, because it would take us too far down the rabbit hole of neurocircuitry. But basically in terms of behaviors, we both have DPO type behaviors. So, decision-making, reward based behaviors. And we have habits that we learn and we acquire. And then we just start to reflexively, things like walking, things like yawning when we're tired, things like taking a particular route through the parking lot, right? We learned that the first time we go to a given parking lot and walk into a building. But after that, we tend to follow the exact same trajectory becomes very automatized. It's just like, we just do it without thinking. Well, the go no-go circuitry is another aspect of our behavior, where we both have to select behaviors to perform. And we have to select behaviors to suppress. And the anorexic brain seems to reward suppression of one set of behaviors, ingestion of high calorie foods, and to reward focus, or even hyper-focus and consumption of low fat, low calorie foods. So, this homeostatic process that we learn about from like high school onward, that, oh, everything in your body is designed to keep everything in balance. You stay awake for a certain amount of time. You want to sleep, you don't eat for a while. Then you want to eat to maintain weight, right? You eat too much. Then you want to eat less. Those systems are disrupted. And so what's so beautiful about this work from the Columbia group, is that what it says is the place to intervene has to be the habit. This stuff has already passed through all the learning, it's passed through all the reward systems. It's clearly not being overrun by the homeostatic processes of the body. There's very little body fat. There's no leptin, whatever neurons in the brain respond to leptin are starved for leptin, periods of shutdown, sperm production, and testosterone is lowered. Bone density is down. Clearly, this is overriding all those homeostatic processes, all the signals that would say eat, eat, eat. Those don't matter in the brain of the anorexic. In the brain of the anorexic is just performing habits and they're being rewarded for it. So, when you come along and say, look, you should really eat this whole pie or this whole pizza you'll feel better. That's how she aversive to them. So, since it appears to be a habit, a reflex that's perpetuating the anorexic phenotype. As we say, in science, it's perpetuating anorexia in this individual and telling them about all this terrible stuff that's happening in their body won't work, taking them away from all the images of thin people online, et cetera. That's not going to work. What's going to work. What's going to work is intervening in the neural circuitry. That's related to the habit itself. And it turns out that there are ways to do that. So, how do you break a habit? How do you rewire the brain circuitry that's literally causing a reflex? And in this case causing a reflex that is killing the individual, or at least leading to very bad health outcomes. The way that you do that is through a cognitive mechanism where you teach the individual, what is leading up to the habit? This is a little bit similar to the way that somebody who suffers from addiction starts to put in different constraint type behaviors, constraint type behaviors, are the sorts of things like where the alcoholic will call a hotel ahead of time and say, listen, I want the mini bar taken out of the room. I don't want a television in the room, et cetera, constraint type behaviors. Those are really ways of keeping oneself from the temptation. But with these habits, they work at such a subconscious level. That what seems to work best is a combination of teaching the individual about their internal state and how to register their internal state. What we call interoception this ability to perceive your internal state, so that they can start to learn, to associate the interactions with different types of food, with the sorts of cues that are occurring within their body, quickening of heart rate, hyper acuity of focus that we talked about earlier. Once they start to be able to notice that those things are happening, then they can start to intervene. So, let's talk about what those things are that lead into a habit, because those turn out to be the exact points of entry for changing and eliminating and rewiring habits, to a more healthy behaviors. And I should highlight that this isn't just about rewiring habits for sake of the anorexic. These are also the same types of mechanisms that one would want to incorporate in order to rewire any habit of any kind. There are two main features of thinking that go into the sorts of habits that anorexics execute. The first is something called weak central coherence. Weak central coherence is essentially an inability to see the forest through the trees. It's a hyper acuity and focus on details within a given environment. And there's actually an interesting probe test for anorexia that involves something akin to kind of a where's Waldo type of puzzle, where an image is put up. The one that I saw was one in which there is a big array of coffee beans. Actually, they're all brown coffee beans. And your job is to identify where in that array of coffee beans, there's a face. And indeed there's a face embedded in there. It looks a little bit like a coffee bean, but once you see it, you realize it's a face, not a coffee bean. And it becomes very hard to not notice the face after that. Anorexics, are very good at identifying the face. They find it much faster than do non-anorexics, which is really interesting, right? They somehow are able to hone in on details and find those details and fixate on those details. Now eventually, most, if not all people find the face, but once you do what you will find and what everyone finds is that you can't unfine the face, it just jumps out. So, what essentially you've lost is the ability to see the whole picture, because there's some detail within that picture that you're obsessed by. So, this has kind of elements of obsessive compulsive disorder, but it's not really obsessive compulsive disorder per se. So, we call that weak central coherence. It's a hyper acuity on one particular feature. You miss the big picture. The other is a challenge in set shifting that once you identify something that's of particular interest and that's driving some sort of reward, for the anorexic that would be identifying the high-fat foods or identifying the one food on the table that one could eat without anyone, hopefully noticing that they're eating just the green beans and not touching any of the other food. If you ever had a meal with an anorexic. You might be familiar with this. It's kind of uncomfortable to be around. Actually they go through a lot of elaborate procedures to kind of hide food too. They'll sometimes even chew food, hold it in their mouth and then go to the bathroom and discard it things, very elaborate, very troubling types of things to hear about, and to be around. But you'll notice that they push food around their plate a lot. They become masterful actually at trying to keep people's awareness away from what they're doing, which is to hone in on these low fat, low calorie foods. And they can't seem to set shift. They can't just relax and enjoy the meal, because the meal for them is essentially like this where's Waldo or find the face in the coffee being tasked. They're constantly monitoring how much people are observing them and trying to navigate this. What would otherwise be a really pleasant circumstance for most people they're trying to navigate through this because remember for them, the reward is in the avoidance of certain things and the acquiring of only the foods that their brain rewards them for, because those are the foods that have been preselected and are now habit. What's amazing. And frankly also important are these findings that once you teach anorexics, what's happening to them, that they're doing this, they are able to intervene. Now they need support, right? And another form of therapy that seems to work well for anorexics that ideally is combined with this habit rewiring, is a family-based model. Family-based models are starting to surface a lot now in various therapy settings, therapy based models in short are basically where the entire family is made aware of the individual's challenges with a particular eating disorder or other disorder. And in understanding some of the biology and psychology around it, they stopped condemning the individual. They start to support that individual through queuing them towards their own habits that they observe. They give them some autonomy. They realize that none of this changes overnight, but they're taught about things like neuroplasticity and the ability to change one's brain in response to experience. And so there's a whole internal support network. Now, for people that live alone, this isn't available to them. This isn't the kind of thing that you share with your coworkers. You might involve a close friend or a spouse, but it's not the sort of thing that people that don't live in a family context can really benefit from. All of these things fall under the umbrella of cognitive behavioral therapy. And I should mention that cognitive behavioral therapies are often done in conjunction with pharmacologic therapies. I think that there's this idea out there that it's either, or when often it's both. So, cognitive behavioral are often combined with this habit recognition and rewiring approach, which is starting to become more and more common. And I think the date on it looked really good that especially when it individuals are taught this early in adolescence, that there are positive outcomes over time, the relapse rate of anorexia is quite high. It's about 50% of individuals will relapse at some point often triggered by a stressful life circumstance. But the combination of cognitive behavioral therapy that includes this family model, or at least habit reformulation seems to be fairly effective. And at present might be the most effective treatment. Now there are additional treatments starting to surface, and that takes us into the realm of chemical treatments for anorexia. And I just want to mention that there are clinical trials, meaning legal clinical trials being done at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine by Matthew Johnson and others, exploring how drugs like MDMA, which increases dopamine and serotonin to very high levels or siliciden so-called magic mushrooms, which increases serotonin and other compounds to very high levels within the confines of a professionally supported therapeutic environment can help people rewire their brain, such that they can get relief from major depression and various forms of trauma. And now eating disorders are also being explored in the context of MDMA and siliciden clinical trials. I do want to emphasize that those are clinical trials, that those compounds are not yet legal. And in many cases, most cases they are still illegal. I do not think that they should be explored without a properly trained medical doctor, that the clinical trials are essential to complete before one explores those compounds in particular, because lately I get a lot of emails about these compounds. People telling me that they've had amazing experiences and relief from various things, not just eating disorders, but depression, et cetera. However, I get an equal number of emails from people saying that they worked with some self appointed guide. This would be outside the clinical trials I was referring to, and they are now experiencing chronic visual, snow. They're getting genuine visual field deficits. They are havering ticks that they have never had before, they have chronic insomnia. So, I'm not passing judgment on any of these compounds or the people that are doing this sort of thing. I just want to see the clinical data. And I do believe that we should wait until these clinical trials are done before people start approaching the stuff. And that's because they are serious compounds. They can open plasticity, but whether or not they work quote unquote for different types of eating disorders or depression and trauma, the data are looking promising, but that the clinical trials are still not done. And I know a number of people are going out of the U.S. and into other countries where this stuff is being done more regularly and there too. I've gotten reports back of people doing so-called ibogaine treatments. Some of you who are familiar with eating disorders will immediately be asking, well, what about ibogaine? Does it work? Does it work? Well, the clinical trials in this country are not complete. I've heard evidence direct. I've heard directly from people who have benefited from the sorts of things, for treatment of eating disorders. But I've also heard of people that have developed chronic seizure disorders from pursuing things like ibogaine for the treatment of eating disorders. So, again, I'm not passing judgment. I would just like to see more data. And it's very important that the safety aspects of safety be in place. So, this is definitely not something to get renegade about. So, it appears that once anorexia has established that habit breaking through self-awareness of what the habits are, is going to be a primary entry point. That might seem kind of trivial. You might say, well, could you have just told us that in one sentence, but I want to return us to this model about homeostatic processes, reward, processes, et cetera. That leads us to a place where the short answer is no, you can't simply say break the habit. An individual needs to be informed about where that habit comes from. And the fact that what currently seems like a rewarded habit should actually be a punished habit. Now, I don't mean by actual punishment, but what I mean is within the brain, there's been a switch and the anorexic needs to learn that there's been a switch such that what should be rewarding is now punished and what should be punished. Starvation is now rewarded. The beauty of being a human being is that knowledge of knowledge can allow you to make better decisions. I'll say that again, the beauty of being a human being is that knowledge of knowledge can allow you to make better decisions. Now, of course, when we are anxious, when we are tired, when we are intoxicated, we have less access to that ability to use knowledge of knowledge, to intervene. The anorexic will often do things that are in keeping with their habits, such as overexercising. This is a area that anyone who's treated anorexics or interacted with anorexics is well aware of, that they are constantly moving. They're constantly on the treadmill. They're constantly running. They always want to be moving and burning calories, so that they can feel okay about interacting with food or because they have the distorted body image. Well, does breaking a habit mean that they should stop moving around and exercising? No, not necessarily. There's some really interesting studies that show that shifting anorexics towards activities that for instance, build muscle resistance training and allow them to eat a bit more food without necessarily losing weight, but rather to put more muscle on their body can actually be beneficial. Now I'm not talking about anorexics becoming bodybuilders, has all body dysmorphia associated with bodybuilding, but certain forms of exercise are just catabolic. Meaning they break down the amount of muscle. They reduce body weight, overall, other types of exercises like resistance training or anabolic, they allow muscle to be put on. And there are some interesting studies, not a lot, but some interesting studies trying to encourage anorexics, not to stop exercising, but rather to stop exercising in this neurotic catabolic way of breaking oneself down, but rather getting them shifted toward breaking habits of only approaching low calorie, low fat foods, while also encouraging them to embark on resistance training and to start to learn and reward the relationship between exercise for sake of making one's body strong, including the bones, not just the muscles, but the bones, which is important, especially in anorexics. And then to see food as a way to nourish that process, to building a body that could be of the stable weight. Hopefully there, once the anorexic is of a healthy weight that they're maintaining that weight, but that they don't have to constantly be on this treadmill, no pun intended of balancing whatever food intake they have with activity. And along the lines of that. During the episode on fat loss and metabolism as well, I talked about this neat and non-exercise induced thermogenesis where people who tend to be thin, tend to bounce around a lot. They're kind of fidgety and that burns 1000 of calories a day, anywhere from 800 to 2000 calories a day. Now that can be beneficial for the folks that are overweight and have a healthy mindset about food, but are trying to lose weight. And it turns out that by, you literally fidgeting and bouncing around, like, this is why I'm doing this. It looks ridiculous. You actually burn a lot of body fat and calories. That way provide you're in a caloric deficit, you'll burn body fat because body fat is not just a passive tissue. It actually receives input from neurons that release noradrenaline and adrenaline. And this neat. Has been described for several decades now. And it actually is a pretty terrific way to burn off more calories. So, with the anorexic, you actually want to encourage them to not constantly be trying to burn off calories. That can be very challenging. So, shifting them toward activities like weight bearing activities or resistance training that promote this more anabolic type of relationship to activity, as opposed to catabolic can be beneficial. Before we move on to talking about bulimia and some related disorders, I want to talk about an aspect of anorexia. That's very interesting, quite troubling in fact, but that has received a lot of attention and that's the distorted self image. Now, episode and depression, we talked about a very powerful aspect of major depression, which is this anti-self confabulation that people who are depressed seem to genuinely believe. And even confabulate about the fact that they are performing poorly in life and that they are no good or not, or worthless, et cetera. It's literally a lie that they believe and their statements and their feelings and their behaviors start to reflect that lie. They're not conscious of it. That's why we call it a confabulation. Anorexics often will see themselves as overweight or imperfect in ways that are of an obsession for them, they'll think, oh, you know, their arms are a little bit fat, you know, or, you know, the contour, their face makes they don't like the pictures of themselves or they. What I'm describing here is actually pretty typical behavior of a lot of people. I mean, how many people do you know that after you take a picture of them, they say, can I see the picture? And then they tell you that you have to throw it away. That doesn't necessarily mean they're anorexic or they're suffering from some sort of disorder. That just means that they're a human being that cares about how they appear in the world. We're not here to judge that in the case of the anorexic. The problem seems to be that they have a genuine distortion of their self image so much so that they don't actually see themselves accurately, their visual perceptions are off. And the reason we know this, it's because of some really important and beautiful studies that were done with my colleague, Jeremy Bailenson's lab at Stanford, he's in the department of communications, he's actually collaborated with a Dr. Halpern that I mentioned earlier. What's really interesting about these studies is they give us a window into the perceptual defect that anorexics have. I've actually done one of these experiments. I'm fortunate to not be anorexic, but I've done some work with the VR lab over there. And what you get to do is you get to adjust this avatar of yourself to the point where you think it's, as accurate as it could possibly be, and anorexics, really distort this avatar. In other words, they create this serious mismatch between their perception of themselves and the reality. So, indeed it does seem to be the case now what's relieving, or I should say what's encouraging about some of the therapies that we talked about before the family based model, the Connie behavioral treatments. Yes, and the drug treatments as well. But this habit intervention model is that as one starts to shift those things, it does appear that the perception of self seems to follow that the perception of self seems to shift along with the change in habits. And that's a relief, or at least I find that reassuring because changing one's perception is actually very hard, as somebody who's worked almost his entire career on visual perception and related things. The perceptual apparatus of the brain are not very amenable to neuroplasticity, meaning they don't change that easily. Whereas it appears that the circuitry that's related to habit formation, and decision-making and the reward, circuitry, that stuff can be rewired. And so anorexics as they progress out of their anorexic state into one, which they are intervening in their reflexes, gaining better habits around food, eating more, more accurately, assessing foods and environments that they're in related to food, as they change their behavior. And they start to put on healthy weight, maybe they're also doing the sorts of exercises that allow them to put on healthy weight and avoiding kind of extreme exercises of cannibalism and breaking themselves down. They also managed to somehow just as a consequence of all that rewire their perception of self. So, it doesn't seem that trying to tell someone, oh my gosh, you're so thin. You really need to eat. That doesn't seem to work. They just don't see themselves the same way that you see them. And so I offer that as a point of consideration, if you know someone that's anorexic, or if you look at an anorexic and you think, how is it that they are still critical of the small, even nonexistent amount of body fat on their triceps or something? How is that? Well, it's literally that their brain, as it relates to perceptions, visual perceptions in particular, they're completely off. And fortunately by changing habits, you rewire those circuits as well. Okay, so let's talk about bulimia, which is overeating and then purging typically by self-induced vomiting or by ingestion of laxatives, sometimes also in concert with people taking stimulants and fat burners, over ingestion of stimulus to try and burn off more energy. And then we'll also talk about binge eating disorder, which has a lot of the same features as bulimia, but typically no purging. I'm not going to list off all the clinical criteria that would allow someone to be diagnosed as bulimic or binge eating disorder. But the general features are that they ingest far more calories than they need, anywhere from 10 to 30 times, their daily caloric intake, oftentimes within a two hour period, which is just a staggering amount of food and nutrients in a short period of time. Oftentimes they're overriding those mechanical signals from the body that they're full. It's a really troubling thing to think about, but people are literally gorging themselves with food. This looks a lot like a laboratory animal that has these AgRP neurons stimulated, these neurons that will eat until they almost burst or burst. So, you wonder is that these AgRP neurons that are active almost certainly yes. That they're involved. Although I don't think that that's going to be the major point of intervention, but we're going to talk about other types of interventions. There are a number of clinical criteria. For instance, if somebody has one of these binges once a year, does that make them bulimic? Technically, no, but I certainly don't recommend people do this. If you are one of these people who has so-called cheat days, right? Some of you may be familiar with cheat days. I think they're a little less common now, but the idea is you eat clean for six days or five days a week or two weeks. And then you have a so-called cheat day where you just kind of go wild and eat whatever you want and whatever volumes is that bulimia. And it has some of the contour of bulimia. If you're vomiting afterwards or binge eating disorder, if you're not, does it constitute full blown bulimia or binge eating disorder? And it's pretty hard to say, the criteria that were described to me is that if somebody is doing this at least once a month, over a period of anywhere from two to three months, then it likely would qualify. And I certainly know people who do these cheat days and by those criteria, they have something like binge eating disorder. But in general, one of the hallmark features of bulimia binge eating disorder is that people are unable to control their eating. They're just simply, they're not making the decision to have a cheat day. They're not making the decision to overeat. They are simply driven from the inside without question by way of neurocircuitry. They are driven from the inside to ingest far more food than they need. And in some cases than they would want to eat. So, it's a lot like the habit that we described for anorexia, it's almost like it's turned into a reflux once they get going, all the homeostatic signals are being overridden, all the signals from the body, the leptin, the insulin, the glucose, all that stuff has cosmically sky high. And yet they're just what we, the nerds call hyperphagic, they're just eating like crazy. So, what's going on there? Well, there've been a lot of ideas, about why this arises. There's the so-called thyroid hormone hypothesis. That one's a tricky one. It turns out that cortisol and thyroid hormone concentrations vary according to when the binge purge happened. So, there were some studies that looked at thyroid hormone levels and they found elevated thyroid hormone levels. Thyroid hormone is involved in metabolism and not just the burning of energy, but the use of energy in converting it to different tissues of the body, cartilage bone, fat, and muscle, et cetera, did a whole episode on thyroid and growth hormone. By the way, if you're interested in learning more about thyroid hormone, but thyroid hormone can also be depleted at other phases of the binge purge cycle. Now, without listing off all the terrible things that happen with this binge purge cycle, there are a number of things that are really worth pointing out. One is that the vomiting itself, the use of laxatives that can cause severe disruption to the mucosal lining the mucus lining of the digestive tract can severely disrupt the gut microbiome. It can cause all sorts of even a ulceration of the esophagus and just really terrible stuff. There's a lot of shame associated with bulimia, oftentimes because people are vomiting and it's hard to hide that vomiting behavior, people are aware of it. There's some social isolation. So, you recall from the beginning, it does not appear that sexual trauma is a prerequisite for bulimia. Although sometimes it can occur the hallmark feature of bulimia that distinguishes it from anorexia, aside from the fact that it's overeating as opposed to under-eating is a lack of what they call inhibitory control. And that might come as no surprise. But first of all, the bulimic, unlike the anorexic is hyper impulsive and oftentimes has other types of impulse behaviors. They might have a little bit of alcohol and then start to eat like crazy. Whereas normally they're very restrictive. That's a common feature of bulimia, sometimes they over ingest alcohol during these binges. Sometimes they are sexually promiscuous, not always, but it's a general issue with satiety once they start eating and with impulse control generally. And for that reason, many of the treatments that you see for bulimia and binge eating disorder are the sorts of treatments that don't seem to work so well, or at least most of the time for anorexia. So, the drugs that increase the neuromodulator serotonin, for instance, fluoxetine also called Prozac, Paxil, et cetera. Those things oftentimes can be effective in bulimia. Some of the drugs that are used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder an ADD, a topic that we're going to talk about in depth here on the podcast soon, some of those same drugs like Adderall, Vyvanse and things of that sort can also be used to treat bulimia and binge eating disorder. Why would that work? Well now you are familiar with the prefrontal cortex. You probably know more about prefrontal cortex than you ever wanted to, just from this episode, prefrontal cortex is involved in this analysis of duration path and outcome. Duration path and outcome is how we avoid impulsivity. It's how we think. Okay, if this, then that, if that, then this, you can imagine how for the obsessive compulsive or for the anorexic, these are circuits that are overactive. For the bulimic this is the circuit that's going to essentially be underactive and is under conditions where they think, oh, you know, I shouldn't eat anything. I shouldn't eat anything. And then they just tear the refrigerator open and plow through that. And then at that point they're plowing through the cupboards and then they're ordering food. And then they're feeling horrible about themselves. There do tend to be these cycles of binge and purge followed by feelings of real shame because they just can't control their behavior. And what is more embarrassing than not being able to control one's behavior as an adult or as a young adult. So, really the polar opposite of what you see in anorexia. So, this lack of impulsivity implies a lack of prefrontal control. What we call top-down control. Why do we call it top-down? Because the prefrontal cortex is suppressing the activity of deeper limbic and hypothalamic circuitry, and things of that sort. Anytime you feel like you want to say something really offensive and you don't, that's top-down control. That's your prefrontal cortex. Anytime someone says something and you like grow your teeth. 'Cause you'd know you shouldn't say anything, gritting your teeth is top-dow control, okay? When you explode or burst or say the wrong thing, or say the thing that you shouldn't say or do the thing you shouldn't do, that's lack of prefrontal control. And indeed people who have frontotemporal dementia due to aging or head injuries, see this a lot and people play sports get a lot frontal damage. They become more impulsive. So, bulimics have an issue with impulsivity, and therefore drugs that can increase serotonin. And sometimes these drugs that increase dopamine and adrenaline also called epinephrin, will increase the tone as we call it the dopaminergic tone or the, it's called adrenergic, but norepinephrine levels in the brain allow for more top-down control. And that's also why they're used to treat ADHD and attention deficit disorder. They tend to create a hyper-focus. They tend to push the brain into, these drugs tend to create a hyper-focus, and tend to push the brain and general motor processing into one in which you think if this, then that, if this, then that, so anticipating outcomes. And for that reason, drugs like Wellbutrin, bupropion, which is an antidepressant, which mainly increases the amount of dopamine and norepinephrine and less serotonin, that can also be effective for certain types of binge-eating disorder is actually used to treat smoking, for promoting smoking cessation and for depression, but also for certain forms of obesity related to binge eating disorder. And the data are pretty good. And there are timed release forms of this and non-time release forms. And I think you have to consult with a psychiatrist in order to get these prescribed because they are prescription drugs, but it's a very different constellation of neurochemicals and brain areas and approaches for bulimia. The treatment of binge eating disorder has been explored from a new standpoint recently. And that's the work of this now, sadly, former colleague of mine, Dr. Casey Halpern, who's at University of Pennsylvania that I mentioned earlier, they are using deep brain stimulation in order to treat binge-eating disorder. Now why deep brain stimulation? Well work from Dr. Halpern and others while at Stanford showed that there are particular patterns of brain activity in both the prefrontal cortex, but also in an area of the brain called the nucleus accumbens, very important and very relevant area of the brain in this context, and in any discussion about motivated behaviors of any kind, feeding, sex, drug relay behavior, people exercise compulsively, the nucleus accumbens is in a ongoing dialogue with the prefrontal cortex and the nucleus accumbens has no mind of its own, but it's associated with dopamine release. It's part of this so-called reward pathway. And what Dr. Halpern and colleagues discovered is that there are particular patterns of activity that ripple through the brain, through these prefrontal networks and through this nucleus accumbens area, those areas are connected. It's called Delta oscillations, Delta, just being a particular frequency of electrical activity for your aficionado as wonderful heart activity. But in any case, those Delta oscillations in the nucleus accumbens are associated with food reward in both mice and humans. Somehow this reverberatory activity creates a perception in the individual that food is hyper rewarding. And that's interesting, and has allowed them to use a targeted deep brain stimulation approach to treat binge-eating disorder. And this deep brain stimulation is appearing to be an effective treatment. There's still more studies that need to be done. Actually, if you think you have binge-eating disorder, you can find the criteria for that. And you could contact Dr. Halpern he's. As I mentioned, he's moving to University of Pennsylvania. They are recruiting patients for these studies all the time. The studies are fairly invasive. They involve a FDA approved approach of literally placing a wire down into an area of the brain that, and allows the individual to stimulate a particular brain area to offset some of these activity patterns that lead to a elevated sense of reward from food and binge eating. And the data looked really promising. Now I realize that's a very invasive approach. Not everybody is going to be willing to have this wire inserted into the brain, but for people that suffer from binge-eating disorder. This is a great and very exciting potential treatment. Because what I didn't tell you is that many people have binge eating disorder are obese to the point where their health is greatly risk. Now, obesity causes all sorts of shifts in the dialogue between the brain and body. Some of which you'll recognize from earlier in the discussion, for instance, leptin signaling is disrupted. So, the fat there's lots of body fat, but even though that body fat is secreting, this hormone leptin in that signal should shut down the desire to eat. The receptors to leptin in the brain are totally screwed up. And so the signal to eat is there, but the signal to stop eating is not there. So, again, you have an accelerator and a brake, and it's like, the accelerator has always pushed down. Some of these brain stimulation approaches seem to be able to bypass some of that, and of course there all the metabolic syndromes and the problems with having excess levels of body fat, things like insulin resistance, type two diabetes. I mean, as disturbing as is to here, there are many individuals, actually, I know some who are so obese that they start getting bodily sores. They're not just bedsores, but they have skin sores that are very disruptive to them. They don't like having these sores. And in addition to that, they can get peripheral neuropathies because of some of these metabolic issues. They're not getting enough utilization of the nutrients in the tissue, because the way that insulin has disrupted insulin singling, and they actually have to have certain portions of their limbs amputated, and yet they continue to overeat. So, this is not an issue of self-control that can easily be dealt with simply by telling the person, look, you have to stop eating or you're going to die, or you're going to have your legs amputated. Like with anorexia, there's a distortion in the relationship to food, but the homeostatic and the reward aspects are disrupted. So, unlike anorexia, where it seems to be a habit based mechanism with bulimia and binge eating disorder, something deep within the neural circuitry is causing food to be hyper attractive and the break is off. So, if you want to develop some empathy for what these people are dealing with, consider this, it's like driving a car, you get onto a grade, maybe a 10 or 15 degree grade, and you're heading down and you figure, well, you'll just pump the brakes a little bit, but there is no break, right? So, you start going faster and faster and faster. And your only choice is to use the accelerator just to coach through it. That's essentially what's happening to these neural circuits. So, the work of Dr. Halpern and others, I think is really exciting. And even though it's highly invasive, I think is going to lead to not just some relief for the patients that do get that deep brain stimulation, but also the identification of what sorts of receptors are present in those brain areas. That could help. What that means is that once we understand which brain areas are involved in disorder, and we understand what receptors, those brain areas express, then there can start to be additional interventions by way of non invasive treatments, things like drug treatments, do behavioral interventions work for bulimia? In some cases, yes, provided that those interventions are done early enough. Regardless, behavioral interventions, coupled with drug based interventions are always more effective than either one alone. Fortunately, there is a decent size kit of drugs that can help with bulimia. I mentioned some of them before things like bupropion, Welbutrin some of the serotonergic drugs and some of the drugs used to treat impulsivity. So, we have on the one hand anorexia, which seems to be a disruption in habit and a coupling of unhealthy habits in this case, food restriction to the reward pathway. And on the flip side, we have binge eating disorder and bulimia where a very unhealthy habit of gorging oneself with food sometimes followed by purging, is not necessarily coupled to reward. They feel terrible when they do that, right? The anorexic feels great about restricting their food intake. They feel like they're winning some sort of game. The circuitry is flipped somehow that way. With bulimia they feel horrible about the fact that they're bingeing, there's immense shame. They can't control themselves. The reward is set up before the behavior, the reward is set up in drawing them to food and in making food look like something that's incredibly appetizing and there's no impulse break. There's no way for them to stop that kind of behavior. So, really kind of troubling thing to think about. In either case, I think for those of us that know anorexics or have observed anorexia, it's so hard to see somebody starved themselves to near death or to death. What more could be disturbing? Well, equally disturbing is somebody who has an abundance of food and is gorging themselves, and then feels terrible about it. So, these are heavy topics. These are topics that frankly no one really wants to talk about unless they know someone who is suffering from them, or they themselves suffer from them. What I've tried to do today is try and give you a window into what really underlies these things that we call eating disorders. I hope I've done that at the level of biology neurocircuitry mechanism endocrinology, and some of the psychology, as with any episode of this podcast. But especially in this month where we're talking about mental health issues and mental health disorders, behavioral disorders, there's no way that I can exhaustively cover all the different forms of treatment. You have the modely approach, you've got all these different approaches to depression, into anorexia, et cetera. What I've tried to do is give you a framework. And in doing that, I've tried to give you a framework of understanding that also applies to this question. That's I think equally important and goes alongside the treatment of eating disorders is what in the world is healthy eating. What in the world is a healthy relationship to food. I like to think that I have a healthy relationship to food. I know the foods I like. I enjoy them. They're 10 or 15 foods in particular that I liked very much. I've mentioned a few of them on the podcast before, and I was sort of amused, surprised and perplexed as to why. For instance, I do enjoy eating butter, not in huge amounts, but I do like butter. So, that seemed to be pretty triggering for folks out there. A small selection of people decided that the ingestion of butter was a health concern. Look to me, ingesting butter in small quantities is something that I'm comfortable with. And my blood lipid profiles feel good. They look good to me. For other people that might not be the case. For some people. The idea of eating an animal-based food is probably so repulsive that it actually can make them feel physically sick. And I think that we should be aware that that kind of mental phenotype exists. I'm not calling it a pathology for other people like myself, things like butter and meat feel healthy. Now, what quantities? Well, I enjoy eating very much. I'm not shy about this. I've talked about on the podcast before, I enjoy eating. Some people have a very complicated relationship to food. They don't think of it as nourishment. They don't enjoy it socially. It's a stressful thing for them based on their personal history, or maybe just general anxiety around food. And I hope that in sharing this information about the fact that anytime we approach food, these neurons in our hype, in the arcuate area of our hypothalamus actually increase our levels of anxiety. This is related to that point that Dr. Halpern made, which was that from an evolutionary standpoint, it is advantageous to ingest as much food as often as possible, as quickly as possible. We now know that to not be healthy in this age of abundance, where calories are essentially everywhere. And yet a lot of people feel anxious in anticipation of a meal. What could be useful to them? Well, whether or not they have an eating disorder or not. It's very clear that developing methods to calm oneself in the presence of any anxiety or fear inducing stimulus can be beneficial. I've talked about some of these episodes related to stress, things like the physiological side to inhale through the nose and a long exhale, things like mindfulness meditation certainly can help. There are data, a lot of studies out there showing that meditation practice can help people deal with eating related anxiety and disorders. I think as a general rule, trying to avoid approaching a meal or sitting down to eat in an anxious state is probably a good idea, but let's be realistic. How often can we do that? I think most of us are going to have circumstances where we're rushing around trying to just eat before we head out or get to a meal. And then we sit down and we find ourselves eating. This is one of the first times in human evolution where we mostly eat out of a desire to consume food, not out of a need for food. Most everybody could go a fairly long period of time, just ingesting water and electrolytes. And not that I'm suggesting people do that, but let's face it. We largely eat nowadays because of a desire to eat, not a need to eat, and yet we need to eat on a fairly regular basis. And so no topic is more complicated and nuanced than food and nutrition. And in particular, as it relates to eating disorders. So, the major takeaways today are, we should all be asking the question, what is healthy eating for us? How do we develop a relationship to food that we can enjoy food, hopefully both socially and on our own, but that we are not neurotic and compulsive about it. For those of you that intermittent fast, this also applies, right? What, you know, God forbid, if you eat 30 minutes before your eating window starts, what does that mean? If it means something catastrophic, do you have an eating disorder? I don't know. Maybe you have an anxiety disorder, that's for you to explore. If you don't manage to eat five meals a day and that's your obsession. Well, then, you know, the same thing applies. These are questions that we can all ask ourselves. Today, we focus on the extremes of food related behaviors that really qualify as genuine disorders. They are in the psychiatric manuals and they are diagnosable and they are serious health concerns. They're not just mentally troubling and concerning for the people suffering from them and the people around them, but they are genuine health concerns, just want to reiterate, that interaction nervosa is the most deadly psychiatric disorder by a huge margin. And if you look statistically at the number of people with eating disorders and that die of eating disorders, it's not far off from the number of people that die from automobile accidents. I know that that sounds like a ridiculous number, but you can look this up. This is particularly true in certain countries, why that is, we don't know, but again, this is not a new phenomenon. This is not just related to body image issues that are created through social media. And as a final point on that, many of you are probably asking what about plastic surgery? What about all the steps that people are going through? Excuse me, to preen themselves and change themselves. Are people addicted to plastic surgery? Is that a form of body dysmorphia? And indeed it is. And so we will do an episode on exercise related and plastic surgery related body dysmorphia. I think there is very little question that those types of disorders are clearly related to what we're observing in social media and in media, that this shift of, for instance, action heroes. If you look at action heroes in the '80s, there were very few men that were very large. You had your terminate, you had your stallone's in your shorts and eggers and a few others, but the men in movies tended to be, if they were muscular, they were far more svelte than they are now. There's this kind of, there's a, literally a hypertrophy of the imagery. And likewise there's been hypertrophy of the female body shape. As it's portrayed in the media. There are body dysmorphia that are related to those types of things. And that relate to things like plastic surgery, steroid abuse, diet, drug abuse, and so on. Definitely important to think about and consider, and definitely deserving of its own episode. You've learned a lot of neuroscience today. I hope that was useful in thinking about these disorders and in thinking about other aspects of feeding and motivated behaviors, I would love for you to take away this model that was handed off to me, that I think is so powerful for thinking about all sorts of things, not just eating, but all kinds of behaviors and perceptions that you have one box for what you think, one box for what you do and what is intervening between those? Why is it that you can know better and not do better? Well it's because you also have to cope with the subconscious homeostatic processes and reward processes. And those oftentimes can be disrupted in ways that we find ourselves doing things that are not good for us or not good for other people. But fortunately, there is this great gift, which is that knowledge of knowledge can allow you to do better without question. And that knowledge of knowledge allowing you to do better over time leads to this incredible phenomenon called neuroplasticity, which essentially is translated into doing better over time. Even if difficult eventually makes doing better reflexive. If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's Huberman Lab on YouTube. And there, you can also leave us comments and feedback and suggestions for future topics and future guests for the Huberman Lab Podcast. As well we hope that you will subscribe on both Apple and Spotify and on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review and to give us feedback there as well. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, that's a terrific way to support the podcast. And if you'd like to support research on stress, human performance, sleep and so forth, you can go to a hubermanlab.stanford.edu. And there there's a tab that you can click. If you'd like to make a tax deductible donation to the laboratory, to explore the sorts of things that relate to neurocircuits stress, sleep and human performance. Not today, but oftentimes on this podcast, we discuss various compounds and supplements that people could possibly take in order to help deal with anxiety, improve gut microbiome, improve their sleep, et cetera. We didn't discuss those today, but for those of you interested in those compounds, if you want to see the ones that I take, you can go to Thorne that's T-H-O-R-N-E .com/the letter U/huberman. So, it's thorne.com/u/huberman. See all the supplements that I take, you get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you enter the Thorne site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes we partnered with Thorne because they have the highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of ingredients, the precision of the amounts of those ingredients. And while supplements are certainly not required or necessary for anything really, you can always use behavioral tools. Many people benefit from taking supplements of various kinds. And we do believe that getting supplements of the very highest quality is going to be important if that's the decision for you. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention. And thank you for your interest in science. [fast-paced music]

========================================

--- Video 312 ---
Video ID: DtmwtjOoSYU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DtmwtjOoSYU
Title: Dr. Robert Sapolsky: Science of Stress, Testosterone & Free Will
Published: 2021-08-30 12:00:05 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I interview Dr. Robert Sapolsky, Ph.D., Professor of Biology, Neurology & Neurosurgery at Stanford University. We discuss stress, what defines short-term versus long-term stress, and how stress can be beneficial or detrimental, depending on the context. We also discuss stress mitigation and how our sense of control over stress mitigation techniques, including exercise, determine health outcomes. Dr. Sapolsky explains some of the key effects of the hormone testosterone — how it can amplify pre-existing tendencies for aggression or sexual behavior, but that it does not produce those behaviors per se. He also explains how testosterone impacts our social hierarchies, sense of confidence, and willingness to embrace challenges of different kinds. He also explains how our behaviors and perceptions shape testosterone levels. And we discuss estrogen and the powerful role it plays in brain development, health and longevity. Finally, we discuss free will, what it means to have free will, and if we have any free will, including how knowledge alone might allow us to make better decisions for ourselves and society. 

Please visit our website for an updated list of our current sponsors, as the sponsors mentioned in this episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs

Links
Dr. Sapolsky's most recent book, "Behave: The Biology of Humans At Our Best & Worst": https://amzn.to/3yrZ6k7
Support Research in the Huberman Lab at Stanford on Stress, Sleep & Human Performance: https://hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction: Dr. Robert Sapolsky 
00:02:26 Sponsors: Roka, InsideTracker 
00:06:30 Stress: Short & Long-Term, Good & Bad 
00:09:11 Valence & Amygdala 
00:11:00 Testosterone: Common Myths vs. Actual Truths 
00:15:15 Behaviors that Affect Testosterone  
00:17:20 Mindsets & Contexts that Affect Testosterone
00:20:28 How Finger Length Ratios Reflect Prenatal Hormone Levels  
00:22:30 Aggression: Male-Female, Female-Male, & Female-Female 
00:24:05 Testosterone: The Challenge Hypothesis 
00:29:20 How Dopamine Impacts Testosterone & Motivation 
00:32:32 Estrogen: Improves Brain & Longevity BUT TIMING IS KEY 
00:39:40 Are Testosterone & Sperm Counts in Males Really Dropping? 
00:42:15 Stress Mitigation & Our Sense of Control 
00:51:35 How Best to Buffer Stress 
00:57:04 Power of Perception, Choice & Individual Differences 
01:00:32 Context-Setting, Prefrontal Cortex & Hierarchy 
01:11:20 How Dr. Sapolsky Accomplishes Deep Thinking  
01:13:17 Do We Have Free Will? 
01:20:50 How to Apply Knowledge & Learning  
01:23:44 Robert’s New Book: “Determined: The Science of Life Without Free Will” 
01:28:27 Reflections, Support of Podcast, & Supporting Stress Research 

#HubermanLab #Testosterone #Stress

Photo credit: Linda A. Cicero (used with permission from Stanford Medicine Media)

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Robert Sapolsky. Dr. Sapolsky is a Professor of Biology and Neurosurgery at Stanford University. His laboratory has worked on a large variety of topics, including stress, hormones, including testosterone and estrogen, and how the different members of a given species interact according to factors like hormones, hierarchy within primate troops, and how things like stress, reproduction and competition impact behavior. One of the things that makes Dr. Sapolsky's work so unique is that it combines elements from primatology, including field studies with human behavior, in essence trying to unveil how humans as old world primates are controlled by different elements of our biology as well as our psychology. Dr. Sapolsky is also a prolific author of popular books, such as "Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers", "The Trouble with Testosterone", and "Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst". During the course of our discussion today, Robert also revealed to me that he is close to completing a new book entitled, "Determined: The Science of Life Without Freewill." And indeed we discuss the science of life without freewill during this episode. We also discuss stress and how best to control stress and how stress controls us at both, conscious and subconscious levels. We talk about testosterone and estrogen and hormone replacement therapy and how those impact our mind, our psychology and our interactions with others. As with any discussion with Dr. Sapolsky, we learn about scientific mechanisms that make us who we are. And today we also discuss tools and how we can leverage those scientific mechanisms in order to be better versions of ourselves. I should mention that unlike most guest interviews on the Huberman Lab podcast, this one had to be carried out remotely due to various constraints, so you may hear the occasional audio artifact, please excuse that. We felt that the value of a conversation with Dr. Sapolsky was well-worth those minor, minor glitches. And indeed the information that he delivers us is tremendously valuable, interesting, and in many cases actionable as well. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA, ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about the design of the sunglasses and eyeglasses was created with performance in mind. There are several things I like about ROKA glasses so much. One of them is that the aesthetic of the glasses is great. Unlike a lot of performance glasses out there that you can wear while swimming and running but also indoors, these glasses don't make you look like a cyborg. The aesthetic of them is really terrific, and they have a lot of different styles to select from. In addition to that, the quality of the lenses on both the sunglasses and eyeglasses are superb. The optical clarity is great, you can move from brightly lit areas to shadowed areas, and you don't get any degradation in the quality of the visual image. And that's absolutely essential. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's ROKA.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done. And now with the advent of quality DNA tests, you can get a lot of information about your genetics and how that also impacts your immediate and long-term health. The reason I'm such a fan of getting blood work done is that it is really the only way to understand what's going on in your system at a level that can really inform your decisions about your immediate and long-term health. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is that you get numbers back about your hormones and your metabolic factors, etc., but you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have a very easy to use dashboard that gives you that information, and then gives you some suggestions and directives about things you could change about your nutrition, about your exercise and other lifestyle factors that can help you move those numbers in the direction that's best for you and for your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to InsideTracker.com/Huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker plans, just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic grass-fed and finished certified humane meats. I eat meat about once a day, in general my lunch or my breakfast consists of some meat, and that meat has to be of very high-quality, and generally I'll eat some vegetable as well. And then I tend to eat pastas and rice and things of that sort later in the day or in the evening in order to facilitate the transition to sleep. So I'm eating meat about once a day, and I always insist that the meat that I eat be of the very highest quality and that the animals were raised and maintained humanely. While conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots and eat a diet of inflammatory grains, Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses resulting in meat that's higher in nutrients and healthy fats. In addition, they raise their animals in a way that's not just better for our health, but also has a positive impact on the environment. They practice regenerative agriculture, which means the meat is climate positive and carbon negative. So you can feel good about what you're eating at the environmental level and for sake of your health. You can order Belcampo's sustainably raised meats to be delivered to you by using my code Huberman at Belcampo.com/Huberman and entering my code Huberman to get 20% off your first time order. I'm partial to the ribeyes or the New York steaks, so on one day I might have a ribeye, the next day I might have a New York steak, I also really like the meatballs, I'm a particular fan of the meatballs. So, again, that's Belcampo.com/Huberman and enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off your order. And now without further ado, my conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. Great, well, thank you so much, Robert, for joining us today. I've been looking forward to this for a very long time and I appreciate it. - Oh yes, glad to be here. - There is an enormous range of topics that we could drill into, but just to start off, I want to return to a topic that is near and dear to your heart, which is stress. And one of the questions that I get most commonly is, what is the difference between short and long-term stress in terms of their benefits and their drawbacks? And the reason I say benefits is that, obviously stress and the stress response can keep us alive, but stress, of course, can also sharpen our mental acuity and things of that sort. So how should we conceptualize stress and how should we conceptualize stress in the short-term and in the long-term? - Well, basically sort of two graphs that one would draw. The first one is just all sorts of beneficial effects of stress short-term, and then once we get into chronicity, it's just downhill from there. Short-term because it saves you from the predator, short-term because you're giving a presentation and you think more clearly or your focus is better, all sorts of aspects of that. And what then winds up being an argument is, how long does it take to go from short-term to long-term? And that's somewhat arbitrary, but the sorts of chronic stressors that most people deal with are just undeniably in the chronic range, like having spent the last 20 years, daily traffic jams or abusive boss or some such thing. The other curve that's sort of perpendicular to this is dealing with the fact that sometimes stress is a great thing. Like our goal is not to cure people of stress because if it's a right kind, we love it. We pay good money to be stressed that way by a scary movie or a rollercoaster ride. What you wind up seeing is when it's the right amount of stress, it's what we call stimulation. And the basic curve there is, here is an optimal level of stimulation and too little, and function goes down with what we would call boredom, and too much and function goes down with what we would call stress. And the optimum is what all of us aim for. - In terms of the benefits of stress in the short-term, one thing that's really striking to me is, how physiologically the stress response looks so much like the excitement response to a positive event. And we can speculate that the fundamental difference between short-term stress and short-term excitement is some neuromodulator like dopamine or something like that. But is there anything else that we know about the biology that reveals to us? What really creates this thing we call valence that an experience can be terrible or feel awful, or it can feel wonderful, exhilarating depending on this somewhat subjective feature we call valence? Do we know what valence is or where it resides? - On a really mechanical level, if you're in a circumstance that is requiring that your heart races and you're breathing as fast and you're using your muscles and some such thing, you're going to to be having roughly the same brain activation profile, whether this is for something wonderful or something terrible with the one exception being that if the amygdala is part of the activation, this is something that's going to be counting as adverse. Whether that's the circumstance, an adverse circumstance recruiting the amygdala into it, and how much it's the amygdala being involved, biases you towards interpreting it as even more awful. The amygdala in some ways is kind of the checkpoint as to whether we're talking about excitement or terror. - Let's use the amygdala as a transition point to another topic that you've spent many years working on and thinking about, which is testosterone and other sex steroid hormones. I heard you say once before that among all the brain areas that bind testosterone, that where testosterone can park and create effects that the amygdala is among the most chockablock full of these parking spots, these receptors. I realize there's a lot here, but how should we think about the role of testosterone in the amygdala given that the engagement of the amygdala is fundamental in this transition point between a exhilarating, positive response and a negative stressful response? Or maybe just broadly, how should we think about testosterone and its effects on the brain? - And pertinent to the transition from whether this is a stressor that's evoking fear or revoking aggression in terms of that continuum, also because the amygdala is in the center of all four points on those axes. Basically, almost everybody out there has a completely wrong idea as to what testosterone does, which is testosterone makes you aggressive because males, virtually every species out there have more testosterone and a more aggressive and seasonal measures have testosterone surging at the time of year, they're punching it out over territory. And you take testosterone out of the picture, you castrate any mammal out there, including us, and levels of aggression will go down. And the easy thing then tends to conclude that testosterone causes aggression. And the reality is testosterone does no such thing, it doesn't cause aggression. And you can see this both behaviorally and in the amygdala. What does testosterone do? It lowers the threshold for the sort of things that would normally provoke you into being [mumbles] so that it happens more easily. It makes systems that are already turned on, turn on louder rather than turning on aggressive music or some such thing. What does that look like behaviorally? You take five male monkeys, put them together, they form a dominance hierarchy. Number one is great, number five is miserable, number three is right in between. Now take number three and shoot the guy up with tons of testosterone and he's going to be involved in more fights. Aha, testosterone uniformly causes aggression, but you look closely and there's a pattern to it, is number three now challenging numbers two and one for their place in the hierarchy. Absolutely not, he is brown-nosing them exactly as much as he used to. What's going on is he's just a miserable terror to poor number four and five. And in that case, what testosterone is doing is amplifying the preexisting patterns of aggression. Amplifying the social learning, that's where it'd gone into there. Now on sort of the more reductive level, so how does that translate into the amygdala? Does testosterone make amygdaloid neurons have action potentials? Does it cause those neurons to suddenly speak about fear and aggression spontaneously? Absolutely not. What they do is, if the amygdala is already being stimulated, it increases the rate of neuronal firing. What its worth? It shortens after-hyperpolarizations. So the theme there exactly is, it's not creating your aggression, it's just upping the volume of whatever aggression is already there. And once you factor that in, it's impossible to say anything about what testosterone does outside the context of what testosterone related behaviors, how they get treated [laughs] in your social settings. - Mm-hmm, yeah. And in terms of status and the relationship between individuals, either nonhuman primates or humans, can we say that testosterone and levels of testosterone? Or I should say, can we say that relative levels of testosterone between individuals is correlated to status within the hierarchy? - Yes, but in a way that winds up being totally uninteresting. Like you go back on whatever number of decades, the endocrinology texts, and there were two totally reliable findings in there. Let's see, I have a dog in here that's- - Oh, good, we like dogs at the Huberman Lab podcast. - Oh, okay, it is jingling with that. - They are welcome, they are absolutely welcome, yeah. - And there'd be two truisms, which is higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of aggression in humans and other animals. Higher levels of testosterone predict higher levels of sexual activity. Whoa, testosterone causing both, and the correlation is there. And when you look closely, we've got cause and effect stuff, sexual behavior raises testosterone levels, aggression raises testosterone levels. Your levels before had were barely predictive of what's going to happen, so it's a response rather than a cause. When you look at that though in terms of making sense of individual differences, they don't matter a whole lot. You can spend an entire career on the social circumstances that produce 3.5% more testosterone in the circulation, and expect to see all sorts of interesting implications. And that's not really the case, it's somewhat of a yes or no modulator of the much more subtle social stuff that's already there. - Very interesting. I think that there are a lot of misconceptions about human biology, but testosterone seems to be one area where at least from what I can find on the internet, it's sort of at the peak of misunderstanding. Maybe we could just ask a few more questions about testosterone and sexual behavior because there's an interesting story there about castration versus non-castration and the causality, again. But before you address that, I just want to highlight something that you said that I think is so vital, which is that behaviors, such as aggressive behaviors and sexual behaviors can actually increase testosterone. Did I hear that correctly? - Yeah. - And the reverse is sort of true, but not in a causal way. Is that right? - The opposite direction of the causality, yeah. - Yeah, yeah, so if I were to increase somebody's testosterone by 30%, male or female doesn't matter, their sexual behavior may or may not change. - Essentially zero effect at all. Your brain is not that sensitive to fluctuations in testosterone levels. In terms of things like aggression, raising testosterone, this is a great footnote. If you have the right type of willing to die on the trenches devotion sort of thing, watching your favorite team play a sport will raise your testosterone levels as you sit there with the potato chips in your armchair. So it's not the physicality of aggression, it's the psychological framing of it. So, yeah, testosterone is not causing that. And a great way to appreciate that is, okay, so you had all these testosterone sexual behavior correlations, and you do the definitive endocrine intervention, which is you do a subtraction study, you've removed the testes. And as I said before, levels of sexual behavior goes down. Good, we've just shown that testosterone is somehow have caused it. Critically they go down, but not down to zero, whether you are a rat or a monkey or a human, whatever. And what predicts how much residual sexual behavior is there, how much sexual behavior there was before castration? What that's telling you is by then that's behavior that's being carried by social learning and context rather than by the hormone, exact same thing with aggression. Drops after castration, doesn't go to zero, the more prior history of it, the more it just keeps coasting along on its own even without testosterone. - Very interesting. Can we say that there is an exception in terms of the early organizing effects of hormones? Like, for instance, if a developing animal is deprived of a testosterone or estrogen or aromatized testosterone into estrogen, there's a whole story there is, you know. But then I could imagine that the circuits of the brain that are responsible for initiating sexual behavior in the first place might not emerge, and therefore not be sensitive to the testosterone later in life. Is that right? Okay. - Yeah, exactly. And a great way of seeing that is this totally nutty biological factoid, which is the second to fourth digit ratio enhanced. - Oh yeah. - Totally obscure thing, the ratio of one to the other in some way reflects levels of testosterone, androgen exposure during fetal life. And I can't remember which way it goes and it's minuscule and you need a thousand people in your sample size to be able to see anything, but you see it in other primates, it's already there in fetal sonograms, all of that. So that's a readout of subtle differences in prenatal exposure, and that winds up being a predictor of a whole range of sort of stuff in adult behavior. So, yeah, at the fetal end, when you're still building everything, testosterone and the amount of that is making a huge difference. By the time you're an adult, it's just somewhat of an old and a non-signal. - Yeah, I have a confession, which is that I was a master's student at Berkeley in Marc Breedlove's arena, so I'm an author on that paper, although I'm deep within the author line, and you got the description of it exactly right that it's the D2, the index finger to the ring finger ratio is more similar in females than it is in males. In males, the index finger tends to be shorter. And for people out there who are listening to this who are now freaking out or measuring, that there is a proper way to measure this, which is, eyeballing it doesn't work all the time unless at the extremes. And there's some very interesting stories there. It actually has been replicated no fewer than five times, Marc Breedlove tells me. But yes, in terms of these early organizing effects, those seem very robust in most studies. These later effects are sort of activation of neural circuits by hormones. I'm absolutely fascinated by this. And I do have a couple other questions, which is, we normally associate testosterone with males, but of course, females make testosterone as well from the adrenals and presumably elsewhere too. I'm guessing if we looked hard enough, we'd probably find that there were other sources of androgens in females. Can we say that these general contours of effects on aggression also pertain to females? And I suppose I should ask in particular about female-female aggression, which does exist in many species, female-male agregression as well as maternal aggression, which is a robust aspect of our evolution, of course, that the mother will, an angry mother animal of any kind protecting her young is truly dangerous, in the best sense of the word. - And that type of post-parturition, period after birth aggression is all about estrogen, progesterone, those sorts of things. Female aggression, the rest of the time has testosterone as a major player at a much lower level on the average. On the average, one always has to say, but it's basically the same punchlines. In females, the lower levels of testosterone are essential for typical levels of aggression and sexual behavior. Nonetheless, they're not causing it, it's not sensitive to small individual differences. Same exact thing. You can get way over-impressed with the importance of androgens in females just as readily as in males. - So in line with that, how should we conceptualize testosterone? I realize there isn't a single sentence that can capture a hormone in all its effects because hormones have so many different slow and fast effects on the brain, on other glands on their own, on the very glands that produce them. But as I've heard you talk about testosterone today and over the years, I start to get the impression that as the most misunderstood molecule [laughs] in human health in the universe, it's clearly doing something very powerful. It's shifting the way that certain neural circuits work, adjusting the gain on the amygdala, as you described, and certainly other things as well. Is there any truism about testosterone like, and its relationship to effort or its relationship to resilience, and in a way that maybe will help me and other people to sort of think about how to think about testosterone? - Yeah. Maybe three separate answers to that. The first one is, I think it's a fair summary to think that when it comes to motivated strong behaviors, what testosterone does is make you more of whatever you already are. And that to me, sexual arousal, libido, aggressiveness, spontaneous aggression, reactive aggression, things of that sort. It's upping the volume of things that are already strongly there. Second way to think about it is, well, here's like my favorite finding about testosterone. And this was some wonderful work by a guy, John Wingfield, who's one of the best behavioral endocrinologists out there. And about 20 years ago he formulated what was called The Challenge Hypothesis of Testosterone in Action. What does testosterone do? Testosterone is what you secrete when your status is being challenged, and it makes it more likely that you'll do the behaviors needed to hold onto your status. Okay, so that's totally boringly straightforward if you are a baboon. If somebody is challenging your high rank, the appropriate response on your part is going to be aggression. All right, so we've just got in through the back door, testosterone and aggression, again. But then you get to humans, and humans have lots of different ways of achieving or maintaining status. And all you need to do is go to like some fancy private school's annual auction, and you will see all these half-drunk alpha males competing to see who can give the most money away as a show of conspicuous like property that they have. And in a setting like that, I mean, I haven't been able to take urine samples, if there's times, unfortunately, but that shows the flip side of it. If you have a species that hands out status in a very different sort of way, testosterone is going to boost that also. Okay, so that generates a totally nutty prediction. Wow, take people in a circumstance, say playing an economic game where you get status by being trustworthy and being generous in your interactions with the game. If you give people testosterone, does that make them more generous? And that's absolutely the case. Totally cool finding. I'm showing you, I don't know, basically if you took a whole bunch of Buddhist monks and shot them up with testosterone, they'd get all competitive with each other as to who could do the most random acts of kindness. And if we have a societal problem with too much aggression, the first culprit to look at is not testosterone, the first to look at is that we hand out so much damn elevated status for aggression in so many circumstances. So I find that finding to be fantastic. Third thing about subtlety of testosterone. Okay, so like some subtler behavioral effects, you give testosterone to people and they become more confident, they become more self-confident. Well, that's good, people pay to take all sorts of nonsensical self-help courses that will boost your self-esteem. And that's a good thing unless testosterone makes you more confident, that is inaccurate, and you're more likely to barrel into wrong decisions. What's shown in economic game play is that testosterone by making you more confident makes you less cooperative because who needs to cooperate because I'm on top of this all on my own. Testosterone makes people cocky and impulsive. And that might be great in one setting, but if and the other is, you're absolutely sure your army is to get over on the other country in three days. So hell, let's start World War I, and you get a big surprise out of it. Testosterone altering risk assessment beforehand probably played a big role in that kind of miscalculation. - Super-interesting. I always think about testosterone and dopamine being close cousins in the brain, not just because of their relationship through the pituitary and hypothalamus. That, of course, but also because of dopamine's salient role in creating this bias towards exteroception. When somebody takes a drug, with it increases dopamine, or they're chockablock full of dopamine. They tend, I want to highlight 'tend' because this is, I'm really generalizing here, but they tend to focus on outward goals, things beyond the boundaries of their skin. And testosterone seems to do a bit of the same, it tends to put us into a similar mode of perceiving the outside world in ways that we're asking questions like, how do I relate to this other of my species? How do I relate to these goals? Is there anything that we can do to better conceptualize the relationship between testosterone and dopamine and motivation? Or would that just take us down the alleyways of, of neural pathways and the hypothalamus? Which is fine too. - Well, I think it's got lots to do with sort of this massive revisionism about dopamine. Everyone, since the pharaohs got brought up being taught that dopamine is about pleasure and reward. It turns out it isn't, it's about anticipation of reward, and it's about generating the motivation, the goal-directed behavior needed to go get that reward. And before you know it, you're using like elevated dopamine, your entire life to motivate you to do whatever is going to get you like entry into heaven after-life kind of, it's doing that sort of thing. So it's really about the motivation. And what testosterone does even in individuals who are not aggressive and why testosterone replacement is often a very helpful thing for aging males is it increases energy, it increases a sense of thereness, a presence of alertness that increases motivation. So that's a whole aspect, which then takes us into is your motivation to get up and like go, hand out lots of soup in a soup kitchen for homeless people, or is it to get up and go ethnically cleanse a village. It's got much to do with what your makeup was before the testosterone got onboard. So it's activating in an energetic sense, testosterone within minutes increases glucose uptake into skeletal muscle. You're just more awake and alert and all of that, and that has a lot to do with what dopamine does. And as one might predict then, getting just the right levels of testosterone infused into your bloodstream feels great to lab rats. They will lever press to get infused into the range that optimizes dopamine release. So there is, you are absolutely right, they're deeply intertwined. - Yeah, such beautiful biology there. And I love the way you encapsulate their relationship. I want to ask about estrogen, we don't hear about estrogen as often, and it's always interesting to me now doing some public facing education, that testosterone is this very controversial molecule, just to say it is almost controversial. [laughs] [Robert laughs] But estrogen doesn't seem to hold the same controversial weight, and yet estrogen has a very powerful effects on both the animal brain and on the human brain of males and females. Men do not want their estrogen to go too low. Terrible things happen, they will lose cognitive function, libido can drop. So men need estrogen as well, but perhaps maybe we can put the same filter on estrogen as we did on testosterone. Are there any general themes of estrogen that people should be aware of or that you think that are generally misunderstood? Is it really all about feelings and empathy and making us more sensitive? I sense not. - No, and it's once again very context dependent. And if estrogen after giving birth is playing a central role in you wanting to shred the face of somebody getting too close to your kittens kind of thing, we know it's not just warm, fuzzy, empathic kind of stuff. Estrogen in lots of ways could be summarized by, if you've got a choice in the matter between having a lot of estrogen in your bloodstream or not, go for having a lot of estrogen. It enhances cognition, exactly as you said, it stimulates neurogenesis in the hippocampus, it increases glucose and oxygen delivery, it protects you from dementia, it decreases inflammatory oxidative damage to blood vessels, which is why it's good for protecting from cardiovascular disease in contrast to testosterone, which is making everyone of those things worse. This springs up this minefield with a question, which is, so what about post-menopausal estrogen? And all sorts of lab studies with non-human primates suggested that you keep estrogen levels high after a monkey's equivalent of menopause. And you're going to keep brain health a lot better or decreasing the risk of dementia, stroke, every such thing. Estrogen is a great antioxidant, all of that. So in the 90s I think when Healy, I'm forgetting her name, but when there was the first female head of the NIH, Bernadine Healy set up this massive prospective human study, what was going to be the biggest one of all times, looking at the pluses and minuses of post-menopausal estrogen. And tens of thousands of women, and this was... And they had to cut the study short because what they were seeing was, estrogen was not only doing the normal bad stuff that you expect in terms of some decalcification stuff, but it was increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease, and it was increasing the risk of stroke, and it was increasing the risk of dementia. And this ground to a halt and everybody, they stopped the study and front page news and everybody panned at that point. And nobody could make sense of it who had been spending the last 20 years studying the exact same thing in primates and seeing all the protective effects. And the explanation turned out to be one of those things where like the law of unexpected consequences. Okay, menopause in women, it lasts different lengths of time, that may be a factor that's going to come. You know what, let's not start giving our study subjects more estrogen until they're totally past menopause. And when you've got that lag time in between, you shift all sorts of estrogen receptor patterns, and that's where all of the bad effects come from. - Wow! - All of the monkey studies had involved just maintaining ovulatory levels into the post-menopausal period. And you do that and you get great effects. Estrogen is one of the greatest predictors of protection from Alzheimer's disease, all of that, but it needs to be physiological. Just keep continuing what your body has been doing for a long time versus let the whole thing shutdown and suddenly like try to fire up the coal stoves at the bottom of the basement kind of thing, and get that going, there you get utterly different outcomes. And that caused a lot of human health consequences when people suddenly decided that estrogen is in fact neurologically endangering post-menopausally. - Wow, that's fascinating. And I never thought that these steroid hormone receptors could by not binding estrogen, being devoid of estrogen binding, I should say, could then set off opposite biochemical cascades. Fascinating. I guess it raises the question about testosterone replacement too, whether or not people should [laughs] talk to their doctor before too long. Men and women talk to your physicians before too long to avoid these, whatever is happening in these periods where there isn't sufficient testosterone and/or estrogen. It sounds like could cause longer-term problems even when therapies are introduced. - Two additional misery slash complications. So, okay, you're trying to understand, you look at women with a history with or without post-menopausal estrogen replacement where it's done great. And you're seeing 20 years later, estrogen is a predictor of a decreased risk of Alzheimer's. Then you got to start trying to do the unpacking prospective type studies. How much estrogen? At which times? Estrogen is a catchall term for a bunch of hormones, estrone, estradiol, estriol. How much of each one of them? Natural or synthetic? Go try to figure all of that out. And the second complication is, it's often hard to say anything about what estrogen does outside the context of what progesterone is doing. And often it's not the absolute levels of either, it's the ratio of the two. This is such a more complicated endocrine system than testosterone. And because you have to generate dramatic cyclicity that like no male hypothalamus ever has to dream off. It's a much, much more complicated system, thus, it's a lot more complicated to understand, let alone like figure out what the ideal benefits are of it. - Yeah. I don't know what to make of the literature on dropping rates of testosterone and endocrine disruptors. I was at Berkeley when Tyrone Hayes published his data on these frogs that were drinking water from various locations throughout the United States, not just in California, and seeing very severe endocrine disruption through blockade or, and of androgen receptors and all sorts of issues. And you hear this all the time now that sperm counts are dropping, that there are all these endocrine disruptors that there's birth control in the water, in the drinking water. It all starts to sound a little crazy, and yet I've also been fooled before by, I guess a good example would be, there's a lot of crazy stuff in the world online about all the terrible stuff in highly processed foods. And yet you've got very respectable people, endocrinologists at UCSF like Robert Lustig saying, yeah, a lot of these hidden sugars and these emulsifiers, they're causing real problems. So I've become more open-minded about the question. And so, are we suffering from drops in sperm counts and testosterone and estrogen and fertility as a consequence of endocrine disruptors in the environments and food, or because of social reasons? Is there anything that we can hang our hat on like real data that you're confident in? Or is it just a mess? - No, the phenomenon does appear to be quite real. Cross-sectional studies, human populations, or I still don't understand why this was one of the first things that Hayes spotted. Decreasing testicle size in crocodiles. [Andrew laughs] Go figure why that was one of the first contributions to this. And I think the phenomenon is absolutely real. And what you're then left with is two classic challenges, which is this is correlated with something broad environmental toxins. Which ones, how much, when, etc.? And the other one always being, well, okay, dropping is a dropping enough to make a difference. How big of an effect is this? And those are where the juries are still out. - Yeah, it's an area that I know there's a lot of interest in, and you've got groups of people who won't touch a receipt at a store because of the BPAs that are on the inks of the... And then [laughs] you've got people who don't care about those things. It is a fascinating area. I hope that more biology will be done there soon. I'd like to briefly return to stress. You described a study once about two rats, one running on a wheel voluntarily, one who is basically stuck in a running wheel, and it's forced to run anytime, rat number one runs. So in one case the rat is voluntarily exercising. [laughs] And in the other case, the rat is being forced to go to PE class, so to speak, but really, and seeing divergent effects on biology. And I'd like to just touch into this and use it as kind of a case study for stress mitigation in general. I'm rather obsessed in our colleague, David Spiegel, Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford is obsessed with this question of, how humans can start to mitigate their own stress? What do you think about stress mitigation and what should we do as individuals and as families and as a culture to try and encourage people to mitigate their stress, but in ways that are not going to turn us into rat number two, where we're being forced to mitigate our own stress and therefore it becomes more stressful. [laughs] - And what you see is, rat number one gets all the benefits of exercise. Rat number two gets all the downsides of severe stress with the same exact muscle expenditure and movements going on. Perfectly yoked, great example that it's the interpretation on your head. And I haven't kept up with that literature, but I'll bet you, rat number two is having a whole lot more activity in its amygdala than is rat number one. Okay, so stress mitigation. Anything I should say here I should preface with, I'm reasonably good at telling people what's going to happen if they don't manage their stress, but I'm terrible at actually like managing stress or advising how to manage that. I'm much better with the bad news aspect of it. But what you see is, by now just a classic literature, half a century old, sort of showing what are the building blocks of stress. Not, ooh, you step outside and you've been gored by an elephant, and can you grow from your experience? And what doesn't kill you makes you stronger. In that you could have a stress response, but you're in the realm of the gray zone of ambiguous social interactions, that sort of thing. Some people have massive stress responses, others not at all, in between, enjoy it. Like what are the building blocks of, what makes psychological stress stressful? And the first one is exactly what is brought up by that running study. Do you have a sense of control? A sense of control makes stressors less stressful. And the running wheel shows that or studies where you, you lab rat or you college freshman volunteer have been trained that by pressing a lever, you're less likely to get a shock. And today you're at the lever they're working away and unbeknownst to you the lever has been turned off, and it has no effect on shock frequency, but because you think you have some control, you have less of a stress response. If you were a rat and doing this day-in and day-out, you're less likely to get an ulcer. So a sense of control. And related to that is a sense of predictability. Rat get shocked, human gets shocked, whatever, and the scenario either is the shocks come now and then, or the shocks come now and then, and 10 seconds before a little warning light comes on. And when you get the warning light, the shocks are distressful. You got predictability because if you're not getting warning lights, any second you could be a half second away from the next shock. You get a warning light, and you know that if there isn't one, you've got at least 10 seconds worth of relaxation. You know what's coming, you can prepare your coping responses, and best of all afterward you know when you're finally safe, when you can recover from it. And that's enormously protective. Others outlet for frustration, you take a rat who is getting shocked, and if it could run on a running wheel, that's a protective thing, that's doing it voluntarily. If you've got a rat and he can gnaw on a bar of wood, a stressor is less stressful. Unfortunately, if you have a rat or primate or human and they're stressed, the ability to aggressively dump on somebody smaller and weaker also reduces the stress response. And the fact that displacement aggression reduces stress accounts for a huge percent triggers like unhappiness. So all of those are variables, get social support as well. That's a good one. Interpreting circumstances is being good news rather than bad. Hurray, so you've got this very simple sort of like take home recipe of go out and get as much control and as much predictability and as many outlets and as much social support as possible, and you're going to do just fine. And you go out and do that, and that's a recipe for total disaster because it's much, much more subtle than that. In one great example, okay, so you're getting shocks, you want a warning beforehand, get a little warning light 10 seconds before each shock, it's wonderfully protective. Get a warning light one second before the shock doesn't do anything. There's not enough time for you to get the psychological benefits of the anticipation. Now instead, gets the little warning coming on two minutes before each shock, and it's going to make things worse because you're not going to be sitting there like reveling and sort of your sense of predictability, and it's soon going to be, oh. You're going to be sitting there for two minutes saying, damn, here it comes. Predictive information only works in a narrow domain. Similarly, control. Do you want to have a sense of control on the face of stress? And the answer is, only if it is a mild to moderate stressor because what's happening then, your sense of control is completely independent of the reality of whether you have control or not, but in the face of mild to moderate stressors, a sense of control gets interpreted as, wow, look how much worse things could have been. Thank God, I have control, I'm on top of this to master my fate. In contrast, if it's a major stressor, all that arbitrary sense of control does is make you think, oh my God, look how much better it could have been. I could have prevented it. And we all know that intuitively like we do that in the face of people's worst stressors. Nobody could have stopped the car the way the kids suddenly jumped out. It wouldn't have mattered and if you had gotten them to the doctor a month ago, instead of now, it wouldn't have made any... You didn't actually have any control. And what you see is, you absolutely want to have a huge sense of control over mild to moderate stressors, and especially ones that result in a good outcome. Hooray, for me, and in the face of horrible stressors, what you want to do is like self-deception, and like truth and beauty don't necessarily go hand-in-hand at that point. And that's why stress management techniques impact control and predictability wind up being far worse than neutral if you're preaching that to somebody homeless or somebody with terminal cancer, or somebody who is a refugee. Tell a neurotic middle-class person that they have the psychological tools to turn hell into heaven. And there's some truth to that. Do the same thing to somebody who is going through a real hell, and that's just privileged heartlessness to do that because that doesn't work. More and more outlets, if your outlets are damaging, that's not a good way to mitigate stress. Social support, if you're confusing mere acquaintances for real social support, you're going to have the rug pulled out from under you at some point. If you're mistaking social support for being, going and bitching and moaning and demanding supportiveness from everyone around you rather than you doing some of that reciprocally, that's not going to work very well either. It's not simple. It's not for nothing that lots of us are really lousy. It, like being good friends and things like that, and why it takes a lot of work to do it right? Because you do it wrong and it may temporarily seem like a great thing, but when it turns out to be completely misplaced faith, you're going to be feeling worse than before you started. - Interesting. These days, there's a lot of interest in using physical practices to mitigate stress, trying to get out of the ruminating, and to some extent take control of neural circuits in the brain by using exercise and using breathing and hypnosis. And, of course, hypnosis has a mental component as well. What are your thoughts on stress mitigation from the standpoint of, okay, so we don't want to be rat number two, we want to select something for ourselves, so we have to take the initiative for ourselves. Being forced into exercising is not, it could actually have negative health effect perhaps. So we need to pick something that we like, we need to take control of it. In terms of supporting other people, you touched on that a bit. What is the best way to support other people? Is it to talk about the stressful thing? I mean, I'm not asking you to play psychologist here, but I find divergent data on this. We can spin ourselves up into a lather by ruminating on something. And language seems to me like it's a wonderful tool, but it's also a fairly deprived tool because it doesn't really get into the core of our physiology like something like breathing would. So what are your thoughts on more, for lack of a better way to put it, more head-centered, cognitive approaches to stress mitigation versus kind of going at the core physiology. Cold showers now are even a thing to some extent just to get people stress acclimated, voluntarily taking cold showers. - That makes some sense physiologically, preconditioning for when the real stressors come. In terms of what you bring up, oh, transcendental meditation, mindfulness, exercise, prayer, sort of reflecting on gratitude, all that sort of thing. Collectively they work on the average, they work in terms of, they can lower heart rate and cholesterol levels and have all sorts of good outcomes, but they compromise us. One is exactly the caveat that comes out of the running wheel study is, it doesn't matter how many of your friends swear by the stress management technique. If doing it makes you want to scream your head off after 10 seconds, that's not the one that's going to work for you. So read the fine print and the testimonials, but it's got to be something that works for you. Another one is the stress management type techniques that work, you can't save them for the weekend, you can't save them for when you're stuck on hold on the phone with Muzak for two minutes. It's got to be something where you stop what you're doing and do it virtually, daily or every other day, and spend 20, 30 minutes doing it. And what you see coming out of that is this like 80/20 rule from economics. 80/20, 80% of the complaints in the store come from 20% of the customers, things like that. What you see is, if your entire life consists of every single thing on your shoulders, that you can't say no to 24/7. If you've stopped that and finally said, my wellbeing is important enough that I'm finally get to say no to some of the stuff that I can't say no to. And I'm going to do it every day for 20 minutes, whatever stress management technique you then do in those 20 minutes sort of who knows what, you're already 80% of the way there simply by having decided your wellbeing is important enough that you're going to stop every single day and have that as a priority. And that's exactly the same finding that you find people with chronic depression untreated that merely calling and getting an appointment to see a mental health professional, people start feeling better already because it's evidence that you've been activated, and you matter enough to do this, and you could conceive that this would actually have a good outcome rather than a hopeless one. Just doing something meditative or reflective every day or so, and it hardly even matters which one you're doing. And what comes out of that is thus another warning, which is do not trust anybody who says, it has been scientifically proven that their brand of stress management works better than the other ones. Just watch your wallet at that point. - Yeah, amen. I think one of the core goals of my lab and David Spiegel's lab, and I know you've worked with David and published papers with David as well is to really try and find out what are the various entry points to this thing that we call the autonomic nervous system and the stress system, and these systems that when gone unchecked really can take us down a dark path. And the idea that there are so many entry points is really the one that keeps, what the data keep telling us over and over again. So there's no magic breathing tool or exercise, it's any variety of those or one of those. And, again, we come back to this idea that it's the one that you select and the one that you make space for, and it's the one that you hopefully enjoy that's going to work best in terms of physiology. - And [mumbles] benign for those people who were stuck around you. - Right, right, absolutely. And that brings me to this question of, I find it amazing that how we perceive an event, and whether or not we chose to be in that event or not can have such incredible different effects on circuitry of the brain and circuitry of the body and biology of cells. And in some ways it boggles my mind, like how can a decision made presumably with the prefrontal cortex, although other parts of the brain as well, how can that change essentially the polarity of a response in the body. And, I mean, you've talked before about Type A personalities in there. We don't have to go into all the detail there for sake of time, but it is interesting that the effects of endothelial cells. I mean, literally of the size of, [laughs] of the portals for blood are in opposite direction, depending on whether or not somebody wants to be in a situation as a highly motivated person. Maybe you could just give us the top contour of that because I think it really illustrates this principle so beautifully. And then maybe if you would, you could just speculate on how the brain might have this switch to turn one experience from terrible to beneficial or from beneficial to terrible, it's really fascinating. - Well, all you need to do is like tonight before you're going to sleep and you're lying in bed and you're nice and drowsy and your heart's beating nice and slow, you start thinking about the fact that that heart isn't going to beat forever. [Andrew laughs] And imagine your toes getting cold afterward and imagine the flow of blood coming to a halt and all of you clotting. You're going to be doing something with your physiology at that point that 99% of mammals out there only do if they're running frantically. And you're going to be turning on your sympathetic stress response with thought, with emotions, with memory. And the measure of that is just how much the cortex and the limbic system sends projections down to all the autonomic regulators in the brain. You can think autonomic regulatory neurons into action in ways that only other animals can do with like extremes of environmental circumstances. And given that and the autonomic rule, I mean, the other big challenge in understanding it is gigantic individual differences. And that's, when you talk about the optimal amount of stress, the counts of stimulation, and in general that stress that's not too severe and doesn't go on for too long and there is overall in a benevolence setting. And under those conditions, we'd love being stressed by something unexpected and out of control predictability like a really interesting plot turn in the movie you're watching. That's great, but you get the individual differences that somehow has to accommodate the fact that for some people, the perfect stimulatory amount of stress is like getting up early for an Audubon birdwatching walk next Sunday morning. And for somebody else, it's signing up to be like a mercenary in Yemen. [Andrew laughs] And tremendous individual differences that swamp any simple prescriptions. - Yeah, the prefrontal cortex, this thinking machinery that we all harbor, it's such a double-edged sword. And what's remarkable to me is, how the areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the amygdala, they're sort of like switches. I mean, there is context and there is gain control. You talked about the gain control by testosterone, etc., but they're really like switches. I mean, if you stimulate ventromedial hypothalamus, you get the right neurons, an animal will try and kill even an object that's sitting next to it. You tickle some other neurons, it'll try and mate with that same object. I mean, it's really wild. I think there are probably rules to prefrontal cortex also, but it sounds like the context plural from which prefrontal cortex can draw from is probably infinite, so that we could probably learn to perceive threat in anything. Whether or not it's another group or whether or not it's science or whether or not it's somebody's version of the shape of the earth versus another. I mean, it's like, you can plug in anything to this system and give it enough data, and I think it sounds like you could drive a fear response or a love response. Is that overstepping? - Or [laughs] a mixed horribly ambivalent one that is changing by the millisecond, and then like could be mutually contradictory. No, that's absolutely the case in the prefrontal cortex, I more than once have regretted having like wasted 30 years of my life studying the hippocampus then I shoot him and studied the prefrontal cortex because it's so much more interesting what it does, and it's all this contextual stuff. It's all the ways in which it's not okay to lie in this setting, but it's a great thing in another. It's not okay to kill unless you do it to them, and then you get a medal. It's not, all of this social context and moral relativity and situational ethic stuff, that's the prefrontal cortex that's got to master that. And that winds up meaning that's the place in your brain more than anywhere where you say your perception of things can powerfully influence the reality of what's coming into you. - Yeah. - I mean, a great example, just harking back to testosterone. Okay, so exercise boosts up testosterone levels. Does exercise and success do it more than exercise and failure? A literature back in the 80s or so looking at outcomes of marathons. Did testosterone rise more in the people who win than the losers? Wrestling matches. Things of that sort with a simple prediction and the answer wound up being, you didn't see a simple answer. Okay, you win the marathon, that's not necessarily a predictor of increased testosterone. What's that about? And then you find like the winner testosterone decreases, and you find out the guy who came in 73rd is having a massive testosterone increase. Whoa, what's that about? What's that about is far more human subtlety. The guy who won the race has a decline in testosterone because he came in three minutes later than he really, really was expecting. And everybody now is going to be writing it up about how he's over the hill. And the guy who came in 73rd is having a boost of testosterone because he was assuming he'd be dead from a heart attack by the third mile, [Andrew laughs] and instead he managed to finish. It's this interpretive stuff going on in there, and that's what prefrontal cortex is about. - Amazing, it raises this question of cognitive flexibility, Can we tell ourselves that something is good for us even if we're not enjoying it? And can we wriggle around these corners of choosing the exercise or doing the... Personally I'm not a big fan of long bouts of meditation, but I've benefited tremendously from things like dedicated breathing and shorter rounds of meditation. Can I tell myself that it's good for me and wriggle around the corner and get my physiology working the way I want? Do we have cognitive flexibility? Can I be that third place runner and tell myself, well, at least I came in, I wanted to win so badly. That was my primary goal, but another goal was to beat my previous time, and I did do that. And so, [laughs] I mean, it's... To what extent can we toggle this relationship between the prefrontal cortex and these other more primitive systems? - Well, an enormous amount. For example, being low in a hierarchy is generally bad for health in like every mammal out there, including us, but we do something special, which is we can be part of multiple hierarchies at the same time. And while you maybe low ranking in one of them, you could be extremely high ranking in another, you're like have the crappiest job in your corporation, but you are the captain of the softball team this year for the company. And you better bet that's somebody who is going to find all sorts of ways to decide that nine to five Monday to Fridays, just stupid paying the bills. And what really matters is the prestige on the weekend. You're poorer, but you're the deacon of your church here. And so we can play all sorts of psychological games with that. One of the most like consistent, reliable ones that we do and need to use the frontal cortex like crazy is, somebody does something rotten and you need to attribute it. And the answer is, they did something wrong, hmm, because they're rotten. Always have been or always will be this constitutional explanation. You do something rotten to somebody, and how do you explain it afterward? A situational one. I was tired, I was stressed in this sort of setting, I misunderstood this. We're best at excusing ourselves from bad things because we have access to our inner lives and we've got prefrontal cortexes that are great at coming up with a situational explanation rather than, hey, maybe you're just like a selfish rotten human, you need to change. And that's all prefrontal cortex, and we do that every time, we don't let somebody merge in the lane in front of us, even though you curse somebody who does the same thing to you and... Endlessly. - I love it. Your statement about the fact that we can select multiple hierarchies to participate in. To me it seems like a particularly important one nowadays with social media being so prevalent. I know you're not particularly active on social media although you might be pleasantly, or I don't know unpleasantly surprised to find out that there's a lot of positive discussion about you and your work, so you don't even need to be on there. We'll just continue to discuss [laughs] your work. But what's interesting about social media I've found is that the context is very, very broad. I mean, one could argue that who one selects to follow and which news articles you're reading, etc. can create a kind of a funneling of information that itself can be dangerous. More verification of crazy ideas or even just less exposure to new ideas. But there's also this idea that social media is an incredibly broad context. So as you scroll through a feed, it's no longer like being in your eighth grade classroom or your office or your faculty meeting. You are being exposed to thousands, if not millions of contexts, this meal, that soccer game, this person's body, this person's intellect. YouTube is another example. It's a vast, vast landscape. So the context is completely mishmash whereas I'm assuming we evolved. I think we did evolve under contexts that were much more constrained. We interacted with a limited number of individuals and a limited number of different domains, seasons tended to be constrain us all. Of course, then we got phones and televisions, and this started to expand, but now more than ever, our brain, our prefrontal cortex and our sense of where we exist in these multiple hierarchies has essentially wicked out into infinity. How do you think this might be interacting with some of these more primitive systems and other aspects of our biology? - Well, I think what you get is, in some ways the punchline of, what's most human about humans, which is over and over we use the exact same blueprint, the same hormones, the same kinases, the same receptors, the same, everything were built out of the exact same stuff as all these other species out there, and then we go and use it in a completely novel way. And usually in terms of being able to abstract stuff over space and time in dramatic ways. So, okay, you're a low ranking baboon and you can feel badly because you just like killed a rabbit and you're about to eat and some higher ranking guy boots you off and takes it away from you, and you feel crummy and it's stressful and you're unhappy. We are doing the exact same things with like our brain and bodies when we're losing a sense of self-esteem, but we can do it by watching a movie character on the screen and feeling inadequate compared to like how wonderful or attractive they are. We can do it by somebody driving past us in an expensive car, and we don't even see their face, and you can feel belittled by your own socioeconomic status. You can watch like the Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous or read about what Bezos is up to. And for some reason, decide your life is less fulfilling because you didn't fly into space for 11 minutes. And so you can feel miserable about yourself in ways that no other organism can, simply because we can have our meaningful social networks include like the party you're reading about on Facebook that you weren't invited to because it's taking place in Singapore, and you don't know any of those people, but nonetheless, somehow that could be a means for you to feel less content with who you've turned out to be. Do you take steps in your own life to actively restrict the contexts in which you think and live and contemplate in order to enhance your creative life, your intellectual life? Are those steps that you actively take? - Well, I very actively don't know how to make use of anything [laughs] with social media. So I guess that counts as my having thus actively chosen not to learn how. So that's the case certainly for the last year and a half, like lots of people, I've gone through stretches where I've managed to sort of enforce a moratorium on looking at the news, and that was wonderfully freeing. I think in the larger sense though, in addition to me being a neurobiologist, I'd sort of spent decades spending part of each year studying wild baboons out in a national park in East Africa. And I'd spend three months a year without electricity, without phone calls, with going 12 hours a day without saying a word to somebody. And when I finally would, it would be somebody nomadic pastoralist guy in a different language. Yeah, I did 90% of my like insightful thinking about anything in the laboratory during those three months each year, and not one in the lab, and not when inundated with stuff. - Well, I think there is a shifting trend towards trying to create a narrowing of context that... And I like what I see, I have a niece, she's 14-years-old and she and her friends are very good at putting their phones away. They say, we're not going to have our phones for this interaction, especially after... And I realized we're still somewhat in this. It's unclear where it's headed, but 2020 was so restrictive and she was so separated from her friends. Now it's, let's really focus on being together and not bring in all these other elements from our phones. And that brings me great hope for that generation, [laughs] maybe they will... Or who knows, maybe they'll run off and study baboons, we need more field researchers. So along the lines of choice, I'd like to shift gears slightly and talk about freewill, about our ability to make choices at all. - Well, my personal way out in left field inflammatory stance is, I don't think we have a shred of freewill despite 95% of philosophers. And I think probably the majority of neuroscientists are saying that we have freewill in at least some circumstances. I don't think there's any at all. And the reason for this is, you do something, you behave, you make a choice, whatever. And to understand why you did that, where did that intention come from? Part of it was due to like the sensory environment you were in the previous minute. Some of it is from the hormone levels in your bloodstream that morning. Some of it is from whether you had a wonderful or stressful last three months and what sort of neuroplasticity happened. Part of it is what hormone levels you were exposed to as a fetus. Part of it is what culture your ancestors came up with, and thus how you were parented when you were a kid. All of those are in there, and you can understand where behavior is coming from without incorporating all of those. And at that point, not only are there all of these relevant factors, but they're ultimately all one factor. If you're talking about what evolution has to do with your behavior, by definition you're also talking about genetics. If you're talking about what your genes have to do with behavior, by definition you're talking about how your brain was constructed or what proteins are coded for. If you're talking about like your mood disorder now, you're talking about the sense of efficacy you were getting as a five-year-old. They're all intertwined. And when you look at all those influences, basically like the challenge is, show me a neuron that just caused that behavior, or show me a network of neurons that just caused that behavior. And show me that nothing about what they just did was influenced by anything from the sensory environment one second ago to the evolution of your species. And there's no space in there to fit in a freewill concept that winds up being in your brain, but not of your brain. There's simply no wiggle room for it there. - So I can appreciate that our behaviors and our choices are the consequences of a long line of dominoes that fell prior to that behavior. But is it possible that I can intervene in the domino effect, so to speak. In other words, can my recognition of the fact that genes have heritability, there is an epigenome that, there is a hormonal context, there is a historical context. Can the knowledge of that give me some small shard of freewill? Meaning, does it allow me to say, ah, okay, I accept that my choices are somewhat predetermined, and yet knowing that gives me some additional layer of control? Is there any philosophical or biological universe in which that works? - Nah. All of that can produce the wonderfully positive belief that change can happen. Even a traumatic change, even in the worst of circumstances, most unlikely people, and change can happen, things can change. Don't be fatalistic, don't decide because we're a mechanistic, biological machines that nothing can ever... Change can happen, but where people go off the rails is translating that into, we can change ourselves. We don't, we can't because there's no freewill. However, we can be changed by circumstance. And the point of it is, like you look at an Aplysia, a sea slug that has learned to retract its gill in response to a shock on its tail, you can do like conditioning, Pavlovian conditioning on it, and it has learned, its behavior has been changed by its environment. And you hear news about something like horrifically depressing going on, and refugees in wherever. And as a result, you feel a little bit more helpless and a less of a sense of efficacy in the world, and both of your behaviors have been changed. Okay, okay, yeah, I guess that, but the remarkable thing is, it's the exact same neurobiology. The signal transduction pathways that were happening in that sea snail incorporate the exact same kinases and proteases and phosphatases that we do when you're having mammalian fear conditioning, or when you're alert, it's conserved. It's the exact same thing, it's simply playing out in obviously a much, much fancier domain. And because you have learned that change is possible despite understanding mechanistically that we can't change ourselves volitionally, but because you understand change is possible, you have just changed the ability of your brain to respond to optimistic stimuli. And you have changed the ability of your brain to now send you in the direction of being exposed to more information that will seem cheerful rather than depressing. Oh my God, that's amazing, what Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther king and all these folks did. Wow, under the most adverse of circumstances, they were able to do. Maybe I can also, maybe I can go read more about people like them to get even more data points of change the neurochemistry, so that your responses are different now. And you're tilted a little bit more in that direction of feeling like you can make a difference instead of it's all damn hopeless. So enormous change can happen, but the last thing that could come out of a view of, we are nothing more or less than the sum of our biology and its interactions with environment, is to throw up your hands and say, and thus it's no use trying to change anything. - So we can acknowledge that change is extremely hard to impossible, that circumstances can change, and yet that striving to be better human beings is still a worthwhile endeavor. Do I have that correct? - Absolutely. Because simply the knowledge, either from experience or making it to the end of the right neurobiology class has taught you that change can happen within a framework of a mechanistic neurobiology. You were now more open to being made optimistic by the good news in the world around you. You are more likely to be inspired by this or that, you were more resistant to getting discouraged by bad news, simply because you now understand it's possible. - Mm-hmm, yeah, somebody who spent much of his career working on the hippocampus, I have to assume that you are a believer in neuroplasticity, that neural circuits can change in response to experience, and that some of the same so-called top-down mechanisms of prefrontal cortex that we were talking about before can play a role there, that the decision to try and change and the pursuit of knowledge and the pursuit of experience can shape our circuitry, and therefore make us different machines, so to speak. - Yeah. And not only can say prenatal hormone exposure changed the way your brain is being constructed, but learning that prenatal hormone exposure can change the construction of your brain will change your brain right now, and how you think about where your intentions came from. Wow, maybe that had something to do with it. The knowledge of the knowledge is an effector in and of itself. - That's such an important and powerful statement to hear. I think that many people think that if a tool, if it doesn't involve a pill or a protocol, that it's useless. And certainly there are pills and protocols that are very useful in a variety of context for a variety of things, but the idea that knowledge itself, whereas you put it, knowledge of knowledge is itself a tool, I think is a very important concept for people to embed in their minds. And, listen, I'm so grateful for this discussion and for you raising these topics. I think that people, many people know your work on testosterone, on stress, and we've covered some of that today, the work on freewill and this idea that we are hopeless or that we are in total control. I think I'm realizing in listening to you that it's neither is true, and that the solution resides in understanding more about freewill and lack of it, [laughs] and also neuroplasticity. You're working on a book about freewill, are you willing to tell us a little bit about that book and where you are in that process and what we can look forward to? - Yeah, it's going really slow. Title is, "Determined: A Science of Life Without Freewill." And essentially the first half of the book is trying to convince a reader, okay, if not that there's no freewill whatsoever, but at least there's a lot less than is normally assumed. And I'm going through all the standard arguments for freewill, and why that doesn't make sense with 21st century science? And that has led to reading a lot of very frustrating philosophers who basically are willing to admit that stuff is made out of like atoms and molecules. And like there's a physical reality sort of world, they're not just relying on magic, but that they believe in freewill for magical reasons, and where it doesn't make sense. Okay, so the first half of the book is to hopefully convince people that there's much less freewill than we used to think. And then the second half is this gigantic juncture built around the fact that I haven't thought there's any freewill since I was like an adolescent. And despite thinking that way, I still have absolutely no idea how you're supposed to function with that belief. How are you supposed to go about everyday life if anything you feel entitled to isn't true? If any angers and hatreds you feel aren't justified, if there's no such thing as appropriate, blame or punishment or praise or reward, and none of it makes any sense, and somebody like even compliments you on your haircut, and you've been conditioned to say, oh, thanks, as if you had something to do. How are we supposed to function with that? And so the second half is wrestling with that, and what the punchline there is, is it's going to be incredibly hard. And if you think it's going to be hard to subtract a notion of freewill out of making sense of like serial murderers, it's going to be a thousand times harder making sense of when somebody says "good job" to you. [Andrew laughs] And because it's the exact same on reality of sort of our interpretations. It's going to be incredibly hard, but nonetheless when you look at the history of how we have subtracted the notion of agency out of all sorts of realms of blame, starting with thinking that witches caused hailstorms 500 years ago to the notion that psychodynamically screwed up mothers cause schizophrenia, we've done it. We've done it endless number of times, we've been able to subtract out a sense of volition in understanding how the world works around us. And we don't have murderers running amuck on the street, and society hasn't collapsed into a puddle, and in fact, it's a more humane society. So the good news is it's possible because we've done it repeatedly in the past, but it's going to be hard as hell. And it's hard as hell to try to write about that coherently, [laughs] I'm discovering, so it's going slowly. - Well, I speak for many, many people when I say that we're really excited for the book when it's done and we will patiently wait, but with great excitement for the book, "Determined". You said it's the title, correct? - Yeah, "Determined: The Science of Life Without Freewill". It seems like you can't publish your book these days without a sub-title, so that's it? - Fantastic. Well, very excited to read the book. I'm very grateful to you for this conversation today, I learned a ton. Every time you speak I learn, and for me it's really been a pleasure and a delight to interact with you today and over the previous years, I should say, as colleagues. And thank you again, Robert, for everything that you do and all the hard, hard work and thinking that you put into your work because it's clear that you put a lot of hard work and thinking, and we all benefit as a consequence. - Thanks, and thanks for having me, this was a blast. - Thank you for joining me for my conversation with Dr. Robert Sapolsky. If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. In addition, you can leave us comments and suggestions for future episodes and guests in the Comments section on YouTube. Please also subscribe on Apple and on Spotify, and on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review and a comment. In addition, please check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of this podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. And for those of you that are interested in supporting research on stress, on sleep, and how to better access sleep and combat stress, you can do that by supporting the research being done on those topics in my laboratory. You can go to HubermanLab.stanford.edu, and there you'll see a tab entitled, Support Research in the Huberman Lab. So that's for work at the Huberman Lab at Stanford, not the Huberman Lab podcast. And there's a Make a Donation tab where you can make a tax deductible donation. And if you're not already following the Huberman Lab on Instagram, please check out Huberman Lab on Instagram and on Twitter. On both those channels, I post information about science and science related tools anywhere from one to five minutes. Some of that information overlaps with the podcast, but a lot of it is unique and different from the information on this podcast. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 313 ---
Video ID: Xu1FMCxoEFc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xu1FMCxoEFc
Title: Understanding & Conquering Depression
Published: 2021-08-23 12:00:11 UTC
Description:
This episode, I explain what major depression is at the biological and psychological level and the various treatments that peer-reviewed studies have revealed can help prevent and treat depression. I explain the three major chemical systems that are altered in depression: norepinephrine, serotonin and dopamine. I discuss genetic predispositions to depression and how stress, thyroid hormone and cortisol play a role in many forms of depression. I also discuss inflammation as a common feature of many depression symptoms. I review 8 specific science-supported protocols for treating and avoiding depression, including EPA fatty acids (which have been shown to rival certain prescription treatments), how exercise protects against depression, studies of creatine, adjusting dopamine balance and more. I also discuss the results of ongoing clinical trials for ketamine and psilocybin for depression, how these compounds work and finally, I review how ketogenic diets can help in certain cases of depression, especially treatment-resistant major depression.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs

Links
Review of EPAs for the Treatment of Depression - https://bit.ly/2Wl15ti
Review of Creatine for the Treatment of Depression - https://www.mdpi.com/520864
Recent Study on the Clinical Use of Psilocybin for Treatment of Depression - https://bit.ly/3sFSGMM

Timestamps
00:00:00 Mood Disorders & Maintaining Mental Health (Protocol 1)
00:07:10 Sponsors
00:11:15 Major Depression
00:18:40 “Anti-Self” Confabulation
00:21:42 Autonomic (Vegetative) Symptoms of Depression
00:26:58 Norepinephrine, Dopamine & Serotonin
00:31:50 SSRIs (Prozac, Zoloft, etc.): Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
00:37:00 Epinephrine/Motor Functions, Dopamine/Motivation & Craving, Serotonin/Emotions
00:39:33 Physical & Emotional Pain are Linked: Substance P
00:41:50 Hormones & Depression: Thyroid & Cortisol 
00:46:50 Genetic Susceptibility to Depression: Impact of Stress 
00:50:50 Understanding Biological Mechanism Is Key: Recipes versus Skills
00:52:50 Tools for Dealing with Depression: Logic & Implementation (Protocol 2)
00:56:25 Brain Inflammation & Mental State: Cytokines, Prostaglandins, etc.
00:59:20 Protocol 3: Essential Fatty Acids (Omega-3, EPAs: Eicosapentaenoic Acid)*
01:02:50 How EPAs Help Offset Depression: Serotonin Synthesis, Kynurenine, Quinolinic Acid
01:05:25 Protocol 4: How Exercise Offsets Depression 
01:11:44 Protocol 5: Creatine Monohydrate, Forebrain Function & NMDA receptors*
01:20:30 Protocol 6*: Ketamine, PCP (*Prescription-Only), & NMDA-Receptor Function
01:33:08 Protocol 7*: Psychedelics (*In Clinical Trials) for Major Depression: Psilocybin*
01:47:00 Protocol 8: Ketogenic Diet, GABA (Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid)
01:54:50 Summary of Protocols Covered
02:00:10 Support & Additional Resources

#Depression #HubermanLab #Dopamine

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This month, we're talking all about disorders of the mind, things like depression, attention deficit disorders, eating disorders, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. During the course of this month, we are going to discuss the psychological and biological underpinnings of mood disorders of all kinds. You'll learn a lot of science. You'll also learn a lot about the various treatments that exist and that are in development for these various mood disorders. We will talk about behavioral tools, things like exercise, meditation, breath work, but also prescription drugs, supplements and novel compounds that are now being tested in various clinical trials. Across the month, I think you'll start to realize that there are common pathways underlying many mood disorders. In fact, mood disorders that look quite different from one another often depend on the action of the same neurochemicals or neural circuits in the brain and body. That actually should be a point of great relief because what it means is that by understanding the biology of one mood disorder or understanding how one treatment or behavioral intervention can impact a mood disorder, we gain insight into other mood disorders as well. As always, we will discuss science and science related tools that people could implement should they choose. Before we dive into today's topic, I'd like to discuss a very particular set of scientific findings that relate to today's topic, and that are important for understanding all mood disorders and all states of motivation, happiness, and sadness, as well as depression. Basically, I'm going to paraphrase a brief segment of my discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke, who I sat down with to discuss addiction and the biological basis of addiction and addiction treatment. A very important aspect of that discussion was when Dr. Lembke described the pleasure pain balance, literally the circuits in our brains that control our sense of pleasure and pain, and ultimately whether or not we remain happy in our pursuit of pleasure or not. This is an absolutely crucial aspect to the way that we function in everyday life, and especially under conditions of mood disorders. The pathway that she was describing is the so-called pleasure system. However, what most people don't realize is that the pleasure system is also directly associated with, and in fact is the very same system that modulates mental or psychological anguish and pain. Essentially what she described is that whenever we pursue something that we think will bring us pleasure, and that could be anything that we think will bring us pleasure from food, to video games, to sex, to a particular job or goal, short-term or long-term, that we experience release of the neuromodulator dopamine. Now, dopamine is associated with increased levels of motivation and drive. It is not the molecule of reward, it is the molecule of craving motivation and drive. However, as Dr. Lembke pointed out, when we are in pursuit of something, there is a release of dopamine in our brain that makes us feel motivated, and in general, it makes us feel good. But very shortly thereafter and beneath our conscious awareness, there is a tilt of the pleasure pain balance in the brain, literally a shift in the neural circuits that underlie pleasure and pain, such that every bit of pleasure or pleasure seeking that causes release of dopamine will be balanced out by a little bit of pain. And we don't experience this as physical pain, at least not at first, we experience it as craving for more of the thing that brought us pleasure. Now, that sounds pretty good. You get pleasure and then you get a little bit of pain to balance it out. It's subconscious and you experience it as the desire to seek out more pleasure. However, it's actually more diabolical than that. And we really need to keep an eye on this if we are to remain happy, if we are to remain in pursuit of our goals. The crucial thing to understand is that if we remain in constant pursuit of pleasure, the pain side of the balance tips so that each time we are in pursuit of that pleasureful thing, activity, or substance, we are going to experience, we literally achieve less dopamine release each subsequent time. So we get less pleasure and the amount of craving increases. Now, after a certain point or threshold, we call that addiction. And the way to reset the balance, and this is very important, the way to reset the balance is actually to enter into states in which we are not in pursuit of pleasure, to literally enter states in which we are bored, maybe even a little bored and anxious, and that resets the pleasure pain balance so that we can return to our pursuit of pleasure in a way that's healthy, and then in an ongoing way, won't lead to this over tipping or this increase in the amount of pain or addiction. So this is very important. And if this seemed vague, what this means is we should always be cautious of any state of mind or body or any pursuit that leads to very large increases in dopamine. And if it does, we should be very careful to not pursue that repeatedly over time. During today's episode, I'm going to give an example, a real life example of a discussion that I've been in with a young man who's 21 years old who's dealing with a disruption in this pleasure pain balance. He is essentially depressed and he's depressed because of his ongoing pursuit of a particular activity that initially led to a lot of dopamine, but over time has led to less and less dopamine and more and more of this pain side of the balance. We could call him addicted to that particular activity. Whether or not he's addicted by clinical standards or not, really, isn't important. What is important is that he experiences this as depression, as low affect as it's called or anhedonia, an inability to experience pleasure from that thing or from anything else. And he's currently undergoing treatment through a rebalancing of his pleasure pain pathway. So while I can't reveal his identity to you, that wouldn't be appropriate. He did give me permission to reveal the general architecture of what he's coping with. And I spent some hours with him on the phone this week, talking to him as well as to the various people that he's working with to really understand what's going on here 'cause I think it can illustrate the relationship between dopamine, pleasure, and pain for sake of addiction, but also for understanding how to avoid depressive states, how to remove ourselves from depressive states. And as you'll see today, as we discussed depression, many of the molecules and neural pathways and biological mechanisms that we know can be used to counter depression, feed back onto this pleasure pain balance. Before we begin, I'd like to say that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term health can only be detected from a quality blood test. The problem with most blood tests, however, is that you get information back about hormone levels, metabolic factors, et cetera, but you don't really know what to do with that information. Some things might be flagged as too high or too low, but really interpreting those data and taking action to bring those numbers into the ranges that you want is what it's really about. An InsideTracker makes all that very easy. They have a platform, it's a dashboard that will tell you for instance, what sorts of dietary changes or supplementation changes or exercise changes will help you bring various hormones, metabolic factors, and other factors into the ranges that are right for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code "huberman" at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been using athletic greens since way back in 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and that I still take Athletic Greens is that it really covers all of my foundational nutrient and micronutrient needs. It has vitamins, minerals, and the thing that's especially important to me these days is the probiotics, because there are so many data that show that having a healthy gut microbiome is vital to having a healthy immune system and for healthy gut brain axis, literally the functioning of your brain, your mood, various aspects of brain inflammation or limiting brain inflammation are facilitated by having a healthy gut microbiome. And that's facilitated by getting the proper probiotics. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim their special offer. The special offer is five free travel packs, which make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road or in the car, and a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3K2 have been shown to have a number of different positive health effects on hormones, on cardiovascular health, and so on. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim their special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Belcampo. Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic, grass fed, and finished certified humane meats. I don't need a lot of meat. Typically my diet regime is one in which I fast until about noon, and then I have a lunch which is fairly low carbs. So I'll have some piece of meat or chicken or fish and some salad typically. And then in the evening is when I tend to emphasize carbohydrates. That helps me be really alert during the day and sleep well at night. When I do eat meat, I insist that the meat be of the very highest quality and that it is sourced in humane ways. Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, and that results in meat that is higher in nutrients and healthy fats. There are now a lot of data pointing to the fact that high levels of omega-3 fatty acids are vital for mood, for cardiovascular health and various aspects of maintaining what's called a healthy Inflammatone, the various things in our brain and body that maintain a healthy inflammation response, but one that doesn't go out of whack or get unchecked in any way that is detrimental to us. If you'd like to try Belcampo, first-time customers can get 20% off by going to belcampo.com/huberman and using the code "Huberman" at checkout. That's belcampo.com/huberman for 20% off and use the code "Huberman" at checkout. Today we're discussing depression. In particular, we're going to talk about major depression. The phrase major depression is used to distinguish one form of depression from the other, the other one being bipolar depression. Bipolar depression, sometimes called bipolar disorder, is really characterized by manic highs. So where people aren't sleeping and they're talking very fast, and they're buying things and pursuing resources that they can't afford, they're starting relationships left and right, they're manic, followed by periods of crashes of feeling very low, lethargic, and so on. Bipolar depression is an absolutely crucial thing for us to discuss. And therefore we are going to have an entire separate episode related to bipolar depression. Today, we're going to talk about major depression, also sometimes called unipolar depression, just because it doesn't have the highs and lows. It's more characterized by the lows. We're going to talk about the biology, the psychology, and the various treatments, behavioral, drug, supplementation, diet, exercise, all of that. Before we go forward into the material, I just want to emphasize that any discussion about mood disorders carries with it a particular sensitivity, and that sensitivity is one related to self-diagnosis. Today's episode, and indeed in the future episodes for this month on mood disorders, you're going to hear various symptomologies that are used to diagnose and characterize these disorders. If you recognize some of these symptomologies in yourself or in others that you know, that's an important thing to take note of. However, accurate diagnosis really should be done by a qualified healthcare professional. So at once I'm saying, keep your eyes and your ears up for things that sound familiar to you that might be of concern. And at the same time, I'm saying don't necessarily leap to conclusions. Take those flags of concern if they're there and bring them to a qualified healthcare professional, and they'll be able to properly diagnose you as having a particular mood disorder or diagnose somebody as having a particular mood disorder or not. And that's an essential step. I don't say this to protect us, I said this really to protect you. Okay, let's have a fact-based discussion about depression. And I promise you that where we don't know certain things about depression, I will be clear to tell you. In fact, we are going to talk about some treatments for depression that are looking very promising, and that right now are actually being used more and more. And from my read of the mechanistic literature, we're still a bit in the dark as to how these work. That's actually a common theme of medicine. Many times there are treatments that seem promising or that look really terrific. And there isn't a lot of understanding about mechanism. However, any good discussion about neuroscience and in particular about mood disorders, has to get into mechanisms. So we're going to do that. And in doing that, we're going to frame the discussion for the tools of how to keep depression at bay and how to deal with it if you happen to find yourself depressed, or if you know somebody else who's depressed. What is this thing we call depression? Was I mentioned before, it has two forms, bipolar depression, which we're not talking about today, and major depression, also called unipolar depression is the other. Major depression impacts 5% of the population. That is any enormous number. That means if you're in a class of 100 people, five of them are dealing with major depression or have at some point. Look around you in any environment and you can be sure that a good portion of the people that you're surrounded by is impacted by depression, or will be at some point. So this is something we really have to take seriously and that we want to understand. It is the number four cause of disability. A lot of people miss work, miss school, and before then likely perform poorly in work or school due to major depression. Now there's a very serious challenge in having a discussion about depression and it relates directly to the challenges in diagnosing depression. Earlier, I did an episode with Dr. Karl Deisseroth, who is indeed a medical doctor and a PhD. He's a psychiatrist. And he made a very important point, which is that the field of psychiatry and psychology are confronted with a challenge, which is they're trying to understand what's going on within the stuff that's in our brains that's deep to our skulls. We don't have access to that without brain imaging and electrodes and things like that. Someone just comes into the office and the dissection tool for depression so to speak is language. In order to determine if somebody has depression or not, we have to use language, how they talk about things, also how they carry their body. Also some general patterns of health. So let's talk about depression the way that clinicians talk about depression, because one of the issues is that we use the word depression loosely. A lot of people say, "Oh, I'm so depressed. "I didn't get this job or I'm so depressed. "I just don't know, I had a really rough week "or I'm exhausted. "I'm so depressed or I'm so depressed "I thought I was going to go on vacation "and then they canceled the flight." Okay. That is not clinical depression. That's called being bummed out, being sad or disappointed. Now that person might be depressed, but clinical depression actually has some very specific criteria. And those criteria are mainly characterized by the presence of certain things and the absence of a few particular things. So let's talk about the things that are present in somebody that has major depression. First of all, there tends to be a lot of grief. There tends to be a lot of sadness. That's no surprise. The threshold to cry is often a signature of depression. Now that doesn't mean that if you cry easily, that you're depressed. Some people cry more easily than others, but if you're somebody who typically didn't cry easily and suddenly you find yourself crying very easily, that could be a sign of depression. And I want to emphasize, could. There's also this thing that we call anhedonia, a general lack of ability to enjoy things, things that typically or previously we enjoyed. Things like food, things like sex, things like exercise, things like social gatherings, a kind of lack of enjoyment from those things. Sometimes that lack of enjoyment is sad, and sometimes it's just flat, it's just kind of neutral. It doesn't feel good because nothing there. It's like bland food. It's like these experiences are analogous to biting into your favorite article of food and it just not tasting very good. It just doesn't taste like anything at all. And that's a common symptom of major depression. The other one is guilt. Oftentimes people with depression will feel very guilty about things they have done in the past, or they'll just generally feel badly about themselves. And we're going to talk about this because it relates to some of the more serious symptomology seen in depression sometimes, things like self harm, mutilation, or even suicide. But for the time being, we want to frame up anhedonia, this lack of ability to achieve or experience pleasure, or kind of a flat affect as it's called. Sometimes even delusional thinking, negative delusional thinking, and in particular anti-self confabulation. What is anti-self confabulation? Well, first of all, confabulation is an incredible aspect of our mind and our nervous system. You sometimes see other forms of confabulation in people who have memory deficits either because they have brain damage or they have age-related dementia. A good example of this would be someone with age related dementia sometimes will find themselves in a location in the house and not know how they got there. And if you ask them, "Oh, what are you doing here?" They will create these elaborate stories. "Oh, I was thinking about going to the shopping today, "and I was going to take the bus, "and then I was going to do this." They create these elaborate stories, they confabulate. And yet that person hasn't left the house in weeks and that person doesn't have a driver's license. And so they're really just creating this stuff. They're not lying to get out of anything, they're confabulating. It's as if a brain circuit that writes stories, just starts generating content. In major depression, there's often a state of delusional anti-self confabulation, where the confabulation are not directly or completely linked to reality, but they are ones that make the self, the person describing them, seem sick or in some way not well. A good example would be somebody who experiences a physical injury perhaps. Maybe they break their ankle, maybe it's an athlete, and they also happen to become depressed. And you'll talk to them and say, "How are things going? "How's your rehab though?" And they go, "Oh, it's okay. And I don't know. "I feel like I'm getting weaker and weaker by the day. "I'm just not performing well." And then you'll talk to the person that they're working with, their kinesiologist or whoever the physical therapist is. And they'll say, "No, they're actually really improving. "And I tell them they're improving, "but somehow they're not seeing that improvement, "they're not registering that improvement." You notice that sometimes it's subtle and sometimes it's severe, but they'll start confabulating. You'll say, "I actually heard you're doing much better. "You're getting better, you're taking multiple trips "around the building now "before you could barely get out of bed." And they'll say, "Yeah, well basically, they changed some things "about the parking lot that make it easier to move around. "So it's not really me." And these aren't people that are just explaining away their accomplishments 'cause they're trying to brush off praise. They are viewing themselves and they're confabulating according to a view that is very self-deprecating to the point where it doesn't match up with reality. It's not what other people see and it's actually not matched up with reality. And that's a symptom of depression that I think we don't often think about or conceptualize enough. So it's not just telling people, "oh yeah, it's not as good as it seems. Everything's bad." These people really believe that and it becomes disconnected from reality. So it's if they're sort of sinking into a pit and they're losing touch with the realities of the world, including data about themselves, their ability to move and get around it, for example, in that particular instance that I used as an example, but there are others as well. The other common symptomology of major depression is what they call vegetative symptoms, okay? So vegetative symptoms are symptoms that occur without any thinking, without any doing, or without any confabulation. These are things that are related to our core physiology. The word vegetative, you might know it sounds like vegetable. It actually relates to a system in the body that nowadays is more commonly called the autonomic nervous system. The vegetative nervous system and the autonomic nervous system, historically were considered sort of one in the same. And it relates to things like the stress response or to our ability to sleep. So vegetative symptoms be things like constantly being exhausted. The person just feels exhausted. It's not because they exercise too much, it's not necessarily because of a life event, it could be, but they're just worn out. They don't have the energy they once had. So it's not in their heads, it's probably, and now I think we have good data to support the fact that there's something off, something is disrupted in the autonomic or so-called vegetative nervous system. And one of the most common symptoms of people with major depression, one of the signs of major depression is early waking and not being able to fall back asleep despite being exhausted. So waking up at 3:00 AM or 4:00 AM or 5:00 AM just spontaneously and not being able to go back to sleep. I want to emphasize that that could happen for other reasons as well, but it is a common symptom or warning sign of major depression. So let's talk more about sleep and depression. It's well-known that the architecture of sleep is disrupted in depression. What's the architecture of sleep? I've done entire episodes about this, but very briefly in two sentences, although they're probably be run on sentences, early in the night, you tend to have slow wave sleep more than REM sleep or Rapid Eye Movement sleep. As the night goes on, you tend to have more Rapid Eye Movement sleep. That architecture of slow wave sleep preceding Rapid Eye Movement sleep is radically disrupted in major depression. In addition, the pattern of activity in the brain during particular phases of sleep is disrupted. Now this is during sleep. So this can't be that people are creating this situation for themselves. These are real physiological signs that something is off in this so-called autonomic or vegetative nervous system. And then there are some other things that relate to the autonomic nervous system, but that we normally think of as more voluntary in nature. And these are things like decreased appetite. So you can imagine that one could have decreased appetite because of the anhedonia, the lack of pleasure from food, right? If you don't enjoy food, then you might be less motivated to eat it. That makes sense. As well because of these disruptions in the autonomic nervous system, these vegetative symptoms, as they're called, you can imagine that someone would have decreased appetite because some of the hormones associated with appetite, hypocretin orexin and things of that sort, ghrelin, that those will be disrupted. And if those names of hypocretin orexin and ghrelin don't make any sense to you, don't worry about it. What those are just hormones that impact when we eat, when we feel hungry, and when we crave food more, as well as when we feel full, we have enough so-called satiety. If you want to learn more about those, we did entire episodes on eating and metabolism. So you can see that the symptomology of major depression impacts us at multiple levels. There's the conscious level of how excited we are generally. Well, that's reduced. There's grief, there's guilt, there's crying, but then there's also these vegetative things. There's disruptions in sleep, which of course make everything more challenging when we're awake. We know that sleep is so vital for resetting. You're waking up early, you can't get back to sleep. That's going to adjust your affect, your emotions in negative ways. We know this. And appetite is off. And there are hormones that get disrupted. So cortisol levels are increased. In particular, there's a signature pattern of depression whereby cortisol, the stress hormone that normally is released in a healthy way only in the early part of the day is shifted to late in the day. In fact, a 9:00 PM peak in cortisol is one of the physiological signatures of depressive like states. It's not the only one, but it is an important one. So there are a lot of things going on in major depression. And by now you're probably thinking, goodness, this is dreadful. Like there's all this terrible stuff. And indeed it is terrible. It is a terrible thing to find oneself in a mode where things feel sad, you feel guilty, you're exhausted. And oftentimes there's also an association with the anxiety system. So just because people are exhausted and lethargic and they don't enjoy things, doesn't necessarily mean that there's an absence of anxiety. There can also be a lot of anxiety about what's going to happen to me. Am I going to be able to achieve my goals in life? Will I ever get out of this state? And so things really start to layer on. And if this sounds depressing to you, it is indeed depressing. This is really the place that many people find themselves. And it's a pit that they just don't know how to climb out of. So let's just take a few minutes and talk about some of the underlying biology that creates this cloud or this constellation of symptomology. I think that's really important to do because if we want to understand the various treatments, how they work and why they work and how to implement them, we have to understand some of the underlying biology. So let's spend a few minutes talking about the biology of depression, what's known and what's not known. Because in doing that, I think you'll get a much clearer picture about why certain tools work to relieve depression and why others might not. So one of the most important early findings in the search for a biological basis of depression was this finding that there are drugs that relieve some of the symptoms of depression. Those drugs generally fall into three major categories, but the first set of ones that were discovered were the so-called tricyclic antidepressants, and the MAO inhibitors, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors. You don't need to understand that nomenclature, but I'm going to give you a little bit of detail so that if you want to understand it, you can. Most of this work took place in the late 1950s and in the 1960s, and continued well until the 1980s when new classes of drugs were discovered. And these tricyclic antidepressants and the MAO inhibitors largely worked by increasing levels of norepinephrine in the brain, as well as in the body, in some cases. And they were discovered through a kind of odd set of circumstances. We don't have time to go into all the history, but suffice to say that they were discovered because of the exploration for drugs that alter blood pressure. Norepinephrine impacts blood pressure, and drugs that lower blood pressure reduce levels of norepinephrine. And that in many cases, was shown to lead to depression or depressive like symptoms. And so these drugs, these tricyclic drugs, and the MAO inhibitors actually increase norepinephrine. And frankly, they do quite a good job of relieving some, if not all of the symptoms of major depression. However, they carry with the many side effects. Some of those side effects are side effects related to blood pressure itself, by increasing noradrenaline, norepinephrine as it's called, you raise blood pressure. That can be dangerous, that can be uncomfortable. But they also have a lot of other side effects. The reason they have other side effects is because they impact systems in the brain and in the body that impact things like libido, appetite, digestion, and others. And we'll talk about each of those in sequence. Okay, so the experience that clinicians had of observing some relief for depression with the tricyclic antidepressants and with MAO inhibitors was terrific, but there were all these side effects, side effects that people really did not like, they didn't like these drugs at all. A lot of people get dry mouth, I mentioned the low libido, they'd have sleep issues, appetite issues, weight gain. They made some people so uncomfortable that they preferred not to take them, even though when they didn't take them, they had a worsening or a maintenance of their depressive symptoms. A decade or so later, there was the discovery of the so-called pleasure pathways in the brain. These are pathways, literally groups of neurons that reside in different locations in the brain but connect to one another. So it's a circuit. And when you stimulate these neurons with certain behaviors or with electrical stimulation in an experiment, believe it or not, that's been done in both animals and humans, animals and humans become very, very motivated to get more stimulation of these pathways. So this pleasure pathway or these circuits for pleasure are very what we call reinforcing. In fact, animals and humans will work hard to get stimulation of these brain areas even more than they will work to obtain sex, drugs, or even if they are addicted to a particular drug and they are in a state of withdrawal, the ultimate state of craving, if given a choice, a person or an animal will select to have stimulation of this pleasure pathway instead of the drug itself. And that is a major and significant finding. This pleasure pathway, as it's sometimes called, involves areas like the nucleus accumbens and the ventral tegmental area. These are areas of the brain that are rich with neurons that make dopamine. And if you think to the symptoms of depression, of anhedonia, lack of pleasure, a lack of ability to experience pleasure, well, that was a smoking gun that there's something wrong with the dopamine pathway in depression. And indeed that's the case. So it's not just norepinephrine, it's also the dopamine or pleasure pathway is somehow disrupted. And then in the 1980s, there was the discovery of the so-called SSRIs Most people are now familiar with the SSRIs, the Selective Serotonin Re-Uptake Inhibitors. The SSRIs worked by distinct mechanisms from the tricyclic antidepressants and the MAO inhibitors. As their name suggests, SSRI, Selective Serotonin Re-Uptake Inhibitors prevent serotonin from being wiped up from the synapse after two neurons talk to one another. What do I mean by that? Well, here's some very basic Neurobiology 101. If you don't know any neurobiology, you're going to know some in about 15 seconds. Neurons communicate with one another by spitting out chemicals into the little gap between them. The little gap between them is called the synapse or by the Brits, the synapse. Those chemicals bind to the neuron on the opposite side and cause changes in the electrical activity of that neuron on the other side of the synapse. Serotonin is one such neurotransmitter or more specifically, it's a neuromodulator, can change the activity of large groups of neurons in very meaningful ways. Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor means when a person takes this drug, some of those drugs include things like Prozac or Zoloft, the more typical names or more generic names are things like fluoxetine, when people take those, more serotonin hangs out in the synapse and is able to be taken up by the neuron on the opposite side because of this selective re-uptake inhibition. It prevents the clearance of serotonin from the synapse and thereby more serotonin can have an effect. So SSRIs don't increase the total amount of serotonin in the brain. They change how effective the serotonin that's already in the brain is at changing the activity of neurons, okay? So they don't increase serotonin, they increase the efficacy or the function of serotonin in the way that I just described. So that was more than 15 seconds, but now you understand how SSRIs work. And I wouldn't be talking about SSRIs if they didn't in fact work. Yes, there are many problems with SSRIs. They do carry certain side effects in many individuals. Also, about a third of people that take SSRIs don't derive any benefit, it doesn't relieve their symptoms of depression. However, for the other two thirds, there's often a relief of some, if not all of the symptoms of major depression. The problem is the side effects that accompany those SSRIs. And so these days SSRIs are a complicated topic. It's sort of what I would call a barbed wire topic because we often hear about all the problems with them, but these drugs also have saved a lot of lives. They've also improved a lot of lives. The issue is that they tend to have varying effects on different individuals, and sometimes varying effects over time. So they'll work for awhile then they won't work for a while. There are also a lot of mysteries about the SSRIs, and those mysteries bother people. What mysteries am I referring to? Well, SSRIs increase the amount of serotonin or more specifically, they increase the efficacy of serotonin at the synapse, that happens immediately, or very soon after people start taking SSRIs. But people generally don't start experiencing any relief from their symptoms of depression if they're going to experience them at all, until about two weeks after they start taking these drugs. So there's something going on there that's not clear. One idea is that the SSRIs actually can improve symptoms of depression or even remove symptoms of depression through so-called neuro-plasticity by changing the way that neural circuits function. And there are many on this, but the main categories of studies on SSRIs that relate to neuroplasticity fall into two camps. One is that the ways in which SSRIs might, and I want to emphasize, might be able to trigger the production of more neurons in the brain, in particular areas of the hippocampus called the dentate gyrus and others, that impact memory. This is important. We're going to come back to memory. The other is that the SSRIs have been shown in various scientific studies to reopen critical periods of plasticity. I'll just briefly describe one of those studies. There was a study done by Lamberto Maffei's group in Pisa, that explored brain plasticity that's known to be present in young animals and disappear in older animals. And this is also true in humans that younger humans have a far more plastic brain that can change in many more ways more easily than can the older brain. And what they showed was that fluoxetine, Prozac, given to adult animals can reopen this incredible period of plasticity, can allow more plasticity to occur. That was interesting. I mean, it's purely through increases in serotonin transmission. And there are other studies showing that fluoxetine can increase the number of new neurons that are born into the adult brain, so called neurogenesis, the production of new neurons. So it's very clear that there are at least three major chemical systems in the brain; norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin that relate to and can adjust the symptoms of depression. And those actually can be divided into separate categories. So for instance, epinephrin or norepinephrine is thought to relate to the so-called psychomotor defects, sometimes called psychomotor retardation. This is the lethargy, this is the exhaustion, this is the inability to get out of bed in the morning. Dopamine is thought to relate to the anhedonia, or I should say lack of dopamine in depressive patients is thought to lead to the anhedonia. The lack of ability to experience pleasure. And serotonin is thought to relate to the grief, the guilt, some of the more cognitive or more emotional aspects of depression. So we've got the norepinephrine system related to activity and alertness, the dopamine system relating to motivation, pleasure, and the ability to seek and experience pleasure, and then the serotonin system that's related to grief. And unfortunately, brains and organisms don't work in a simple mathematical way where you just say, oh, well, this person's experiencing a lot of grief, but they don't have any problems with lethargy. And so let's just boost up their serotonin. On paper it works, but oftentimes it doesn't work clinically. And another patient, you might get somebody who can't experience pleasure, but they're kind of anxious. They don't have any trouble sleeping, but they're just much more anxious and frustrated than they normally are, and they meet the symptoms of depression. Well, you might think, oh, well, do you just give that person some drugs increase dopamine and everything will be better? And indeed, in some cases that's true. There are drugs like Wellbutrin, which function more specifically on the dopamine system to increase dopamine and they also increase norepinephrine. Many people get great relief from things like Wellbutrin. They don't really impact the serotonin system so much. And therefore you don't get a lot of the serotonergic or serotonin related side effects. However, some people feel far too anxious on those drugs, some people get addicted to those drugs in a way, because a lot of those drugs that increase dopamine make you want more of those drugs. So you start to realize that what makes sense on paper doesn't always make sense clinically. And this is why it's complicated. And a really good psychologist and a really good psychiatrist will work with someone to try and pull and push on these various systems to find the combination of drugs that may be or may not be correct for them. There's a fourth aspect of the chemistry of depression that's really important to understand. And that's pain. We've talked about pain on this podcast before, but even if you didn't hear the episode on pleasure and pain, just want to emphasize that pain is something that we experience in our body, no surprise there, an injury, a cut, et cetera, but that we also experience emotional pain. And those systems are linked in very intricate ways. There's actually some data showing that pain relievers, Tylenol, Aspirin, these sorts of things, can help certain people with emotional pain. Now I'm not recommending people run out and take those things for emotional pain. But actually, if you think about it, that shouldn't come as any surprise. given the enormous number of people that take painkillers, opioids and things like them to try and relieve their psychological pain. And as we know, those drugs are very, very problematic for many individuals. They can help certain individuals, but they are very prone to abuse and they can induce addiction very easily in a number of people. There's a substance that's literally called substance P, the letter P, that's manufactured by neurons in our brain and body, which underlies our sensation of pain. And indeed substance P inhibitors have been used to treat depression, and in some cases works. A lot of people with depression are hypersensitive to pain, and of course they could have multiple things going on. They could have chronic pain or chronic injury and major depression. So you start to get the constellation of the many things that could happen. So that's all I want to say today about the chemistry underlying depression or major depression. There's a lot more there, but I think if you understand the norepinephrine system and that it relates to some of these things like lethargy, the psychomotor defects, as they're called, dopamine and how it relates to motivation and lack of motivation and lack of dopamine and depression, and serotonin and its relationship to grief, and that low serotonin can lead to extreme grief and shame and higher serotonin levels can sometimes restore a sense of wellbeing and safety and feeling good about oneself. If you understand that and you understand that physical pain is somehow involved in certain cases, I think you will know more about depression and its underlying chemistry than most all people out there. And if you'd like to learn more, I invite you to pursue searching those terms further on the internet. And we'll certainly go into them in more depth. But that really sets the stage for where we're headed next. So next I'd like to talk about hormones and how they relate to depression. And I'd also like to talk about stress and how it relates to depression, as well as talk about some of the genetics or the predispositions to depression. And for those of you that are thinking, hey, I want the tools. I want to know how to fix depression. I understand the desire for that. I will just ask if you hang in here with me a little bit longer, not only will you learn a lot more about how this complicated mood disorder works, some of the more interesting things about it, but it will also position you to get a lot more out of the tools that we will describe. You always have the option to skip forward of course, but I think it's important to understand some of the hormonal and stress-related aspects of depression. So let's talk about hormones. 20% of people that have major depression have low thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormone is related to metabolism. Oftentimes we think about thyroid is only related to having a fast metabolism, but thyroid is related to all forms of metabolism, including our ability to synthesize new tissues like protein and repair injuries. I did a whole episode on thyroid and growth hormone. If you want to check that out, all of that is archived at hubermanlab.com. It's all timestamped, et cetera. You can find on YouTube, Apple, Spotify, all those places. So if you're curious about thyroid hormone and growth hormone, and you want to do the deep dive on those, and you want to learn how to alter their levels using various approaches, check that out. But 20% of people with major depression are hypo thyroidal. They don't make enough thyroid. And that leads to low energy, low metabolism in the brain and body. And there's a condition called Hashimoto's, which is essentially low thyroid output. And again, I don't want to get into all the tools related to thyroid. Sometimes a psychiatrists will prescribe thyroid medication to increase thyroid output in people that are depressed and that will work to relieve the symptoms. So there isn't necessarily a direct problem with serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine or substance abuse. Sometimes it's a thyroid problem. So there are certain situations or conditions that can impact the thyroid hormone system and make people more susceptible to depression or make a pre-existing depression worse. And those are things like childbirth. So it's well-known that women who give birth can often undergo what's called postpartum depression. It actually comes from the word post parturition depression. They give birth, what's happier, what's more joyful than the birth of a new healthy child, and they will lapse into a depression. And that's thought to be hormonally related, either directly to the thyroid system or perhaps to the cortisol system as well. We'll talk about cortisol in a moment. As well, certain women during certain phases of their menstrual cycle experience symptoms that are very much like clinical depression, and oftentimes are diagnosed with clinical depression appropriately. And of course the menstrual cycle is associated with shifts in hormone levels. As well, menopausal and post-menopausal women are more susceptible to major depression, regardless of whether or not they've had that major depression earlier in their life. So these are things to be on the lookout for and to definitely talk to a doctor and get a blood panel that hopefully includes measures of thyroid hormone and cortisol hormone. Why cortisol hormone? Well more stress is correlated with more bouts of major depression across the lifespan. How many bouts? Well, it turns out that as you go from having one to two to three, well, when you hit four to five bouts of really intense, stressful episodes in life, these tend to be long-term stressful episodes, your risk for major depression goes way up. So whether or not you have a genetic predisposition to depression or not, one of the best things you can do to try and avoid getting depressed is to learn to control your stress system, to not go from short-term stress, which everybody experiences, we all have short-term stressors, to medium term stress to long-term stress, and to not have too many bouts of long-term stress because that probability of getting depressed goes way, way up. And this is something I've seen over and over again, not just in my scientific career, but just throughout life. People in all sorts of domains, young and old, I've seen that people will go through a very intense relationship, a breakup, sometimes it's the staying together that stressful, sometimes it's a graduate school that can be stressful, sometimes it's some other event. And then some months later they become depressed. And that's because the stress system is associated with the release of cortisol. The cortisol system can dramatically impact the way that these different neuromodulators, dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin function. And so there's this kind of latent or longer lasting impact on the systems that impact mood and wellbeing. So learning how to control your stress is really key. If you're not depressed or you're somebody that has not lapsed into a depression recently, take control of your stress system. And we did an entire episode on how to conquer stress, and that involves dealing with stress in the short term, the medium term, and in the long-term. And there are a lot of different ways to do that. One of the more important reasons for learning how to counter stress in order to offset depression is that there is a genetic predisposition that certain people carry to become depressed. There are these studies now of many, many thousands of individuals, these were mainly done in New Zealand, but these studies have now been done elsewhere, looking at many tens of thousands of individuals who carry particular copies of genes, what they call polymorphisms, in particular of a gene called 5HTTLPR, which is a serotonin transporter. So this is a gene that controls or regulates how much serotonin is available in the brain. If you have this gene, this polymorphism, it doesn't necessarily mean that you will be depressed, but it greatly shifts your susceptibility to depression under conditions of stress. So I realize some people are listening to this and some people are watching it on YouTube. So I'm going to describe this in a way that doesn't require looking at any graphs. What I want you to imagine is a very, shallow hill, like a very mellow hill. It's just a ramp set at about 10 or 15 degrees, okay. What we're plotting there in your mind is that with each about of serious stress, so that could be trying to finish a degree or a relationship breakup, or a family member that's sick, or the loss of a loved one or a pet, with each about of stress, the probability that you will experience a major depression goes up. However, if you carry this gene, this HTTLPR gene, the steepness of that curve goes way, way up where it's actually more like a line such that you need far fewer bouts of stress in order to lapse into a major depression, okay? So if the typical person who doesn't carry this polymorphism has to experience two or three or four or five bouts of stress before they lapse into a depression, somebody with this gene is susceptible to getting depression after just one about or two bouts of intense stress, okay? So that's how these genes work. They don't preordain or determine you to be depressed. They raise a susceptibility. And many genes, many things related to heritability in general, work in that way. And we know there's a strong genetic component to depression. How do we know? Well, in what are called concordant monozygotic twins. So these will be identical twins. And they can either be in one biological sack or two biological sacks while in utero, what's called monochorionic or dichorionic. Well, typically it's monochorionic. And identical twins, for which one of those twins goes on to have major depression, there's a 50% probability that the other one will have major depression. So it's not 100%, it's not 100% inherited, it's not 100% generic, as you might say, but there's a much higher predisposition for depression. Whereas in fraternal twins, that number drops, and in siblings, that number drops to about 25%, and in half siblings, it's about 10%. The numbers vary from study to study, but basically the more closely related you are to somebody who has major depression, the more likely it is that you will also get major depression. And therefore, if you haven't gotten major depression, the more likely it is that you should take steps to learn to mitigate stress because stress is the major factor that can trigger one of these depressive episodes. So we've covered a lot related to the stress and the hormones and the neurochemistry of depression. In fact, I think this is probably the deepest I've ever gone into the biology of any topic on this podcast before getting to any specific tools. I mentioned that learning how to mitigate stress and deal with stress, learning how to measure and adjust your thyroid hormone, those might be useful. But next I'd like to turn to some very specific tools that people who both have depression or who are prone to depression, as well as people who don't have depression and simply want to maintain a good mood, who want to maintain a positive affect and pursuit of things in life, what are the things that you can do? It turns out there are things that you can do and all of the biology that underlies the utility of those things. Meaning the reasons those things work will now make sense to you because they adjust things like serotonin and dopamine, and they adjust them through very specific pathways. I know for many people learning about mechanism is kind of grueling. I realized this podcast isn't necessarily one that you can listen to passively while doing other things. Although I would hope that you could do that and still enjoy it and extract the information. Why mechanism? Mechanism is so key because mechanism is a little bit like understanding some of the chemistry of cooking. If you read a recipe and you can follow a recipe, you often hear people say, oh, I can follow a recipe. That means that if you have every ingredient in that recipe, you're good. You likely can make that dish. You can make that meal. However, if you understand a little bit of the chemistry of why salt has to be added third and not first, or why the heat has to be adjusted at a particular time, well then not only can you follow a recipe, but that also gives you flexibility for when salt isn't available, or when you want to adjust the flavor of the dish, or when you want to try a new dish, or you want to get experimental. So when you understand mechanism, it puts you in a tremendous place of power to work with your system. So it's not just plug and chug, like take 12 milligrams of this, you either feel better or you don't. You can really start to understand how prescription drugs, supplements, nutrition, behavioral tools, how those things weave together to either work for you or not work for you and get you to paths of healthy mind and body. So let's think about why any tool would work to relieve depression. We've talked about how some of the drugs that impact these different chemical systems might work and why they create some of the problems they create. Problems are mainly created by the fact that they impact lots of systems in the brain and body. So you take a drug to increase serotonin, but that serotonin is also related, not just to mood, but to things related to libido and appetite. And so you start disrupting multiple systems. The same could be said for behavioral tools, right? That any behavioral tool that adjusts the levels of a particular chemical ought to perhaps, provide some relief for some of the symptoms of major depression. Let's take an example that I've talked about before on the podcast, which is, if you get into a very cold shower, you take an ice bath, you will release norepinephrine and epinephrine in your brain and body. There's no question about that. I don't think anyone can really escape that. It's a kind of a universal response to being in cold water. Well, if some aspects of depression are related to low levels of norepinephrine, will taking cold showers relieve your depression? Perhaps it might even relieve certain aspects of that depression. Is it a cure? Well, that's going to depend on the individual. Will exercise help? Well, if you go out for a run, you're going to increase the amount of norepinephrine in your body. If you enjoy that run, it's likely that you'll increase the levels of dopamine and probably serotonin in your brain and body as well. Will that cure your depression? Well, there are a lot of studies exploring how exercise can impact depression. And indeed, regular exercise is known to be a protective behavior against depression, but it also can help relieve some of the symptoms of depression. So you may ask yourself, why would you need drugs at all? Why would there be prescription drugs or the need for supplementation or other things to alleviate the symptoms of depression? Ah, well, that's the diabolical nature of depression, which is if people are far enough along in this thing, this sometimes called disease, sometimes called disorder, but major depression, oftentimes they can't get the energy to even get up and take a bath or a shower. They have no motivation to do it, they have no desire to go for a run. So you say, "Come on, let's go, you'll feel better. "I know you feel better, it generates all these chemicals "I heard on the whatever podcast, Huberman Lab podcast, "or another podcast that getting into action "does all these things." And they just don't want to do it. And to you, a person who's not experiencing depression, that perhaps could just seem like the most frustrating and confusing thing in the world. But it's very important to highlight the fact that these circuits that are accessible to some of us, the circuits for happiness, for pursuit of pleasure, for exercise, for getting in a cold shower, if that's your thing, that those circuits are present in all people, but for certain people that are experiencing major depression and are really in the depths of their depression, they can't really access those circuits in the same way that people who are not suffering from depression can. So I hope that makes it clear. It's not offering any excuses for them. And indeed, I think those behaviors would help jolt them out of some of the symptomology of depression, but they're just not accessible to everybody. So let's talk about the things that people can do to deal with depression. And again, anytime you add a behavior or a tool or a supplement, or subtract a behavior, tool, supplement, drug, et cetera, you absolutely should talk to your physician, especially if you're somebody that's dealing with major depression. I want to focus on the stress system. And I'm not just going to tell you to get sunlight in your eyes and to get a good night's sleep, although I think everybody should do that on a regular basis, ideally every day, talked about those ad nauseum on this podcast. They will help your sleep, they will help you alleviate stress. I think you should have tools to deal with stress in real time, et cetera. But let's look at depression from the standpoint of a deeper biological phenomenon, which is inflammation and the immune system. There's growing evidence now that many forms of major depression, if not all of them, relate to excessive inflammation. Now inflammation plays an important role in wound healing. It is a positive aspect of our immune system. Our ability to combat wounds, combat illnesses, et cetera, but inflammation gone unchecked, inflammation that lasts too long, or is of too high amplitude, meaning too many anti-inflammatory or inflammatory cytokines and things of that sort in the body is bad. And there's decent evidence now that inflammation can lead to or exacerbate depression. And that if we want to control depression, or limit or eliminate depression, that focusing on reducing inflammation and its associated pathways is a really good thing to do. And I think this is a really good thing for everybody to do regardless of whether or not you suffer from depression or not. And today we're going to talk about exactly how depression comes about through the inflammation pathway. So, first of all, who are the major players in creating chronic inflammation in the brain and body? They are the inflammatory cytokines. Things like IL-6, interleukin-6, things like Tumor Necrosis Alpha, TNF alpha, things like C reactive protein, alright? Not all of these are cytokines. You have interferons and prostoglandins and a lot of these things. But when we are stressed, chronically stressed, we get inflamed, our brain and various locations of the brain become inflamed because certain classes of cells, in particular, those glial cells, the cells that are typically thought to just be support cells, those cells and their biochemistry and their dialogue with the neurons of the brain and body starts to become disrupted. I may have mentioned it earlier, I don't recall. But I certainly mentioned it in an earlier podcast that adrenaline epinephrin, when it's released in the body, it doesn't cross the blood brain barrier, but there are certain things that are able to cross the blood-brain barrier when we are stressed. Things like the E2 prostoglandins, those cross the blood brain barrier. And our blood and our brain, therefore our brain and our body can communicate because certain things can pass through this barrier we call the BBB or the Blood Brain Barrier. And also we have something called the glymphatic system, which is really a plumbing system that links the brain and body. It's the link between the immune system and the brain. Well, there is a set of actions that we can take in order to limit inflammation. And this has been shown in several quality peer reviewed studies now to reduce inflammation and to relieve some, and in some cases, all of the symptoms of major depression. One of those approaches is to increase our intake of so-called EPAs or Essential Fatty Acids. There's now a very long list of papers in quality peer review journals showing that when people ingest a certain level of EPA omega-3 fatty acids, the relief from depressive symptoms matches the SSRIs. That's incredible, right? That essential fatty acids could relieve symptoms of depression, as well as some of the prescription antidepressants. Now, this doesn't necessarily mean you run off and stop taking your antidepressants if you've been prescribed them, please don't do that. Please talk to your physician. And I should mention that some of the same studies have shown that increasing our intake of these essential fatty acids, in particular, the EPA variety of omega-3s, can lower the effective dose of things like SSRIs. Meaning if we required a 50 milligram or 40 milligram dose of fluoxetine, that one can get by on a lower dose and thereby perhaps not experience as many or as severe side effects by taking or supplementing with EPAs. Now, the threshold level seems to be about one gram, 1000 milligrams of EPA. So you will sometimes see on a bottle of krill oil or fish oil or any other source, even plant source or other source of EPA that it's 1000 milligrams or 1200 milligrams. But what's really important to look at is whether or not there's more than 1000 milligrams of EPA, because the EPA in particular is what's important here. And actually in exploring some of the literature on the effects of EPAs on cardiovascular health, excuse me, as well as their effects on depression, there's some interesting dose dependent responses, such that people who took anywhere from 400 milligrams to 5,000 milligrams of EPAs, achieved a variety of different benefits. And in some cases, some side effects, we'll talk about those. And it does seem that this 1000 milligrams is the critical threshold for benefiting or getting some relief from depressive symptoms. But people who took two grams seem to do better. And in the cardiovascular health realm, there it's a little more complicated. Some studies point to a very positive effect on cardiovascular health by taking increasing amounts of EPA, others, not so much. The current data point to the fact that for every gram of EPA that one ingest, there's about a 9% improvement in cardiovascular health, the same dose dependent improvement on psychological health in combating depression can't really be stated. I wouldn't say that the more EPA you take, the better you're going to feel so to speak. I don't think the data point to that. However, it does seem that if you take a gram, 1000 milligrams or 2000 milligrams of EPA, there does seem to be some substantial relief for many people, should emphasize many, not all, for many people in major depressive symptoms. So how would this work? Well, turns out that these inflammatory cytokines, they impact neurons and the circuits of the brain that relate to things like serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. These inflammatory cytokines act in a variety of different ways, but they mainly act to inhibit the release of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, or the synthesis of serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine. And I'll give you one example of how EPAs can positively impact this process. And then it points to a second tool, which is the proper utilization of exercise to offset the effects of depression. So now you should understand why having healthy levels of serotonin is important for maintaining healthy mood. It's not responsible for all the aspects of having a healthy mood, there's also dopamine and norepinephrine, but it is a very important one. Dopamine also called 5HT, essentially derives from a precursor called tryptophan. Tryptophan arrives into our system through our diet, okay, tryptophan is an amino acid. Tryptophan is found in Turkey, it's found in carbohydrates. And that should therefore raise the idea, hmm, I wonder if one of the reasons why people who are depressed have such an appetite for carbohydrate late in foods is because they're trying to get more tryptophan, and therefore more serotonin. And indeed that's the case. Tryptophan is eventually converted into serotonin. However, if there's excessive amounts of inflammation, these inflammatory cytokines cause tryptophan to not be converted so much into serotonin, but to be diverted down a different pathway. The pathway involves something called IDO, Indoleamine, which converts tryptophan into kynurenine. Kynurenine actually acts as a neurotoxin by way of converting into something called quinolinic acid. And quinolinic acid is pro depressive. So if that seems like a complicated biochemical pathway, what's basically happening here is that the tryptophan that normally would be made into serotonin, under conditions of inflammation is being diverted into a neurotoxic pathway. And ingestion of EPAs, because it limits these inflammatory cytokines, things like IL-6, C-reactive protein, et cetera, can cause more of the tryptophan that one ingests or has in their body to be diverted towards the serotoninergic pathway. Exercise, it turns out, also has a positive effect on the tryptophan to serotonin conversion pathway. And the way it does it is really interesting. You now know that tryptophan can either be converted into serotonin or it can be converted into this neurotoxin, which is a bad thing. Exercise, the activation of the muscles through rhythmic repeated use, in particular aerobic exercise, but also resistance training has been shown to do this to some extent, tends to sequester or shuttle the contouring into the muscle so that it isn't converted into this neurotoxin that is pro depression, okay? There are a lot of steps in the pathway leading to depression, but what this essentially means is that hitting a certain threshold level of EPA intake, whether by supplementation with fish oil or krill oil or through some plant source if you're not into ingesting fish or krill, or trying to get up above that 1000 milligram threshold for EPA by ingesting particular food sources, you certainly can do it through food, you don't have to supplement, but it's easier to do with supplements, that doing that will limit the inflammation that diverts tryptophan into this neurotoxic pathway. And exercise as well, augments this conversion of tryptophan into serotonin because it takes this thing that would potentially be a neurotoxin and it sequesters it, it pulls it away so that it can't actually go have its pro depressive effects. So you've got multiple steps here. We're describing two tools, increasing EPA and regular exercise as a way of increasing serotonin, somewhat indirectly, right? It's by limiting this bad pathway to promote the activity of a good pathway. But from the data that are published in Quality Peer Review journals, it really appears that this inflammation pathway does function to increase depression through these pathways. And so knowing that there are behavioral steps and supplementation based steps, or if you prefer getting your EPAs from typical food, from nutritional approaches, I find that very reassuring that the mechanisms all converge on a common pathway, serotonin. That gives me great peace of mind that when people say, hey, go out for a run, or you should get outdoors exercise, or you should take fish oil like the Scandinavians do, I have Scandinavian family members and they are known to, or I should say they are quite open about the fact that during the winter months in particular when depression is more likely, but throughout the year, really, they make an effort to regularly ingest high levels of EPA, either through ingesting fatty fish and its skin, I'm not a particular fan of ingesting the skin of fatty fish, or by supplementing with Cod liver oil or other types of fish oil, sardines, and things of that sort, sardine oils. There are a number of different things out there that one could use. So I find it very reassuring that there's a common biochemical pathway that can explain why these things not just work, but why they should work. They should work because they operate in the very same biochemical pathways that antidepressants that are prescribed to people do. So what does this mean for you? Well, if you're somebody who suffers from major depression, again, don't stop taking your prescribed medication. Talk to your doctor, but talk to them perhaps about the EPAs and exercise and how these things can impinge on the same biochemical pathways. If you're somebody who is not suffering from major depression, I still think these pathways are really important to understand. And actually knowing these pathways is additional motivation to get regular exercise. I think we all know that we should be getting anywhere from 150 minutes to 180 minutes per week of so-called zone two cardio for cardiovascular effects. Zone two is the kind of melowish cardio where you can sort of hold a conversation if you needed to. But it's a little bit tough, you're kind of sucking for air a little bit. And that's going to limit these depressive like symptoms, I think in all of us. I don't think that we should think of depression as a strict threshold. I'm somebody who personally has made the choice to take 1000 milligrams of EPA per day. I do that by supplementing fish oil. There's debate out there as to whether or not it's better to take EPA NDHA in particular ratios, and whether or not DHA can impact the LDL, which is the so-called bad cholesterol. That's getting really down into the weeds. And we can talk about that in a future episode. But for myself, I notice a pretty substantial positive effect of taking anywhere from 1000 milligrams to 2000 milligrams of EPA per day. I do that through supplementation and I do strive to try and eat some fish, even though frankly, I've never liked the taste of fish. For those of you that would like a little more detail or perhaps a lot more detail into the effects of EPA on depression and in relieving depressive symptoms, and if you want to get into the nitty gritty of it, I invite you to go to examine.com, put in depression, EPA, they list off and have links to 28 studies on the effects of EPA on major depression. If you go to pub med, there are many, many studies on this now that date back several decades, really. If you're interested in the specific effects of EPA, as opposed to DHA, I want to point you towards a particular study entitled, not surprisingly EPA, but not DHA appears to be responsible for the efficacy of omega-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids supplementation and depression, evidence from a meta analysis of randomized control trials. This is a really wonderful paper. The author is Julian Martins, M-A-R-T-I-N-S. It was published in 2009. We will provide a link to this study in the caption. And that study is really the one that at least to me, points to why EPA in particular is what's effective, and that whether or not DHA is problematic or not as a separate issue, but it's really the EPA that one wants to hit a certain threshold level of if one's goal is to get relief from depression or to keep depression at bay by keeping mood elevated, which is why I take a high-dose EPA. So we've got EPA, we got exercise, now you understand how they work to adjust mood. Now, I want to talk about something that at least for me, was quite surprising when I first learned about it for sake of treatment of mood disorders, and that's creatine. Creatine has a number of very important functions throughout the body. For those of you that are into resistance training, and actually for those of you that are into endurance training as well, creatine has achieved a lot of popularity in recent years because supplementation with creatine can draw more water into muscles and can increase power output from muscles. So it's something that does indeed work. There have been debates about whether or not it's unhealthy for the kidneys to take long-term creatine, supplementation at high doses. And I invite you to go down that rabbit hole. I think most people now accept the idea that for most people, not all, but for most people, low dose creatine supplementation of anywhere from one gram to five grams per day can have a number of positive effects on physical performance. People with kidney issues, et cetera, need to be especially cautious, but creatine is interesting for that purpose. However, there's also a so-called phosphocreatine system in the brain, and that phosphocreatine system has everything to do with the dialogue between neurons and these other cell types called, glial, and glial comprise several cell types, microglia, astrocytes, et cetera, but the foster creatine system in the forebrain in particular, in the front of our brain, has been shown to be involved in regulation of mood and some of the reward pathways as well as in depression. And there are now several studies, at least three, although they're probably more by the time this comes out because they're coming out very quickly now, at least three quality studies pointing to the fact that creatine supplementation doesn't just have these positive effects on physical performance, but can also be used as a way to increase mood and to improve the symptoms of major depression. This has been now done in several double blind placebo controlled studies. The studies have looked at women, have it looked at men, have looked at adolescents, some of whom were taking SSRIs, some of whom were not, they've done magnetic resonance spectroscopy. So spectroscopy is a way that you can look at the concentrations of particular in the brain in real time in humans, it can be used for other things as well, of course. And basically what's been observed is that increasing the activity of the phosphocreatine system in the forebrain can be beneficial or at least is correlated with improvements in mood. So let's just talk for a moment about what's involved with using or supplementing creatine in order to improve mood and perhaps even treat depression. First of all, when I talk about creatine, I'm talking about creatine monohydrate, there are a number of different forms of creatine. Here I'm talking about creatine monohydrate. The American Journal of Psychiatry in 2012, published a study, which was a randomized, double blind placebo controlled trial of oral creatine monohydrate. And what it found is that it could augment or enhance the response to a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor, in particular, in women with major depressive disorder. So like EPA, creatine supplementation seems to either lower the required dose of SSRI that's required to treat depression, or can improve the effectiveness of a given dose of SSRI. However, there are other studies that have looked directly at creating supplementation in the absence of SSRIs. And those are interesting as well. There's a wonderful and very comprehensive review on creatine for the treatment of major depression that includes beautiful tables of all the subjects and the dosages, et cetera. I'm not going to read off every line and every column in that review, but we will provide a link to that review as well. One of the things that's really striking about the lists of studies that they include is that most of them used dosages that are pretty reasonable for most people, anywhere from three grams to five grams, sometimes up to as many 10 grams per day of creatine. Many of these also were shown to increase activity of this phosphocreatine system in the forebrain, and some show a relationship between that phosphocreatine system and a particular category of receptors in the brain called the NMDA receptor, N-methyl D-aspartate receptor. The NMDA receptor is one of the first things that every budding neuroscientists learns about because it is the receptor that has particular electrical and chemical properties that make it a critical gate for so-called neuroplasticity. So it's not a receptor that's activated in the brain, typically for just the functioning of the brain on a day-to-day basis. It's a receptor that's activated when circuits are going to change, when they are inspired to change by some very strong stimulus, meaning some experience, or in some cases a drug, or in some cases something else. But the NMDA receptor is a kind of a key node for shifting brain circuitry. And so while the details aren't entirely clear, it seems that creatine supplementation leads to increases in the phosphocreatine system in the forebrain. And that increases in the activity of the forebrain phosphocreatine system relate to changes in the way the NMDA receptors function and may lead to some of the plasticity, the changes in neural circuits that underlie the shift from negative mood and affect to positive mood. Now, there are a lot of gaps. There are a lot of little boxes or bins in the diagram I just laid out for you. And some of them are still truly black boxes, as we say, meaning, we don't really know what's in them yet. And more mechanistic data are coming. However, when you look over the data in this review, or when I look over the data in this review, what you find is that they're pretty striking positive effects of creatine. And one of the more interesting effects is that creatine has actually been shown to increase mania in people that are already manic. And that's interesting, we're not talking about bipolar depression today, but it seems that creatine elevates levels of activation and kind of mood overall. And you could see why that would be a problem for somebody that's already in a manic phase, but it actually might be beneficial for somebody who is very low affect and has major depression. So should you supplement with creatine? Well, as always, talk to your healthcare provider, but if you're somebody who is thinking about things that you can do and things that you can take in order to improve your mood, keep depression at bay, maybe even support other treatments for major depression. the creatine system seems like a logical one. There's at least strong studies and a good number of them to look to, to determine whether or not that's right for you. I personally take five grams of creatine for other reasons. I take it for the physical performance, enhancing effects, but it's kind of nice to think that perhaps it's also helping me improve my mood. That's a choice that I've made for me is in within the margins of safety for me in my life. I don't know that it's right for everybody, but I find it very interesting. And again, I find it particularly interesting because there's a logical biochemical pathway to support the finding that it improves mood and can offset the effects of major depression in some cases, or can improve the effects of antidepressant medication in many cases. When I see mechanism and I see effectiveness, and the mechanism and the effectiveness map to a lot of the same mechanisms that are involved in prescription drugs, that gives me great reassurance that this isn't just some sort of mysterious pathway or mysterious compound by which a creatine might be working. So now we've kind of clustered together EPAs, exercise, and their relationship to inflammation, creatine and its relationship to forebrain function, and the phosphocreatine system, and this NMDA receptor. And as you'll see in a few minutes, that NMDA receptor turns out to be vitally important and is actually one of the main nodes of action for some of the more novel and exciting therapeutics that are being explored now in psychiatric clinics. So let's talk a little bit more about this NMDA receptor and how it relates to some of the more experimental or novel therapeutic compounds for the treatment of major depression. And the compounds that we're going to be talking about, you may have heard of before, one is ketamine, which is getting increasing interest in psychiatric clinics and in various experimental and clinical studies, and the other is PCP. Both ketamine and PCP are known drugs of abuse. For many years, people have abused these drugs, go by the street name, special K, et cetera. And they create dissociative anesthetic states. So dissociative states where people don't feel as closely meshed with their emotions and their perceptions. It's an odd state, I hear. And it's an odd state that clinicians are now leveraging for the treatment of depression. And we'll talk about why that is, but let's talk a little bit about this NMDA receptor and why ketamine and PCP might work for the treatment of depression or how they even could work. I want to be very direct that this is an area that still needs a lot of data. There are however, some excellent papers from really terrific groups. One of them is a paper that was published in nature last year, 2020. First author is Vesuna, Sam Vesuna, V-E-S-U-N-A, and the last author and the lead on the study, who was Dr. Karl Deisseroth, who was a guest on the Huberman Lab podcast a few months ago. He's world expert in neuroscience, he's a psychiatrist. And this paper from Sam Vesuna and Karl and colleagues explored how these dissociative states come about. And they looked at this both in animals and in humans and found that there was a, essentially a common mechanism whereby a particular layer of cortex, so your brain has this outer shell of tissue that is called the neocortex. It's where our perceptions lie, it's where our associations lie, it's a very important area for processing decision-making and planning, et cetera. It's literally stacks of cells, and one of those layers in the stack of cells is layer five. And the layer five neurons in particular, went into a particular rhythm of electrical activity, this one to three Hertz rhythm after mice or humans were administered ketamine or PCP. There was activation of a particular area of the brain, this retro splenium cortex as it's called. And the dissociative state that emerged was an interesting one. And clinically what's described in the trials for ketamine and things like it, that people who are depressed will take ketamine, will experience a kind of separateness from their grief and from their emotions. And that possibly there's plasticity, there actually shifts in the neural circuitry, such that their emotions don't weigh on them so heavily, I'm using very loose language here, but that they don't feel as over written or as burdened by their own emotions as they did previously to the ketamine therapy. Now, absolutely in no way, shape or form am I suggesting that people run out and take ketamine in order to treat their own depression. These drugs are still very much experimental, although they are approved in certain contexts, at least in the U S, by prescription for the treatment of depression. What's interesting to me is that these dissociative states sound at least at the outset to be more of a separateness from everything. It sounds a little bit like depression itself. That's sort of like anhedonia and an inability to experience pleasure. And then one takes a dissociative anesthetic and somehow is able to get relief by getting even further away from an experience. To me, that doesn't make sense, but that just speaks to the fact that these drugs and these receptors and these pathways operate through very cryptic means. And we really don't understand all the pathways in the brain that relate to motivation and mood and so forth. And the results with these ketamine trials are looking very promising. In fact, there are a number of trials that show that a fair number of people that take ketamine in a therapeutic setting legally with a psychiatrist guiding the experience are able to get relief from their symptoms without the need for many, many treatments with the drug. Just how many treatments varies from individual to individual, but it's not like people have to take this stuff ongoing. This is really an attempt to tap into this NMDA receptor that is related to neuroplasticity. Both ketamine and PCP essentially act as antagonists, which means they block the NMDA receptor. They do it through different methods, non-competitive and competitive for you chemists and pharmacologists out there. You can look it up if you like. But what's therefore even more surprising is that every neuroscientist learns that activation of the NMDA receptor, not antagonism or blocking of the NMDA receptor leads to changes in neural circuitry in very profound ways. In fact experimentally, and I've done these experiments myself, if you want to prevent plasticity, you want to prevent an experience from reshaping neural circuitry, you give an MDA receptor blocker. I've done that many times in the course of my experimental neuroscience career, not to myself, obviously, but in the course of doing experiments. So it's still a bit mysterious to me how this could work. A couple things. One is this layer five activation is pretty interesting. We're going to come back to layer five when we talk about yet another emerging treatment for depression, which has psilocybin, so-called magic mushrooms, and the effects of psilocybin on layer five neurons in the cortex. So there's a common theme emerging here, which is that layer five activity in the cortex may be important for rewiring the brain in certain ways that can lead to recovery or to an alleviation of some of the symptoms of major depression. So if this is sounding a little bit vague to you, it's because this is still truly experimental and new, and still very much on the cutting edge of what's happening now. We don't have all the answers. So if it sounds like I'm moving slowly through this, and I'm being extra careful about what I say, you are correct. Your antenna are correct in this case. I never want to misstep and say something that's not true, but that's especially the case when we're talking about experimental therapies and drugs, which formerly were taken as drugs of abuse, which are now being used as drugs for therapeutic treatment in the clinic. There is a very interesting study. This was published in science in 2019. So these are very recent studies. The last author on this is Liston, L-I-S-T-O-N. The title of the paper is "Sustained Rescue of Prefrontal Circuit Dysfunction "by Antidepressant Induced Spine Formation." And here, when we hear spine, we're not referring to spine as in your vertebrae, running down your spinal column, we're talking about the spines, which are these little protrusions on neurons. Neurons are not smooth by any stretch. If you zoom in on a neuron, if you were to come to my lab and look down the microscope at a neuron and zoom in on it, you'd find that some neurons are smooth, but most neurons have these little protrusions. And those little protrusions are called spines. And those little spiny protrusions are little sites where neurons can reach out and form and receive new synapses from neighboring neurons. So they increase the surface area of a neuron and allow new connections to be formed. And so spine formation is synonymous with neuroplasticity, which is synonymous with changes in circuit function, which is synonymous with changes in the ways that we think, we feel, and we behave. And what was shown in the study is really interesting. What they showed is that ketamine can relieve depressive symptoms rapidly by changing or increasing in this case, the spines on these neurons in the prefrontal cortex. And if that word prefrontal rings a bell, well, now you remember the phosphocreatine system, the ingestion of creatine monohydrate, and the forebrain, activation of the forebrain were related to, in some way or another, to relief or improvement of major depressive symptoms. So we're starting to converge on a picture here whereby these drugs, ketamine, PCP, used in a therapeutic context, may be increasing neuroplasticity. Literally the changing of neurocircuits in the forebrain somehow through dissociative states. And I don't want to speculate too much about how that might come about, but one of the things that's such a resounding or repeating theme of major depression is that when you talk to somebody who has major depression, it is a real downer. And I'm not being disparaging of those people. But if you've ever had a conversation with someone who's depressed, they're always talking about how exhausted they are, or in really severe cases, they are not even responsive at all. They just kind of stare at you blankly, or they fall asleep. I mean, they're truly depressed. Their system is lowered in terms of its activation state. So I think that it's interesting that the application of drugs that allow people to separate from that state of not caring or being uninterested or unwilling to do anything is actually one of the paths to treatment. It's not always about just getting people peppy and excited and happy. There also seems to be requirement for getting them distanced from their own grief. And this brings us back to something that we talked about way back at the beginning of this episode, which was this particular feature of the anti self confabulation, that everything that happens is a reflection that I should say for the depressed person, that everything that happens is a reflection of how life is bad and their experiences just point to the fact that nothing is going to get better. This is the common language of depression. If this is very depressing to hear me talk about it, it is heavy. And that's what it's like to hear these things, it's even heavier, of course, for somebody to experience them. And those beliefs, those patterns of guilt and grief and anhedonia and delusional anti self confabulation, those are the things that eventually, if they get severe enough, start to convert into things like self harm mutilation, and in the most tragic of cases, of course, suicide. And so I think we can look to these treatments such as ketamine and PCP, but in particular ketamine and its use in the clinic, as ways for people to get distanced from the negative affect that they feel isn't just inside them or overwhelms them, but that for the very severely depressed person, they feel is them. And we hear this sometimes, you are not your emotions. That's a statement that I've always been a little bit challenged by. I mean, yes, indeed emotions are not who we are. They are states that we go into and out of, including happiness and sadness, but they are very much a part of us when we experience them. We don't experience them as next to us or behind us or across the room from us. We experienced them as our emotions. They are so much part and parcel with our experience of ourself that a statement like we aren't our emotions is a very hard statement to digest, especially for the depressed person. And so I think that the NMDA receptor and its capacity to induce neuroplasticity, circuit changes, the fact that PCP and ketamine are both showing activation of neural circuits by way of suppressing activity of the NMDA receptor, and some of the positive or exciting therapeutic outcomes that are coming from this really point to the fact that ketamine and PCP and removal of negative experiences or the experience of a negative experience, sort of getting meta there. But the experience of a negative experience may be an important path by which people treat their depression, especially in its most severe forms where people are veering towards self-harm, mutilation, and suicide. So you may have noticed a theme, which is that certain categories of approaches that we've been discussing for offsetting the symptoms of depression, such as exercise, ingesting EPAs, reducing inflammation, or even the SSRIs for increasing serotonin, focus on changing some core biological function, like raising the amount of a chemical, serotonin, or reducing the amount of inflammatory cytokines in the brain and body. And yet things like ketamine focus more on rewiring circuitry, changing neural circuitry so that it functions better in the immediate and hopefully in the long-term as well, and keep people with major depression in what they call, remission, away from major depression. Another category of treatments that's being actively explored now in laboratories and in the psychiatry realm are the psychedelics. And that's a huge category of compounds. However, one in particular, psilocybin is one that's being most intensely and actively pursued for its capacity to treat major depressive disorder. I want to be very clear that the work that I'm going to describe as work that's being done in university settings, university hospitals, by scientists and psychiatrists, and these are clinical studies, clinical trials, leading to peer reviewed data. And those are the data that we'll be discussing. Some of the major luminaries in this area include, of course aren't limited to, but include people like Matthew Johnson who's at Johns Hopkins. We'll discuss some of his work now, and fortunate to say that he will be coming on the podcast as a guest to just scribe the studies in a variety of laboratories, working on a variety of different psychedelic compounds, but let's focus on psilocybin for its capacity to rewire neural circuits and alleviate depression. There have been anecdotal data or evidence over the years that psilocybin has this capacity, how does psilocybin work? Well, psilocybin, magic mushrooms, as it's sometimes called, mainly works on what's called the serotonin 5H2A receptor with some affinity for the 5HT1 receptor. What does that mean? Well, basically, you've got a lot of different kinds of serotonin receptors just as you have a lot of different kinds of dopamine receptors or other types of receptors. The advantage of having different receptors expressed in different parts of the brain and body, even on different parts of individual cells in the brain and body is that the same compound, serotonin, can have a diverse set of effects on different cells and tissues. This is also the basis of some of the side effect profiles of SSRIs, because maybe for instance, we know that taking Prozac fluoxetine will increase serotonin in one area, but also in another area. And then they will go have diverse effects on different brain circuits because of the variety of receptors. Receptors are just like parking slots where the molecule serotonin parks and has different effects. Well psilocybin engages or increases serotonin transmission, meaning it increases the amount of serotonin, mainly by acting at these 5H2A receptors, but where in the brain does it happen and what are the major effects? First, let's talk about the major effects 'cause I think that's what people are interested in. The study that I'd like to highlight is a fairly recent one. It was published in may of 2021 in Journal of the American Medical Association Psychiatry, so JAMA Psychiatry, and it's entitled, "Effects of Psilocybin Assisted Therapy "on Major Depressive Disorder, a Randomized Clinical Trial." It's an absolutely beautiful study, a very important study. It includes some of the luminaries in this area like Matthew Johnson, Patrick Finan, Roland Griffiths, and others. We will provide a link to this study. It is available in its full form at zero cost if you want to read it. It's got a lot of detail. So I'm just going to summarize a few things, but basically what they did was they screened for patients to come into the clinic. These were people that suffered from major depressive disorder, and administered either one or two rounds of psilocybin. They used particular dosages that are listed in the study. So you can look it up if you're really interested in that level of detail. Typically it was 20 milligrams per kilogram of body weight. So it depends on body weight. Or 30 milligrams of psilocybin per 70 kilograms of body weight. They were given in capsule form. So people weren't eating the mushrooms. This is obviously a very controlled study and they wanted to control the dosages appropriately. They were randomized to begin the treatment immediately or after an eight week delay. They had all the appropriate control groups that one would like to see. What's really striking this study is that there was a very significant improvement in mood and affect and relief from depressive symptoms in anywhere from 50 to 70% of the people that were subjects in the study who received the psilocybin treatment. And whether or not it was 50 or whether or not it was 71%, varied according to how long after the study they maintain these antidepressive effects, whether or not they stayed in remission from the depression, but these are really enormous insignificant effects, and very exciting and are pointing in the direction of psilocybin very soon, becoming a treatment for various forms of depression, including major depression. Now, of course, this is limited to the laboratory at present. There are a number of elements of these studies that are important to take into consideration too, which is that there are highly trained guides, meaning people to direct people through the experience. As Matthew Johnson has told me, there is the occurrence from time to time of people having so-called bad trips of having anxiety attacks during the hallucinations and all that. And they have ways to mitigate that and deal with that because the guides are trained. They have all the sorts of medical monitoring devices for heart rate and temperature and things that one would like to see for a study like this, because these are very powerful compounds. I don't want to give away any elements of the discussion with Matthew Johnson, because it will be released in podcast form reasonably soon here, the Huberman Lab podcast. But one of the things that came up and is a fundamental question that I had, that I think probably many of you are asking, is does the experience that one has on these compounds make a difference for whether or not somebody gains relief from depression, from these psilocybin journeys or not? In other words, does it matter what they talk about? Does it matter what they think about? Does it matter if they have a good trip or a bad trip? And I don't want to hold you in too much suspense, I'll let Matthew provide the more thorough answer. But what's really interesting is there are some common themes to psilocybin administration and experience that lead to relief from depressive symptoms, but they are subjectively very varied, meaning that whether or not people feel they had a good experience or a bad experience, whether or not people thought about their parents or thought about the color of the ceiling, doesn't seem to have too much of an impact on whether or not they receive relief during these studies in these clinical studies. It seems like different people can have lots of different experiences and still receive benefit. And that points to something deeper. It points to the fact that these drugs, which is really what they are, are rewiring neural circuitry in a common way despite a diversity of experience while on the drug. And that itself is really interesting. And it takes us back to a place that we've been before in this discussion, which is layer five of the cortex. This area that ketamine seems to impact as well by generating rhythms of the, I mentioned one to three Hertz activity in layer five of certain areas of the cortex. Well, the 5HT1A receptor is known to be enriched in layer five of the cortex, and layer five of the cortex is a very interesting area because it's an area in which there's a lot of lateral connectivity. So connections between different brain areas laterally, generally is what allows us to merge different senses. So for instance, when we hear a sound off to our right over here, we turn to our right. There's a very hardwired response. And typically we hear something off to our right, we don't look to our left. That's how hardwired some of these circuits are. What appears to be happening is that the activation of the serotonin system and 5HT1A receptor in layer five is offering up or providing an experience whereby the lateral connections are able to engage much more broadly than they would normally. Now that also could be a bad thing. And I asked Matt about this, that sounds kind of spooky. I don't know that when I hear something off to my right, that I want to look off to my left. That could be highly maladaptive, especially if it's a car coming at me from my right. That doesn't seem to be what's happening. It's not really rewiring these deeply reflexive circuits. It's somehow rewiring associations between events, emotional events, past events, current events, and future events in ways that allow people to get some sort of relief or distance from these narratives, these depressive stories about their past and present and allow them to see new opportunity and optimism in the future. It's really a fascinating thing if you really think about it, because I would have thought that simply by ramping up laterality of connections, meaning that cross associations, that things could either be rewired randomly in ways that don't serve us, or would perhaps just cause no effect at all. So it's either going to be bad or neutral, but that's not really the way things are turning out. Again, these are highly controlled studies. I do want to emphasize that ketamine, psilocybin, these things are still illegal. Most all places. There are some regions and cities in the United States where they are locally decriminalized, but they are not legal. They're still illegal. So what we're referring to here are indeed clinical studies in which people are taking them legally. I think it's very likely we will see a shift in the legislature around psychedelics, and in particular, psilocybin in the not too distant future. And I think that for now, what we should know is what Matt told me and what you'll hear far more about, which is that psilocybin. this one where in most cases, two dose treatments done in a highly clinical setting, controlled setting with patients that are carefully selected, can in many cases, the majority of people receive and maintain relief from their depressive symptoms, simply through the experience of this psychedelic journey. I did ask them about micro dosing. I made it sound as if I'd never heard about it before. Microdosing, not micro dosing. Microdosing, and his answer was interesting. His answer was that the microdosing effects don't seem to be nearly as impactful as some of these, well, let's just call them what they are. These kind of high amplitude sessions that there are just one or two, there are some studies ongoing where there's more than two, but that the microdosing doesn't seem to compare to these macrodosing, I mentioned the dosages before, this 20 milligrams per 70 kilograms or 30 milligrams per 70 kilograms dosages given several weeks apart. So you'll hear more about microdosing and other psychedelics and their impact on depressive states and major depression in the episode with Matt. But for the time being, it really seems as if, again, we're looking at neuroplasticity, we're coming back to layer five, just like with ketamine and PCP. We're hearing about layer five, we're hearing about rewiring of circuitry, we're hearing about a dissociation or a distancing of oneself from these negative moods and affects and narratives, but there's a key distinction between the ketamine work and the psilocybin work, which is that in the ketamine work, it really is about dissociating from experience during the session with the psychiatrist, whereas during the psilocybin journey, it's really about immersing oneself in the experience and being fully present to that experience. That does seem to be an important component and what the difference is there and why they both seem to provide some relief from major depression isn't clear. I think most likely it takes us back to the fact that this thing we call major depression clearly involves serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine. And in some individuals, they may be more deficient in one or several of those or all of those, whereas in other individuals, it might be a different collection of chemicals. And of course there are a tremendous number of other psychedelic compounds that people are exploring for treatment of major depression. But really psilocybin is the one that we have the most data on. MDMA has mainly been explored in the clinical realm for treatment of trauma. There are some trials ongoing for treatment of depression, but the big breakthrough seemed to be happening in the realm of trauma treatment, the so-called maps group that's doing this, again, legally in a clinical setting. And there are other groups that are starting to do it as well. We are going to do an entire podcast about MDMA and some related compounds. So I'll save that discussion for then. One of the most common questions I get for this podcast is about different diets, different regimes, different nutritional plans, things like keto, ketogenic diet, or vegan diets, or intermittent fasting, or the all meat diet, the so-called lion diet, et cetera. There are actually really interesting data relating nutrition and diet to major depressive disorder. And I think we just need to frame this by returning to something that was said earlier, which is that the ingestion of carbohydrates, in particular carbohydrates and some meats like turkey, that are rich in tryptophan, this precursor to serotonin, are in many ways the self-medicating version of depression treatment. Now, to be clear, I'm not saying that people should use food to medicate their depression. Many people do that reflexively however, they reach for carbohydrate rich foods to blunt their cortisol, because that's indeed what it does. It blunts cortisol when you ingest high carbohydrate foods, in particular starchy foods, and it does increase serotonin, in particular, if those foods rather are rich in the amino acid tryptophan. Now ingesting food is wonderful and important and great, but ingesting excessive foods of any kinds, carbohydrate or otherwise it's not healthy, of course. There have been some explorations of whether or not a vegan diet can improve symptoms of depression. Not a lot of data, not impressive data. There have been very few controlled studies looking at the carnivore or all meat diet. On that, I think there are now some that are starting to spin up, meaning those studies are starting to spin up. However, the ketogenic diet has been explored for its ability to relieve certain symptoms of depression, in particular to what's called maintain euthymia. Euthymia is the kind of state of equilibrium between a manic episode and a depressive episode in a manic bipolar person. We'll return to this more in a future episode, but it basically, maniacs have highs and they have lows, bipolars, either cycle back and forth really quickly. So rapid cycling bipolars or slow, some people So really quickly can be day to day, other people it's month to month or week to week, they're going highs and lows. And you hear about mania and you hear about dysphoria, euthymia is that kind of place in the middle where people feel neither too high nor too low. And there are some interesting studies looking at the ketogenic diet for maintaining euthymia in manic depressives, but also in people with major depressive disorder. Why would this work? Well, we have to remember that the ketogenic diet wasn't discovered so that self appointed nutrition gurus could talk about it online or so that people could make money selling anything related to ketosis. And here I'm not disparaging of the ketogenic diet. It's helped a lot of people. The ketogenic diet was actually shown to be medically relevant for its use to treat epilepsy. It turns out that in epilepsy, or in particular pediatric epilepsy, that a ketogenic diet and the shift of brain metabolism to predominantly one in which ketones are being metabolized rather than more standard glucose tight metabolism, can greatly reduce the number of epileptic seizures that these children experience. It's not always the case, but it's often the case. And so you talk to a neurologist or a neurosurgeon who's specialized in epilepsy, in particular pediatric epilepsy, and they'll tell you this, "Oh yeah, the ketogenic diet, in many cases, not all, "can be very effective for this treatment." How? How is it that a ketogenic diet reduces seizures? Well, the way it reduces seizures is by increasing what's called GABA transmission. GABA is a substance that is naturally released in our brain. It's an inhibitory neurotransmitter, meaning that when it's released into the synapse, it has the tendency to reduce the firing, to reduce the electrical activity of the next neuron or sets of neurons. There are various compounds that increase GABA, in particular, GABA in the forebrain. One common example would be something like alcohol, drinking alcoholic drink or two will increase GABA transmission, ironically will lower your social inhibitions by increasing your neurochemical inhibition. It basically suppresses the self-monitoring pathways. And if people drink enough, it will suppress all pathways and people will urinate themselves and fall over. It will eventually inhibit all sorts of pathways. So the GABA system has a rich array of effects all over the brain and body. But alcohol tends to activate the release of GABA. You might say, well then why not just take alcohol to suppress seizures? Well, that be a terrible idea because there tends to be a rebound excitability after alcohol stops having its effects on the GABA receptors. And so then there's an excitability for which an epilepsy would be terrible. The reason why the epileptic diet is useful for epilepsy is that increases what we call the tonic level, the sort of the ti, the level of GABA in the brain, and that suppresses some of the hyperexcitability, that is the characteristic feature of epilepsy. And there are other drugs, for instance, the benzodiazepines and things of the Xanax, variety, Valium, and so forth. Those increased GABA transmission. Those drugs also have a lot of potential for abuse and addiction, et cetera, and they're problematic for other reasons. But the ketogenic diet, by way of increasing ketone metabolism or shifting brain's metabolism over to ketones tends to modulate GABA such that GABA is more active and adjust the so-called GABA glutamate balance. This is getting technical, but glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, GABA is inhibitory neurotransmitter, and their balance is vital for neuroplasticity, for maintaining healthy levels of activity in the brain, et cetera. And so there is decent evidence that people with major depressive disorders, in particular, the people with major depressive disorders that are refractory, meaning they don't respond to classical antidepressants, can benefit, it seems, from the ketogenic diet. Now this is not always the case, but for those of you out there who are struggling with major depression, and for which drugs have not worked, please talk to your psychiatrist. I don't know how many of them are up on the literature about the ketogenic diet or the EPAs and the rest. Psychiatrists vary in terms of how involved in the current literature they tend to be, but there are many excellent psychiatrists out there. Most of them in my experience, are actually quite avid learners about what's happening and what's new in this realm that they call psychiatry. So it's really interesting that eating in a particular way, lowering carbohydrates to the point where you rely on ketogenic metabolism in the brain, increases GABA and can provide some relief for depressive symptoms. And that in particular, that seems to have positive effects in people that are refractory or don't respond to classic antidepressants. And that would include things like fluoxetine, et cetera. I'll make one final point about ketogenic diets and GABA and depression, which is that it's also been shown that for people that respond well to these drugs that impact the serotonin system, dopamine system, or norepinephrine, the ketogenic diet, there may improve the ability for those drugs to work at lower dosages, which is reminiscent of what we saw with the EPA supplementation. So today we've covered what at least feels to me, like a tremendous amount of material. This topic of depression is indeed an enormous topic to try and get our arms around. We talked about the symptomology, we talked about some of the underlying neurochemistry and biology, and then we talked about approaches to deal with it that are really grounded in the neurochemistry in biology. I just want to recap a few of those tools and what those things are. First of all, we talked about making the effort to not overwhelm the pleasure system. That might seem counterintuitive. To not overly seek out pleasure, or else one can find themselves in a place of depression. I mentioned way back at the beginning of the episode, a young man who I know to be really struggling with depression, and it is thought, and we don't know for sure, but is thought that some of that depression was probably triggered by an overindulgence in video games and other highly dopaminergic activities to the point where those activities eventually were countered by the pain balance that Dr. Anna Lembke described. And he now has to do those activities repeatedly and for many, many hours each day, just to feel okay, not even to derive pleasure from them. And worse, many other activities, practically all other activities have lost their zest, they've lost their excitement and his sense of pleasure for them. And so there's a really active campaign now to reset that system. So, number one, don't overwhelm your pleasure centers either through activities or compounds. Might seem counterintuitive, but you're setting yourself up for anhedonia and depression if you do that. It's not just about addiction that too, but it's also about setting yourself for anhedonia and depression. How often can you engage in these activities? Well, that's going to differ from person to person, everyone's slightly different, but you should really mind your extreme highs and your extreme lows and be cautious about those. We'll probably have a Dr. Lembke on again at a future time to try and get some more specifics about that. But if you do feel like you need to reset that system, it really does seem like a 30 day complete detox from whatever activity or substance that is. And ideally it doesn't continue after that 30 days, especially in conditions of drugs of abuse. Second of all, talks about the norepinephrine system and how the norepinephrine system is really deficient in many forms of major depression. And in depression, there is now more deliberate pursuit of nor epinephrin inducing activities that are healthy, that aren't adrenaline seeking per se, things like cold showers, things like particular patterns of breathing that engage and tend to make us more alert, things like exercise that will increase our levels of noradrenaline. I'd be remiss if I said that these activities could completely eliminate depressive symptoms in people with major depressive disorder. I don't think that's the case. And again, I want to acknowledge that people with major depressive symptoms often don't have the energy, the willingness, or the capacity to engage in some of these activities, but things like cold shower, deliberate cold showers, things like regular exercise, they aren't just feel good activities. They actually engage the norepinephrine system and keep that system tuned up and allow us to increase our norepinephrine levels at will on a regular basis. And their mood enhancing effects are real effects at the level of neurochemistry, then we talked about EPAs, Essential Fatty Acids, and it's clear that for most people, getting above 1000 milligrams and probably even closer to 2000 milligrams per day of EPAs can be beneficial for mood, especially in attempts to treat or offset major depressive disorder. Are there side effects? Well, you need to explore those for yourself and with your doctor, everyone has a different health background. For the margins of safety, for most people would probably be quite large, but for some people that might not be the case. So definitely check with your physician. We also talked about exercise and how EPA and exercise on a regular basis can offset these inflammatory pathways. I want to mention something I've mentioned on a previous podcast, but in terms of keeping the Inflammatone, all these molecules that create inflammation, and then the inflammation can limit the amount of serotonin through the pathways we described. In order to do that, it's also very, very useful to ingest two to four servings of fermented foods on a daily basis or near daily basis. These are data that were published by the Sonnenberg Lab at Stanford recently in the journal Cell, Cell Press Journal, excellent journal that ingestion of these fermented foods really keeps the gut microbiome tuned up, so to speak, well in order to offset these inflammatory cytokines, keeping inflammation at bay, it just turns out to be a really good thing in order to keep our mood in a good place. So EPA, exercise, fermented foods, creatine as a potential source of relief from depression or offsetting, or keeping us away from major depression or relapse into depression. And then we talked about the prescription compounds and the compounds that are being used mainly in the course of studies and of psychiatry and depression, things like ketamine, PCP, psilocybin, and related compounds. And then lastly, we talked about ketosis, which may not be right for everybody, but might be right for certain individuals out there who are grappling with this. If you're learning from this podcast and hopefully enjoying it and applying some of the tools that we describe, please subscribe to the podcast on YouTube. That really helps us. As well, please leave us a comment and some feedback for future episodes and topics that you'd like to see us cover. You can do that on YouTube, in the comment section. As well, please follow us on Instagram. It's Huberman Lab on Instagram. There, I provide some recaps of some of this material. I also provide some original material that doesn't show up in the podcast. Please also subscribe on Apple and Spotify, if you haven't already. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star rating, as well as a comment and some feedback. Please also check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's a terrific way to support what we're doing. We also have a Patreon, it's patrion.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Throughout the course of today's episode and in previous episodes, I mentioned supplements that may be appropriate for you. If you want to check out the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. That's T-H-O-R-N-E.com/u/huberman. There, you can see the supplements I take. If you want to try any of those supplements, you get 20% off any of those supplements. And if you navigate from that location in the website to any other locations in the Thorne site, you will also get 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. We partnered with Thorne because they have the absolutely highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality and quantity of the supplements that they put in their formulations. And last but not least, I want to thank you for embarking on this journey of trying to understand what is depression, how does it work, and how to treat it. And thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 314 ---
Video ID: p3JLaF_4Tz8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p3JLaF_4Tz8
Title: Dr. Anna Lembke: Understanding & Treating Addiction
Published: 2021-08-16 12:00:26 UTC
Description:
This episode I interview Dr. Anna Lembke, MD, Chief of the Stanford Addiction Medicine Dual Diagnosis Clinic at Stanford University School of Medicine. Dr. Lembke is a psychiatrist expert in treating addictions of all kinds: drugs, alcohol, food, sex, video games, gambling, food, medication, etc. Dr. Lembke is also an expert in the opioid crisis, and the author of Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence (https://amzn.to/3AHHGBp).

We discuss the biology and psychology of why people become addicted to certain substances and behaviors and the key role that our "dopamine balance" plays in creating addiction. We also discuss the science and practice of how to conquer addictions, why people relapse and how to avoid relapsing. Dr. Lembke also shares her expertise on topics closely related to addiction such as community, shame and lying and she explains why telling the truth—even about the most basic things in daily life, adjusts dopamine levels in our brain.

This episode is an important one for anyone struggling with addictions of any kind, for their friends and families and for health care professionals. It is also for anyone who has defeated addiction and is determined to stay clean. Last but not least, it helps explain why all humans do what we do, and how we can all maintain a healthy sense of pleasure seeking in life.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www. hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter
Apple Podcasts: https://apple.co/3thCToZ
Spotify: https://spoti.fi/3PYzuFs

Dr. Anna Lembke 
Website: https://www.annalembke.com
Stanford Profile: https://profiles.stanford.edu/anna-lembke
Dopamine Nation (new book): https://amzlink.to/az09noicps3RR

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Anna Lembke, Addiction Expert
00:02:25 Disclaimer & Sponsors: ROKA, InsideTracker, Headspace
00:07:00 Dopamine, Happiness & Impulsivity 
00:15:56 What Is Pleasure? 
00:18:20 Addiction, Boredom & Passion for Life
00:24:00 Pain-Pleasure Balance Controls Addiction
00:29:10 Dopamine Deficits, Anhedonia
00:30:47 Are All Addictions the Same?
00:35:38 Boredom & Anxiety Lead to Creativity 
00:40:35 Finding Your Passion Starts with Boredom & Action Steps 
00:50:05 How to Break an Addiction
00:55:25 Relapse, Craving & Triggers
01:07:40 Can People Get Addicted To “Sobriety”? 
01:11:45 Are We All Wired for Addiction? 
01:15:57 Bizarre Addiction
01:18:14 Recovered Addicts Are Heroes
01:20:10 Lying, Truth Telling, Guilt & Shame
01:30:40 Clinical Applications of: Ibogaine, Ayahuasca, Psilocybin & MDMA 
01:40:20 Social Media Addiction 
01:51:25 Narcissism 
01:53:30 Goal Seeking, Success & Surprise
01:58:10 Reciprocity
02:01:15 Closing Comments, Resources

#HubermanLab #Addiction #Dopamine

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Anna Lembke. Dr. Lembke is a psychiatrist and the chief of the Addiction Medicine Dual Diagnosis Clinic at Stanford University School of Medicine. She's a psychiatrist who treats patients struggling with addiction. She has successfully treated patients dealing with drug addiction, alcohol addiction, and behavioral addictions, such as gambling and sex addiction, as well as other types of addiction. In fact, during our discussion, I learned that there are a huge range of behaviors and substances to which people can become addicted to, and that there is a common biological underpinning of all those addictions. I also learned that there is a common path to the treatment and recovery from essentially all addictions. Dr. Lembke explained that to me and explained how to think about and conceptualize our own addictions, as well as the addictions of other people who are struggling to get treatment, move through treatment, and stay sober from their addictions. In addition to treating patients, Dr. Lembke is an author and was featured in the 2020 Netflix documentary, "The Social Dilemma". I'm excited to tell you that she has a new book coming out called "Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence". The book comes out August 24th and is an absolutely fascinating read into addiction and ways to treat various types of addiction. I've read the book cover to cover, and all I'll tell you is that at the very first chapter and throughout, you are going to be absolutely blown away. The stories about her patients are extremely engaging. It brings forward the real struggle of addiction and the incredible, I think it's fair to say heroic battles, that people fight in order to get through addictions of various kinds. And all of that is woven through with story, with science, in ways that make it very accessible to anyone, whether or not you have a science background or not. I can't recommend it highly enough. So again, the book is "Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence", it comes out August 24th of this year, 2021. And you can pre-order that book by going to Amazon. We will provide a link to that in the show caption. Before we begin, I just want to mention that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA make sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolute utmost quality. Founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, everything about the sunglasses and eye glasses that ROKA makes was designed with performance in mind. First of all, they're very lightweight. You don't even really notice that they're on your face. Second of all, even if you get sweaty, they don't slip off. In fact, they were designed to be worn at work or around the house, but also if you're running or biking. So you can move seamlessly between different activities without having to change your sunglasses or eyeglasses. In addition, the lenses are designed with the science of the visual system in mind. I've spent my career working on the science of the visual system, and I can tell you that it's not trivial to build a lens that allows you to see with perfect clarity, whether or not you're in bright sunshine and then move into shadows. But the ROKA glasses allow you to do that. You always see things with absolute clarity. Another terrific thing about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is the aesthetic. A lot of so-called performance sunglasses and eyeglasses, they're not really built with the best aesthetic and they kind of make people look like cyborgs. With ROKA, they have a lot of different styles to choose from, but all those styles are the sort that you could wear out to dinner or to work, or when engaging in physical activity. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A dot com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout. And if you do that, you'll get 20% off your first order. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done. And I've been doing that for a number of years, for the simple reason that most, if not all of the factors, that impact your immediate and long-term health, can only be analyzed in detail with a quality blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, you can get further insight into what's going on beneath the hood, so to speak. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests, however, is you get numbers back, you get the levels back of various things and you find out if certain things are too high or too low or right on target, but there are no directives about how to move those numbers in the direction that you would want them to go. With InsideTracker, they have a dashboard that makes all of that very easy, and that dashboard takes your numbers and can help direct you towards particular lifestyle factors, nutrition factors, exercise, supplementation, et cetera, that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are right for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published peer review studies and has over 600,000 5-star reviews. I've been meditating for a very long time. I'm 45-years-old now, almost 46, and I started meditating when I was about 15-years-old. The problem, however, is keeping up a meditation practice. I've experienced this myself. I've had periods of time where I'm meditating regularly and then periods of time where I just kind of fall off the rails and I'm just not doing it at all. There's now tons of evidence, evidence from neuroscience, evidence from psychology, evidence from areas of biology focused on stress and the immune system, that a meditation practice, when done regularly, is extremely beneficial for mental and physical health, and things like focus and creativity. However, you have to do the meditation practice, and so if you're not doing it regularly, that's a serious problem. And if you are doing it regularly, great. With Headspace, I find that I can stick to a meditation practice very easily. In fact, that's why I started using it and that's why I continue to use it. I try and get a meditation practice in every day, but sometimes that requires that it be a brief meditation practice. With Headspace, they have a huge range of different meditations of different durations, and so that's really helpful in building and maintaining these powerful meditation practices. If you want to try Headspace you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations. This is the best deal offered by Headspace. Basically you get access to everything they've got, completely free, for a one month trial. So if you'd like to try that, go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke. All right, great to have you here. - Thank you for having me, I'm excited to be here. - Yeah, I have a lot of questions for you. I, and many listeners of this podcast, are obsessed with dopamine, and what is dopamine, how does it work? We all hear that dopamine is this molecule associated with pleasure. I think the term dopamine hits, like I'm getting a dopamine hit from this, from Instagram, or from likes or from praise or from whatever, is now commonly heard. What is dopamine, and what are maybe some things about dopamine that most people don't know? And probably that I don't know either. - So dopamine is a neurotransmitter, and neurotransmitters are those molecules that bridge the gap between two neurons. So they essentially allow one neuron, the pre-synaptic neuron, to communicate with the post-synaptic neuron. Dopamine is intimately associated with the experience of reward, but also with movement, which I think is really interesting, because movement and reward are linked, right? If you think about, you know, early humans, you had to move in order to go seek out the water or the meat or whatever it was. And even in the most primitive organisms, dopamine is released when food is sensed in the environment. For example, C elegans, a very primitive worm. So dopamine is this really powerful, important molecule in the brain that helps us experience pleasure. It's not the only neurotransmitter involved in pleasure, but it's a really, really important one. And if you want to think about something that most people don't know about dopamine, which I think is really interesting, is that we are always releasing dopamine at a kind of tonic baseline rate. And it's really the deviation from that baseline, rather than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum, that make a difference. So when we experience pleasure, our dopamine release goes above baseline, and likewise dopamine can go below that tonic baseline, and then we experience a kind of pain. - Interesting. So is it fair to say that one's baseline levels of dopamine, how frequently we are releasing dopamine, in the absence of some, I don't know, drug or food or experience, just sitting, being, is that associated with how happy somebody is, their kind of baseline of happiness or level of depression? - There is evidence that shows that people who are depressed may indeed have lower tonic levels of dopamine. So that's a really reasonable thought, and there is some evidence to suggest that that may be true. The other thing that we know, and this is really kind of what the book is about, is that if we expose ourselves chronically to substances or behaviors that repeatedly release large amounts of dopamine in our brains reward pathway, that we can change our tonic baseline and actually lower it over time, as our brain tries to compensate for all of that dopamine, which is more really than we were designed to experience. - Interesting and is, is it the case that our baseline levels of dopamine are set by our genetics, by our heredity? - Well I think, you know, if you think about sort of, you know, the early stages of development and infancy, certainly that is true. You're kind of, you know, born with probably whatever is your baseline level. But obviously your experiences can have a huge impact on where your dopamine level ultimately settles out. - So if somebody's disposition is one of constant excitement and anticipation, or easily excited, I think about the kind of people where you say hey, do you want to check out this new place for tacos, and they're like "Yeah, that'd be great!" And other people are a little more cynical, harder to budge. Like my bulldog Costello. Very, very stable, low levels of dopamine with big inflections in his case. Do you think that's set in terms of our parents, and obviously nature and nurture interact, but is that, is dopamine at the core of our temperament? - I don't really think we know the answer to that, but I will say that people are definitely born with different temperaments, and those temperaments do affect their ability to experience joy. And, you know, we've known that for a long time, and we describe that in many different ways. One of the ways that we describe that in the modern era is to use psychiatric nomenclature. Like this person has a dysthymic temperament, or, you know, this person has chronic major depressive disorder. In terms of looking specifically at who's vulnerable to addiction, that's an interesting sort of mixed bag because when you look at the research on risk factors for addiction, so what kind of temperament of a person makes them more vulnerable to addiction, you see some interesting findings. First you see that people who are more impulsive are more vulnerable to addiction. So what is impulsivity? That means having difficulty putting space between the thought or desire to do something, and actually doing it. And people who have difficulty putting a space there, who have a thought to do something and just do it impulsively, are people who are more vulnerable to addiction. - Interesting. Could I, in terms of impulsivity, is this something that relates literally to the startle reflex? Like I, for instance, as a lab director, I'm familiar with walking around my lab and when I decide, deciding I'm going to talk to my people, of course when they knock on my door it's always like wait, why am I being bothered right now? Even though I love to talk to them. But I walk around my lab from time to time, and some people I notice, I'll say, do you have a moment, and they'll slowly turn around and say, yeah, or no, in some cases. And other people will jump the moment I say their name. They actually have a, a kind of a heightened startle reflex. Is that related to impulsivity, or is what you're referring to an attempt to withhold behavior that's very deliberate, under very deliberate conditions? - Yeah, so I don't think that that startle reflex is necessarily related to impulsivity. That can be related to anxiety. So people who are high anxiety people will tend to have more of a startle reflex. Impulsivity is a little bit different. And by the way, impulsivity is not always bad, right. Impulsivity is that thing where there's not a lot of self-editing or worrying about future consequences. You know, you have the idea to do something and you do it. And of course we can imagine many scenarios where that's absolutely wonderful. You know, there can be a sort of, let's say intimate interactions between people, where you wouldn't really want to be super inhibited about it, right. You would want to be disinhibited and impulsive. I can also like imagine like sort of fight or flight scenarios, like battle scenarios, right, where it would really be good to be impulsive and just go rhino! - Where hesitation can cost you your life? - Right, yes, that's right, that's right. But, you know, and I think this brings up a really, something that I've come to believe after 25 years of practicing psychiatry, is that what we now conceptualize in our current ecosystem as mental illness, are actually traits that in another ecosystem might be very advantageous. They're just not advantageous right now, because of the world that we live in. And I think, you know, impulsivity is potentially one of those, right? 'Cause we live in this world that's sort of like, you have to constantly be thinking sort of rationally about the consequences of X, Y, or Z. And it's such a sensory rich environment, right, that we're being bombarded with all of these opportunities, these sensory opportunities. And we have to constantly check ourselves. And so impulsivity is something that right now can be a difficult trait, but isn't in and of itself a bad thing. - I see. And it's, I'm beginning to realize it's a fine line between spontaneity and impulsivity. - Yeah. - What is pleasure and how does it work, at the biological level, and if it feels right, at the psychological level? And if you don't mind painting a picture of sort of the range of things that you have observed in your clinic, or in life, that people can become addicted to. But just to start off really simply, what is this thing that we call pleasure? - Well, I think it's actually really hard to define pleasure in any kind of succinct way, because certainly there is the seeking out of a high, or a euphoria, or I think, you know, the kind of experience that almost anybody would associate with the word pleasure. But also the seeking out of those same substances and behaviors is often a way to escape pain. So for example, when I talk to people with addiction, sometimes their initial foray into using a drug is to get pleasure, but very often it's a way to escape their suffering, whatever their suffering may be. And certainly as people become addicted, even those who initially were seeking out pleasure are ultimately just trying to avoid the pain of withdrawal or the pain of the consequences of their drug use. So I think it's, you know, very hard to actually, you know, define it as this unitary thing. And it's certainly not just getting a high. There are so many ways in which people sort of want to escape, which is not the same thing as sort of this hedonic, you know, wanting to feel pleasure. - So someone could decide that they want to go out and dance, or get up and dance, because of the pleasure of dancing. I can imagine that. But, and maybe it's very difficult for them to stay seated when a particular song comes on, for instance. But seeking what we would call pleasure in order to eliminate pain, that evokes a different picture in my mind. That evokes a picture of somebody that feels lost or depressed or underwhelmed. I definitely want to get into the precise and general description of addiction and what that is, but in a previous conversation we had, you said something that really rung in my mind, which is that many people who become addicted to things, let's call them addicts, have this feeling that normal life isn't interesting enough. That they are seeking a super normal experience, and that the day-to-day routine balance, which is actually in the title of your book, "Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence", that the word balance itself can sometimes be a bit of an adversive term for people. And I'm struck by this idea, and the reason I want to explore it is because so much of what I see online is about generating a lack of balance, about being tilted forward at all times, really leaning into life hard, experiencing life, you know, living a full life. Even the commencement speech given by Steve Jobs on this campus was really about finding passion, digging. You know, that's so much in the narrative now. So maybe you could just tell us a little bit about your experience with this association, if it really exists, between people's sense of the normalcy, or maybe even how boring life can be, and their tendency to become addicts of some sort. - Yeah, well, I mean, I think that life for humans has always been hard, but I think that now it's harder in unprecedented ways. And I think that the way that life is really hard now is that it actually is really boring. And the reason that it's boring is because all of our survival needs are met, right? I mean, we don't even have to leave our homes to meet every single physical need, you know, as long as you're of a certain level of financial wellbeing, which frankly, you know, we talk so much about, you know, the income gap, and certainly there is this enormous gap between rich and poor. But that gap is smaller than it's ever been in like the history of humans. Even the poorest of the poor have more excess income to spend on leisure goods, than they ever have before in human history. If you look at leisure time, for example, so people without a high school education have 42% more leisure time than people with a college degree. So my point here is that life is hard now in this really weird way, in that we don't really have anything that we have to do. So we're all forced to make stuff up, you know, whether it's being a scientist or being a doctor, or being an Olympic athlete, or, you know, climbing Mount Everest. And people really vary in their need for friction. And some people need a lot more than others. And if they don't have it, they're really, really unhappy. And I do think that a lot of the people that I see with addiction and other forms of mental illness are people who need more friction. Like they're unhappy, not necessarily because there's something wrong with their brain, but because their brain is not suited to this world. - And do you think they have that sense, my brain isn't suited to this world, or they simply feel a restlessness and they're constantly seeking stimulation? - I think that's right, yeah. I think it's not really knowing what's wrong with me, and why am I unhappy, how can I be happier? And of course, as you talk about, what's so pervasive in our narrative now is like find your passion, you know, find your, you know, out of whatever it is, to save the world. And in a way that's good because it has people out in the world and seeking. But in a way it can also be misleading in the sense that I think people aren't entirely aware that the world is a hard place, and that life is hard, and that, you know, like we're all kind of making it up. Do you know what I mean? - Yeah. Well there's a book by Cal Newport, I don't know if you know Cal Newport's work, but you guys are very symbiotic in your messages. He's a professor of computer science at Georgetown. Yes, at Georgetown. And wrote a book some years ago, really ahead of its time, called "So Good They Can't Ignore You", which is about not meditating or doing much work to try and figure out what one's passion is by thinking, but rather go out and acquire skills, - Right. - and develop a sense of passion for something by your experience of hard work and getting better end feedback. - Right. - A little bit of the growth mindset, think of our colleague Carol Dweck. But he's gone on to write books, "Deep Work", which is all about removing yourself from technology and doing deep work. - Yes, right. - And he's been a big proponent of the evils of context switching too often throughout the day. - [Anna] Yeah. - For sake of productivity, mostly. His new book is called "A World Without Email." I'm beginning to realize, as I cite off these books and your book, "Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence", that maybe the reason why you two don't know about one another is because neither of you are on social media. - That's it. - Right. - That's it. - And yet you're two of the most productive people that I know, including productive authors. So that's a discussion unto itself. But I find this fascinating. So let's talk about the pleasure pain balance and addiction. And I've heard you use this seesaw or balance scale, - Right. - analogy before. And I think it's a wonderful one that really, for me, clarified what addiction is, at least at the mechanistic level. - Yeah, so to me, one of the most significant findings in neuroscience in the last 75 years is that pleasure and pain are co-located, which means the same parts of the brain that process pleasure also process pain. And they work like a balance. So when we feel pleasure, our balance tips one way, when we feel pain, it tips in the opposite direction. And one of the overriding rules governing this balance is that it wants to stay level. So it doesn't want to remain tipped very long to pleasure or to pain. And with any deviation from neutrality, the brain will work very hard to restore a level balance, or what scientists call homeostasis. And the way the brain does that is with any stimulus to one side, there will be a tip in equal and opposite amount to the other side. - It's like the principle laws of physics. - Yes, right, right. So like, I like to watch YouTube videos. When I watch YouTube videos of "American Idol", you know, it tips to the side of pleasure. And then when I stop watching it, I have a comedown, right, which is a tip to the equal and opposite amount on the other side. And that's that moment of wanting to watch one more YouTube video, right. - Yeah, and I just want to interject there. So this moment of wanting to watch another, that is associated with pain, I think, is, are we always aware of that happening? Because you just described it in a very conscious way. - Right. - But when I indulge in something I enjoy, I'm usually thinking about just wanting - Yes, yes. - more of that thing. I don't think about the pain, - Yes. - I just think about more. - Right. So really excellent point because we're mostly not aware of it. And it's also reflexive. So it's not something that consciously happens, or that we're aware of, unless we really begin to pay attention. And when we begin to pay attention, we really can become very aware of it in the moment. Again, it's like a falling away. You're on social media and, you know, you get a good tweet of something, and then you can't stop yourself because there's this awareness, a latent awareness, that as soon as I disengage from this behavior, I'm going to experience a kind of a pain, right. A falling away, a missing that feeling, a wanting more of it. And of course, one way to combat that is to do it more, right, and more, and more, and more. So I think that is really what I want people to tune into and get an awareness around. Because once you tune into it, you can see it a lot. And then when you begin to see it, you have an, if you keep the model of the balance in mind, I think it gives people kind of a way to imagine what they're experiencing on a neuro-biological level, and understand it. And in that understanding, get some mastery over it, which is really what this is all about. Because ultimately we do need to disengage, right? We can't live in that space all the time, right. We have other things we need to do. And there are also serious consequences that come with trying to repeat and continue that experience or that feeling. - Yeah, so if I understand this correctly, when we find something, or when something finds us, that we enjoy, that feels pleasureful, social media, food, sex, gambling, whatever it happens to be, and we will explore the full range of these, there's some dopamine release when we engage in that behavior. And then what you're telling me is that very quickly, - [Anna] Yes. - and beneath my conscious awareness, there's a tilting back of the scale where pleasure is reduced, by way of increasing pain. - Right. - And I've heard you say before that the pain mechanism has some competitive advantages over the pleasure mechanisms, such that it doesn't just bring the scale back to level. It actually brings pain higher than pleasure. Could you tell us a little bit more about that? - Yeah, yeah. So what happens, again, so the hallmark of any addictive substance or behavior is that it releases a lot of dopamine in our brains reward pathway. Like, right, like broccoli just doesn't release a lot of dopamine, just doesn't, right. - I'm trying to imagine, I was about to say, maybe you, and I stopped myself because. Broccoli's good, it can be really good, but broccoli is never amazing. - Right. Broccoli's never amazing. - We're never like, - I mean- - this is the most amazing broccoli. - Honestly we can probably find somebody on the planet for whom broccoli is amazing. And of course if I'm starving, broccoli is amazing. - Rich Roll. Rich Roll is big on plants, and he has a good relationship to plants. Rich, tell us how to make broccoli amazing. If anyone could do it it'd be Rich. - Yeah, yeah. But what happens right after I do something that is really pleasurable and releases a lot of dopamine, is again, my brain is going to immediately compensate by down-regulating my own dopamine receptors, my own dopamine transmission, to compensate for that, okay. And that's that come down, or the hangover, that after-effect, that moment of wanting to do it more. Now, if I just wait for that feeling to pass, then my dopamine will re-regulate itself and I'll go back to whatever my chronic baseline is. But if I don't wait, and here's really the key, if I keep indulging again and again and again, ultimately I have so much on the pain side, right, that I've essentially reset my brain to what we call like an anhedonic, or lacking in joy type of state, which is a dopamine-deficit state. So that's really the way in which pain can become the main driver, is because I've indulged so much in these high reward behaviors or substances, that my brain has had to compensate by way down-regulating my own dopamine, such that even when I'm not doing that drug, I'm in a dopamine deficit state, which is akin to a clinical depression. I have anxiety, irritability, insomnia, dysphoria. And a lot of mental preoccupation with using again, or getting the drug. And so that's the piece there, there's the single use, which easily passes, but it's the chronic use that can then reset really our dopamine thresholds, and then nothing is enjoyable, right? Then everything sort of pales in comparison to this one drug that I want to keep doing. - And that one drug could be a person, right? I mean, I - Yes. - I know people in my life that are still talking about this one relationship, this one person that was just so great, despite all the challenges of that thing. It's almost like they're addicted to the narrative. - Yeah. - They were maybe, or still are, addicted to the person. So it could be to any number of things, video games, sex, gambling, a person, a narrative. To me, and because of the way you describe this mechanism, this pleasure pain balance, that all speaks to the kind of generalizability of our brain circuitry. And this is something that fascinates me, and I know it fascinates you as well, which is that nature did not evolve 20 different mechanisms for 20 different types of addiction. Just like anxiety is a couple of core sets of hormones and neurotransmitters and pathways, and one person is triggered by social interactions, another person is triggered by spiders. But the underlying response is identical. It sounds like with addiction as well, there may be some nuance, but that there's sort of a core set of processes. So it doesn't really matter if it's gambling or video games or sex or a narrative about a previous lover or partner, whatever. It's the same addictive process underneath that. Is that correct? - Yes, exactly. And that's where this whole idea of cross-addiction comes in. So once you've been addicted to a substance, severely addicted, that makes you more vulnerable to addiction to any substance. - And when you say substance, does the same, is what you just said also true for behaviors? - Yes, so, when I use the word drug I'm talking about substances and behaviors really. I'm talking about behaviors like gambling, sex, you know, - Porn. - gaming, porn, absolutely, shopping. - Work. - Work. - You've accused me, I'll just, for the record, Anna, Dr. Lembke's accused me, not accused me, has diagnosed me outside the clinic, in a playful way, of being work-addicted. You're probably right. The first thoughts I have when I wake up are typically about work. Certainly within 50 milliseconds or so of waking. And probably the last thoughts I have, I would hope are not about work, but yeah, I work constantly. I do other things, but I have to actively turn that off. - Yes. That's exactly right. And you're certainly not alone in that. And of course- - At Stanford, no, no no no. - And we're here in Silicon Valley, right, it's highly rewarded, right. So that kind of addiction. - It's embedded in the culture. - Oh yeah, absolutely. - Absolutely, yeah, yeah. And there's this other city, I think it's called New York, where they also work a lot I hear, and it's heavily rewarded. I once said, and I'm sure that I'm not the first person to say it, but I was thinking about addiction, and I was thinking about the underlying circuits and I posted something to social media which said that addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. That was the way that I kind of crystallized the literature in my mind. And then we met and you of course came and gave these amazing lectures in the neuroanatomy course for the medical students, and the rest is history. But I tossed out a kind of mirroring statement for that as well, which was a bit overstepping, I admit, which I said, addiction is a progressive narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. And I said, dare I say, enlightenment is a progressive expansion of the things that bring you pleasure. Not that anybody knows what enlightenment is, but it was my attempt to take a little bit of a jab at the fact that nobody knows. And so why not, why wouldn't I throw a neurobiological explanation? Just to kind of sample the waters. And people had varying levels of response but I would've, the reason I bring that up is that I would imagine that being able to derive pleasure from many things would be a wonderful attribute. You know people like this, that can experience pleasure in little things and in big events. Not just, you know, the big milestones of life, but also the subtle, you know, as the, like the yogis would say, the subtle ripples of life. If such an ability exists, do you think that that reflects a healthily tuned dopamine system? One that can engage and enjoy, but then disengage. Is that what we should be seeking? And to underscore, I know nothing about enlightenment meditation, or any of it. I just, I use these as opportunities to explore. - Yeah, so it's a great question and I understand the question as, so what should we be striving for, right? Where should we settle out? And, you know, in my book, I really hold out people in recovery from severe addiction as sort of modern day prophets for the rest of us, because I do think that people who have been addicted and then get into recovery, do have a hard won wisdom that we can all benefit from. And the wisdom, I guess, you know, to distill it down, I mean it's many things. But in terms of, you know, dopamine, the wisdom is there are adaptive ways to get your dopamine. And there are less than adaptive ways. And in general, you could describe the adaptive ways as not too potent. So not tipping that balance too hard or too fast to the side of pleasure. - So does that mean never allowing myself to be absolutely in complete bliss? Or does it mean not allowing myself to stay in that state too long? - The latter. I think the latter. Then that gets to temperament, so I'm going to get that to a second. So, in general, what we want is some kind of flexibility in that balance, and the ability to easily reassert homeostasis. We don't want to break our balance, which is possible if we overindulge for enough period of time and end up with a balance tipped to the side of pain, this dopamine deficit state we've been talking about. We want a flexible, resilient balance, right, which can be sensitive to things going on in the environment, which can experience pleasure and approach, which can experience pain and recoil, right? This is all adaptive and healthy and necessary and good. We would never want a balance that doesn't tilt. - Right. - That would be a disaster, we wouldn't be human. And we wouldn't want that, it'd be really, really boring. On the other hand, what people in recovery from addiction talk about is, to some extent having to learn to live with things being a little boring a lot of the time, right? So trying to avoid some of this intensity and thrill-seeking and escapism, that really is at the core of addictive tendencies. - Sorry to interrupt, but when you say boring, can we add stressful and boring? - Yes. - Because there are days where I'm not, I'm one of these people that have to remind myself to have fun, - Yes. - because I sort of forgot what the term means, because I like to think that I experience a lot of pleasure in little things, but I'm a pretty hard-driving guy. I like goals and big milestones and all that stuff. Anyway. The point being that many days I'm not bored thinking oh, there's nothing to do, but I am kind of overwhelmed by the number of things that are really not pleasureful that I have to do. - Yeah, right. - I won't mention what they are, 'cause I don't my colleagues to be like that's why you don't respond to emails. No, just your email. Not yours Anna, but theirs. In any event, so anxiety and boredom can hang out together, right? Am I correct in? - Oh, for sure. I mean, actually boredom is highly anxiety-provoking. - Okay. That's good to know, 'cause I think people hear boredom and they think like, oh, there's nothing to do here. - [Anna] Right. - There's nothing. I feel like we have a ton to do, we just don't really want to do it. - Right, right. - As opposed to something that we're excited to do. - Right, okay, so this gets to sort of some of the core things. Also we were talking about earlier about finding your passion. So I'm going to try to link it all together. But basically boredom, first of all boredom is a rare experience for modern humans, because we're constantly distracting ourselves from the present moment, and we have an infinite number of ways to do that, right. But boredom is really, I think, an important and necessary experience. But it is scary because when you allow yourself to be bored, let's say you were, had that list of all the things you hate to do, but you actually got them all done. Imagine that. And you got your forthcoming book done, and you did all your interviews. - It could happen! Lightning could strike. - Right. And you walked your dog, and you cleaned your house, and you went shopping. Imagine that for a moment. You would be sitting in your house, and my guess is you would be terrified because, wow, what am I supposed to do now, right? There's nothing I really have to do. And that is really, really scary. That can feel like free fall. And yet that's really an important and good experience to have. And I think that is an experience out of which we can have a lot of creative initiative, but also really consider our priorities and values. Okay, here I am on planet Earth. What the he-haw am I going to do with my life? What do I really care about? How do I really want to spend my time, when I'm not distracting myself, you know, in order to spend it. And, you know, then this gets back to our conversation a little bit earlier about finding your passion. So I think that one of the big problems now that's very misguided about this idea of finding your passion, it's almost as if people are looking to fit the key into the lock of the thing that was meant for them to do. - Right, and then everything will feel like a natural progression? - Right, and then everything will be wonderful. - I can attest to the fact that is not how it works in any endeavor. - Yeah, right. And that you'll have all this great success or. And here's where I really think the answer lies. And I really, really believe this. Stop looking for your passion and instead look around right where you are. Stop distracting yourself, look around right where you are, and see what needs to be done. So not what do I want to do, but what is the work that needs to be done? And more importantly, it doesn't have to be some grandiose work. Like does the garbage need to be taken out, right? Is there some garbage on your neighbor's lawn that someone threw there, that you could actually bend over and pick up and put into the garbage can? Look around you. There is so much work that needs to be done that nobody wants to do. That is really, really important, and if we all did that, I really think the world would be a much better place. And this is what people who have severe addiction, who get into recovery, realize. They're like, it's not about me and my will and what I'm going to will in my life or in the world. It's about looking around what needs to be done. What is the work that I am called to do in this moment? Which also is incredibly freeing because I don't have to search for the perfect thing. There's a lot of burden now on young people, that they have to find that perfect thing, and until they've found that perfect thing, they're going to be miserable. You don't have to do that. Look at the life you were given, look at the people around you, look at the jobs that present themselves to you and do that job simply and honorably, one day at a time, with a kind of humility. I think this is really what's so striking to me about the wisdom of people in recovery. There's this incredible humility that comes out of that experience. You feel so broken, so ashamed, but you pick yourself up one day at a time and you build a life that's around what can I do right in this moment, that might benefit another person, and thereby benefit me? - Yeah it's a really important point, and if you're willing, I'd like to actually stay on this issue of passion, because I think the dopamine systems, if I understand them correctly, the dopamine systems merge with this work that you're referring to, this immediacy of things calling to us, like taking out the trash, which sounds frankly really boring, to be honest. I hate taking out the trash, but I do it, 'cause I like a clean home and I like a home that smells good. Or at least doesn't smell bad. So we do these things, and not that we want to offer some larger carrot as a consequence of doing those things. But if I understand correctly, what you're saying is in the act of looking at one's immediate environment, acting on that immediate environment, we cultivate a relationship to these circuits in our brain about action and reward that, at least to my mind, span the range of small things being rewarding, and then lead us to the bigger things being rewarding. It's not like all we're going to do is take out trash and tend to house. We eventually will venture out, and we eventually will find careers and work on those. But if I understand correctly, you're talking about getting into a sort of functional or adaptive action step, and it's the action step that these days we tend to overlook because most of our mindset is in things that are truly outside of our immediate reality. Do I have that correct? - Yeah, that was beautifully said. And I would just add to that, I see a lot of young people who, for example, spend most of their waking hours playing video games, and they come to me and they say I am anxious and depressed. I'm majoring in computer science. I hate it, I thought I would like it. You know, if I could only find that thing that I was really meant to do, my life would be better. And my first intervention for the many many people like that that I see in clinical care is, you have it backwards. I don't say it quite like that. You were waiting for that thing to pull you out of the video game world. And you're never going to find it, as long as you're playing video games. 'Cause video games are so powerfully dopaminergic that you have this distorted sense of really pleasure and pain. And you will not be able to find that thing that you enjoy. And so of course the intervention is abstain from video games, reset your reward pathways, start with a level balance. And what invariably happens, and I've just seen it over 20 years so many times I've become really a believer in this, all of a sudden it's like oh wow, my computer science class is interesting this quarter. It's like okay, you know, you have a receptivity then to experiencing pleasure and reward in a way you just don't have when you're bombarding your reward pathways with these high dopamine drugs. - Very interesting. And just to underscore this notion that tending to the immediate things can lead to super performance. I may have mentioned it earlier this episode, but if I didn't I'll mention it now, which is I have the great privilege of having some close friends that were in the SEAL teams and doing some work with those communities. And it's a remarkable community for reasons that I think most people don't understand. People think, they see the images, carrying logs down the beach, and all this, blowing stuff up, all the stuff that's fun for guys like that. But all of the guys I know who were in the SEAL teams have this sense of duty about immediate things, and not just holding the door and doing, helping with the dishes and moving things around. They are constantly scanning their environment for what can be done. - Ah! - They essentially conquer every environment they're in. They are also some of the most competitive human beings in the world, and they do it, unless they're in the act of war fighting, which is their real job. They do it in every environment, in a very benevolent way. And it's a remarkable thing because it, I think it's what is part of what they're selected for. And, you know, there's a range there. But I think when we hear about tending to the immediate things, or this phrase, you know, how you do one thing is how you do anything. That's a tricky one for me, because there are certain things I just don't do well. But should we always be trying? I think that the tending to, setting the horizon in closely and tending to things in one's immediate environment, I think is very powerful and translates, - Yes. - because again, I think the nervous system, it performs algorithms. It has action steps. The brain doesn't evolve to do one thing, it evolves to be able to use the same approach to doing lots of different things. - Yes. I just want to add, so even beyond that, 'cause that totally resonates for me, and is very consistent with people in recovery from addiction who learn to take it one day at a time, which is one of the, you know, standard lingo from Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step groups. But I think also, as you say, you know, our brain is really wired for the 24-hour period. We're not very good at sort of the, you know, 10 year, 20. I mean we have this huge frontal lobes and yes, we're great planners and we can, but if we live too much in that space, we can really get very anxious and depressed and lost, and either catastrophize or get grandiose. But if you can chunk it down to a day, what people in recovery talk about is how, if I can just do today right, then I will get a chain of days that seem insignificant in their individual units, but after six months or a year or two years of those good days, I've got two very good years, right, and I look back and it's like oh wow, I guess I did all that. But I think that's really, you know, one of the keys, is really taking it one day at a time, which your SEALs, and also this connecting with the environment, right? So being awake and alert to your environment, and connecting with your environment, not trying to escape it. And of course escapism is what we all want and desire, that experience of non being. And we get it from the internet or from drugs or whatever it is, but it's the booby prize. Because ultimately it takes you further and further away from your immediate environment, which is where we really have to connect to get that sense of grounded-ness and authenticity, and like of being in our own lives. - Well I think the unit of the day is something that comes up again and again, in my discussions with colleagues who are extremely successful, and who also have balanced lives. - Right. - This actually came up in the discussion with Karl Deisseroth, who is also a successful scientist and clinician and, you know, manages a family, et cetera. So the unit of the day, I think, is fundamental. And those stack up, as you mentioned. So along those lines, I've heard you say that in order to reset the dopamine system, essentially in order to break an addictive pattern, to become un-addicted, 30 days of zero interaction with that substance, that person, et cetera. - Right. - Is that correct? - Yeah, and 30 days is, in my clinical experience, the average amount of time it takes for the brain to reset reward pathways for dopamine transmission to regenerate itself. There's also a little bit of science that suggests that that's true. Some imaging studies showing that our brains are still in a dopamine-deficit state two weeks after we've been using our drug. And then a study by Schukit and Brown which took a group of depressed men who also were addicted to alcohol, put them in a hospital where they, they received no treatment for depression but they had no access to alcohol in that time. And after four weeks, 80% of them no longer met criteria for major depression. So again, this idea that by depriving ourselves of this high dopamine high reward substance or behavior, we allow our brains to regenerate its own dopamine, for the balance to really equilibrate. And then we're in a place where we can sort of enjoy other things. - So that progressive narrowing - Right. - of what brings one pleasure, eventually expands. So I'd like to dissect out that 30 days a little more finely. And I also want to address how does one stop doing something for 30 days, if the thing is a thought? So we'll kind of, I'll put that on the shelf for the moment. So days one through 10, I would imagine will be very uncomfortable. - [Anna] Yes. - They're going to suck basically, to be quite honest, because the way you described this pleasure pain balance, to my mind says that if you remove what little pleasure one is getting, or a lot of pleasure from engaging in some behavior, that's gone. The pain system is really ramped up. And nothing is making me feel good. I'll just use myself as an example. I'm not in recovery but, you know, that 10 days is going to be miserable. Anxiety, trouble sleeping, physical agitation. - Yes. - To the point where, you know, maybe impulsive, angry. Should one expect all of that? Should the family members of people expect all of that? - Yeah. So what I say to patients, and it's a really important piece of this intervention, is that you will feel worse before you feel better. - For how long, is probably the first question they ask, right? - Yes. And I say usually, in my clinical experience, you'll feel worse for two weeks, but if you can make it through those first two weeks, the sun will start to come out in week three. And by week four, most people are feeling a whole lot better than they were before they stopped using their substance. So yeah, you have to, it's a hard thing. Like you have to sign up for it. And I will say, obviously there are people with addictions that are so severe that as long as they have access to their drug or behavior, they're not able to stop themselves. And that's why we have, you know, higher levels of care, - Sure. - residential treatment. So this is not going to be for everybody, this intervention, but it's amazing how many people with really severe addictions to things like heroin, cocaine, you know, very severe pornography addictions. I posit this, I do it as an experiment. I said you know what, let's try this experiment. I'm always amazed, number one, how many of them are willing. And number two, how many of them are actually able to do it. They are able to do it. And so that little nudge is sort of just what they need, And the carrot is, you know, there's a better life out there for you and you'll be able to taste it in a month. You really will be able to begin to see that you can feel better, and that there's another way. - So the way you describe it seems like it's hard, but it's doable for most people, not everybody. - Yeah, right. - And we'll return to that category of people who can't do that on their own. Well, then days 21 through 30, people are feeling better. The sun is starting to come out, as you mentioned, which translates in the narrative we've created here, and supported by biology, that dopamine is starting to be released in response to the taste of a really good cup of coffee, - Yes, exactly. - for instance. Whereas before it was only to insert, you know, addictive behavior. - Right, that's right. - Whichever it happens to be. - Of course, coffee can be addictive too, but we'll leave that aside. - Sure, yeah. I feel like coffee has a kind of consumption limiting mechanism built-in, where at some point you just can't ingest anymore. - Yeah. - But maybe that's wrong. Sorry to give lift to the caffeine addicts out there. As I clutch my mug. So days 21 through 30. I've seen a lot of people go through addiction and addiction treatment. I've spent a lot of time in those places, actually, looking at it, researching. I've got friends in that community. I'm close with that community. One thing I've seen over and over again, sadly often in the same individuals, is they get sober from whatever, they're doing great. These are people with families. These are people that you discard your normal image of an addict and insert the most normal, typical, whatever, healthy person you can imagine. 'Cause a lot of these people you wouldn't know were addicts. And then all of a sudden you get this call, so-and-so's back in jail. So-and-so's wife is going to leave him because he drank two bottles of wine and took a Xanax at 7:00 a.m., crashed his truck into a pole, has got two beautiful kids. Like how did this happen again? To the point where by the fourth and fifth time, people are just done. I mean maybe people, you might be able to detect the frustration in my voice. I'm dealing with this, with somebody that's like, I don't even know that I want to help this time. It's been so many times, to the point where I'm starting to wonder is this person just an addict. This is just kind of what they do and who they are. And you never want to give up on people but, and I'm hanging in there for them. But I will say that many people have given up on them. And so what I'd like to talk about in this context is what sorts of things help other people that we know that are addicted? What really helps? Not what could help, but what really helps. And are there certain people for whom it's hopeless? I mean, I don't like to hold the conversation that way, but I wouldn't be close to the real life data if I didn't ask. Is it hopeless, are there people who just will not be able to quit their substance use or their addictive behavior, despite, I have to assume, really wanting to? - Yeah, so there are people who will die of their disease of addiction, you know, and I think conceptualizing it as a disease is a helpful frame. There are other frames that we could use, but I do think, given the brain physiologic changes that occur with sustained heavy drug use, and what we know happens to the brain, it is really reasonable to think of it as a brain disease. And for me, the real window of, let's say being able to access my compassion around people who are repeat relapsers, even when their life is so much better when they're in recovery. - Oh yeah, yeah. - It's like a no-brainer, right? Is to conceptualize this balance and the dopamine deficit state, and a balance tilted to the side of pain. And to imagine that for some people, after a month or six months, or maybe even six years, their balance is still tipped to the side of pain. That on some level that balance has lost its resilience and its ability to restore homeostasis. - It's almost like the hinge on that balance - Yes. - is messed up. - Exactly. And so, I mean, for someone who's never experienced addiction, like yourself, maybe one way to conceptualize it is. - Well I didn't say that. - [Anna] Oh okay. - To be clear, I was not referring to myself, but I, in this example I was giving, if I were, I would come clean. I would reveal that. But I think that, especially after hearing some of your lectures and descriptions of the range of things that are addictive, I think I've been fortunate I don't have a propensity for drugs or alcohol. - Right, okay. - I'm lucky in that way. - Right, right. - Frankly, if they remove all the alcohol from the planet, I'll just be relieved because no one will offer it to me any more. - [Anna] Right, right. - So don't send me any alcohol. It won't go to me. - [Anna] Right. - But I don't have that, I like to think I have the compassion, but I don't that empathy for, you know, taking a really good situation, and what from the outside looks to be - Right, right. - throwing it in the trash. - Yeah, so okay, so let me, and this is really, I think, important because I also had to come to an understanding of this, and I feel that I have in my 20 years of seeing these patients. And of course addiction is a spectrum disease, - Sure. - right, and so you've got the severe end of things. Imagine that you had an itch somewhere on your body, okay. And it was, I mean, we've all had that, like, you know, whatever the source, it was super, super itchy. You can go for, you know, if you really focus, you could go for a pretty good amount of time not scratching it, but the moment you stopped focusing on not scratching it, you would scratch it. And maybe you'd do it while you were asleep, right. And that is what happens to people with severe addiction. That balance is essentially broken. Homeostasis does not get restored, despite sustained abstinence. They're living with that constant specter of that pull. It never goes away. So let me say, there are lots of people with addiction for whom that does go away. And it goes away at four weeks for many of them. But in severe cases, that's always there and it's lingering, and it's the moment when they're not focusing on not using, it's like a reflex. They fall back into it. It's not purposeful. It's not because they want to get high. It's not because they value using drugs more than they do their family. None of that. It's that really they cannot not do it when given the opportunity, and that moment when they're not thinking about it. Does that make sense? - That's a great description and actually in that description I can feel a bit of empathy, because the way you described scratching an itch in your sleep. - Yeah. - You know, I've done that with mosquito bites and some of them, - Right. - you're scratching, you know, like you wake up scratching that mosquito bite. And I also have to admit that I've experienced not feeling like I want to pick up my phone because it's so rewarding, but just finding myself doing it. - Yes, of course, yes. - Like I'm not going to use this thing, I'm not going to use this thing, and then just finding myself doing it, like what am I doing here? - Yes, right, right. - Sort of the how did I get back here again? - Yes, right. - And I know enough about brain function to understand that we have circuits that generate deliberate behavior. And we have circuits that generate reflexive behavior. And one of the goals of the nervous system is to make the deliberate stuff reflexive, so you don't have to make the decision, because decision-making is a very costly thing to do. - Exactly. - Decision-making of any kind. - [Anna] Right, right. - So that does really help. I want to just try and weave together this dopamine puzzle, however, because if by week, so first phase of this 30 or 40 day detox, it's like a dopamine fast, - Right. - right, okay. First 10 days are miserable. Middle 10 days, the clouds are out, there may be some shards of sunlight coming through. And then all of a sudden sun starts to come out, it gets brighter and brighter. Why is it then that people will relapse, not just after getting fired from a job or their spouse leaving them, but when things are going really well? - Yes. - Is it this unconscious mechanism? 'Cause I've seen this before. They have a great win, I have a friend who's a really impressive creative. I don't want to reveal any more than that. And relapsed upon getting another really terrific opportunity to create for the entire world. And I was like how can that happen? But now I'm beginning to wonder, was it the dopamine associated with that win that opened the spigot on his dopamine system? Because it happened in a phase of a really great stretch of life. - Yeah, right. Yeah, so you raise that great point about triggers, right? And triggers are things that make us want to go back to using our drug. And the key thing about triggers, whatever they are, is they also release a little bit of dopamine, right? So just thinking about whatever the trigger is that we associate with drug use, or just thinking about drug use, can already release this anticipatory dopamine, this new little mini spike. But here's the part that I think is really fascinating. That mini spike is followed by a mini deficit state. So it goes up and then it doesn't go back down to baseline, it goes below baseline tonic levels. And that's craving, right? So that anticipation is immediately followed by wanting the drug. And it's that dopamine deficit state that drives the motivation to go and get the drug. So many people talk about dopamine as not really about pleasure, but about wanting and about motivation. And so it is that deficit state that then drives the locomotion to get it. - And earlier your description of dopamine being involved in the desire for more, giving the sense of reward, but also movement. - Right. - I have to assume that those things are braided together - Yes, yes. - in our nervous system, for the specific intention of when you feel something good, then you feel the pain. - Yes. - But maybe you don't notice it. And then the next thing you know, you're pursuing more of the thing that- - And I love the way you use the word braided together, that's beautiful. And let me also just say, something that I find also fascinating in my work with patients, and I see this all the time. There are people for whom bad life experiences, loss, you know, in any form, stress, in many different forms, that's a trigger, but there are absolutely people for whom the trigger is things going well. And the things going well can be like the reward of the things going well, but very often what it is is the removal of the hypervigilant state that's required to keep their use in check. So it's the sense of I want to celebrate, you know, or I want to, this reward happened, I want to put more reward on there. And it's really really fascinating because when people come to that realization about themselves, that they're most vulnerable when things are going well, that's really a valuable insight because then they can put some things in place or barriers in place or go to more meetings or whatever it is that they do, you know, to protect themselves. - Along those lines, I have a friend 40 years sober, was a severe drug and alcohol addict from a very young age. Really impressive person, does a lot of important work in the kind of at-risk youth community out in Hawaii. And he said something to me, he said, as former addicts often do, they've got these great sayings. But I think it fits very well with what you're describing. He said, you know, no matter how far you drive, you're always the same distance from the ditch. And I said well that's kind of depressing, and he said no, that's actually what gives me peace. - Yeah. - Because what would happen is for so many years of relapsing and relapsing, recovering and relapsing, he felt like it was hopeless. And then somehow conceptualizing that the vigilance can never go away, instead of making him feel burdened, - Yeah. - it made him feel relieved. So I often think about that statement, you know, no matter how far you drive, you're always the same distance from the ditch, because in my mind I conceptualize that as gosh, that's a tough way to drive down the road. But actually, on a road where you know where the ditch is and where you know where the lanes lines are, it's actually a pretty nice drive. It's when you don't know where the shoulder is, that you constantly have to be looking around. So there's this, we're speaking now in analogies and imagery and science. But I, one of the things I find so incredible about this community of 12-step, and there are a variety of them, are the communities that they create for themselves, and some of these sayings, which I do believe link back to really core biological mechanisms. - Yes, yes. - I do want to ask about those communities. I have a question which might be a little bit controversial. - Great! - Which is, is it possible that people who were addicted to drugs or alcohol or gambling, or some other behavior, get addicted to the addiction community? Because one thing that I think I observe over and over is that there's some circuit in the brain of human beings that has to tell you about the dream they had the night before, for whatever reason. There's another circuit that leads people to wake you up, if they themselves can't sleep. I don't know what circuit it is. I'm being facetious here. But there does seem to also be a circuit in the brain of addicts to discuss and want to kind of talk about their recovery a lot. And I mention this not to poke at them, but rather the opposite, because I think that one thing that is challenging, at least for me, and having friends that have a propensity for drug or alcohol addiction, not all of them, but certainly some of them, is when they're talking about their recovery, I feel like it's all they talk about. This meeting, that meeting, that meeting. So what I'm really asking here is that, can we become addicted to sobriety? - Right. So this is a great question and it links into some of the other things we've been talking about, having to do with where do we settle out, you know? What is the way to live between pleasure and pain? And I implied earlier that ultimately we want a resilient balance that's sensitive to pleasure and pain, but that can easily restore homeostasis after we indulge, even when we indulge greatly. But the truth of the matter is that people with severe addiction, I believe temperamentally want those extremes, and they're wired for that kind of intensity that is more than just these slight adjustments around the fulcrum, right? It's like they want the big highs and the big lows. - They'll say great meeting. - Yeah, right, right. - They're like that was such an amazing meeting. Or they find a group, - Right, yeah. - They find a group in a location. - Yeah. - This is almost an inside joke in those communities. Again, I'm not reporting, I'm not talking about a friend in quotes, this isn't me reporting. They'll talk about how attractive people are at a given meeting, or how bonded they feel to people at a given meeting. - Right, right. - That the meetings themselves - Right. - become their own form of dopamine hit. - Yes, yes, yes. - And again, I'm not being disparaging, I just, I want to understand this. - Right, so yes, so a lot of times patients will say to me, oh, you know, I don't want to go to AA. It's a cult. And my response to that is because it's a cult is exactly why it works, okay. Because yes, it is much better for you to be addicted to AA and to recovery, than almost any other addiction I could think of. And we know from Rob Malenka's work, who's here at Stanford, that oxytocin, you know, is the hormone that's involved in human pair bonding and relationships and love. And it directly links to dopamine neurons and causes the release of dopamine. So yes, when we connect with other humans, especially in a kind of transcendent spiritual way, that's a huge dopamine hit. And it does replace the dopamine that people get from drugs. And for people who have this addiction temperament, they need it on a more intense level. They're not going to be generally satisfied with kind of, you know, a sort of acquaintanceship, right? They want that intensity of the intimacy that you get with people when you're cathartically exposing, you know, warts and all. So yes, people can get addicted to recovery, and good for them. Go for it, you know. And of course this can be disruptive for friendships and relationships, where the one person is not in recovery. Like you're going to so many meetings, you're always talking about recovery, but you know what, much better than them being intoxicated, right? I mean, so although you may tire of your friends talking about their meetings all the time, I'm sure you would rather have them do that than, you know, be in their addictions. - Absolutely. And this is now the second time you've done this through this discussion, but now I have empathy because the way you describe their enthusiasm about meetings, - Yes. - is probably the way that people feel about me and work. - Yes, right. - In neuroscience. - Yes. - I mean, I've been getting up in front of the class since I was eight years old and talking about things I read over the weekend. Now I just happen to have this thing called a podcast. - Right. - I've been doing it since I was a little. And it annoys a lot of people, right. I've learned to suppress it a little bit. Some people like it, but I'm poking fun at myself just to say that I now can understand that the way I feel about the reports about yet another amazing meeting or, or for there's a different form of this. But there's some people for which they just love intense experiences. - Yes. - They're always like trying to pull me off to Bali because they're talking about how sensual it is all the time, I'm sure Bali's wonderful. But there's this kind of ratcheting up, it's like seeking Burning Man all year long. - Right. - I've never been to Burning Man, no desire to go to Burning Man. But inside of academia I mean if I were to just turn the mirror at myself, inside of academia, or here in Silicon Valley, work, and the - Right. - pursuit of more success, even if money is kind of divorced from that, sometimes it is sometimes it isn't. Academic work is, you know, for sake of pursuit of knowledge. It sounds to me like the same mechanism. In fact, it feels to me very much like the same mechanism. - So Andrew, here's what I love about you. First of all, you're willing to bring your own flaws and foibles to this conversation. - Well they're everywhere. - Well, you know what, it's wonderful. And then you're really open and curious and wanting to understand, 'cause I can't tell you how many people I have met who really see addiction as some kind of otherness. But the truth is we're all wired for addiction. And if you're not addicted yet it's just, it's right around the corner. Do you know what I mean? Especially with the incredible panoply of new drugs and behaviors that are out there. So I love that you're willing to take a moment and really try to understand this, because it is, we can all relate, and you're relating it to your, essentially your work addiction is right and apt. You just happen to be addicted to something that is really socially rewarded. You know, you figured that out at an early age. Oh, when I do X, Y and Z, all these people go look at that smart kid, or whatever it is, you know. - Well for me, it made me feel safe. - Okay. - I felt like. Yeah, I just felt like this, and I pause there 'cause it's like, it's like peace. I'm like ah, I can relax for a moment. - When you're talking about neuroscience? - Or just when I feel like I'm on the right path. - Yeah, okay. - And I'm onto something. Or if I see something that I'm excited about, - Right. - I'm like, I feel filled with, it must be dopamine. - Yes. - I feel flooded with pleasure, literally from head to toe. - Right, yeah. - And then my next thought is more. [laughing] - So true, you're a true addict. - Okay, thank you. - You are. You are. But you just got really, - I think thank you. - you really got lucky with the fact that what you're drawn to is adaptive, essentially, you know. And then your challenge is going to be that your life doesn't get too out of balance in the sense that you're 24/7 working, you don't stop and do some other things or think of- - And my life, admittedly, is somewhat asymmetric. I mean it has other components of physical health, et cetera, but it is somewhat asymmetric. Which is why I got a dog. Although I talk about him an awful lot, so. - But the dog is good because that draws you out of yourself and a little bit away from the work. But again, you know, I think the key here is for people who feel like they don't, they've never experienced addiction or they don't know anybody with addiction, or if they do, they don't get it, just think of that one thing that is the most important thing in your life that you do, that gives you pleasure and meaning and purpose. And then imagine if you couldn't do it. - Oh yeah, let's not talk about that. - [Anna] Right. - Well I appreciate the feedback and you can send me a bill at the end. What is the most ridiculous sounding addiction that you've ever witnessed, that was actually a real addiction, along these lines. Because I think we all know the standard heroin, pill. You've been very, I should mention, because it's important, your previous book, and we will provide a link to that as well, focused on the opioid crisis and what we thought was medication. It turned out to be just as bad, if not worse, than a lot of so-called street drugs. So we understand those, you know, gambling, sex addiction, porn addiction. Now video games. We'll talk about social media a little bit more in depth. But what's the most like, wow, I didn't realize people could get addicted to that? - Water. - Really? - Really. So I had a very lovely patient who was, had a severe alcohol addiction, and she got into recovery from her alcohol addiction for many years. But she kind of had a sort of a polydipsia, or an urge to be drinking something a lot. And so she drank a lot of water and slowly, over time, she realized that if she drank enough water, she could become hyponatremic and delirious and be out of herself. - You can die from it, right? - Right, which is, she just wanted to be out of her own head. And so she would periodically intentionally overdose on water, in order, you know, to, I know, it was so sad, so sad. - What happened to her? - She eventually took her own life. - Wow. - Yeah, it was really. - That's rough. - She was a lovely woman. She was so bright. She had so many interests and passions, and of course it was very sad when, you know, when she died. But that was a wow to me, it was like wow, if you have this disease of addiction, you can even get addicted to water. - Wow. And I think it just underscores the generalizability of the circuits. - Right. - There isn't a brain circuit for addiction to water that she happened to have. There's a brain circuit for pleasure and pain and addiction, and water plugged into that circuit. - Right, right. - Wow. That's intense. In your book, "Dopamine Nation", you also describe some amazing paths to recovery. People that, you know, from reading it I would, I won't say which ones and who 'cause there are some great surprises in the book too, both tragic and triumphant, as they say. You've often described your patients as your heroes. - Yeah. - Yeah, tell us a little bit more about that. - You know, when you think about how hard it is to give up a drug or a behavior that you're addicted to, how much courage that takes and fortitude and discipline, and stick to it-ness, these people are really amazing people. I mean that's, I don't know that I could do it, what they do, you know. And like, you know, we talked a little bit about just the constant ever-present urge to use, even after sustained periods of abstinence for some people. That's really really hard. And of course then you double down on the shame that they feel, because of that urge, even when their lives are so much better. I mean these people are really, really remarkable. And you take their remarkable accomplishment and then you imagine the world that we live in now, where we are constantly invited and tempted and really bombarded with opportunities to become addicted- - It's like feeling an itch everywhere. - Oh yeah, I mean you can't escape it. You know, you cannot escape it. That you'll get an email in your inbox inviting you to do X, Y, or Z. And if you're addicted to that thing, you know, you try to like delete all your apps and not go here. All of a sudden your work inbox, you know, you're getting those images, let's say. Really, really, really hard. And yet these people find a way to do it. I think it's absolutely amazing. And they're really wise people. They have so much wisdom to offer. They've taught me a lot. You know, as I talk about in my book I have my own addictions, and I really just like took a page right out of their, I was okay, what do I do now? All right, what did this patient do, what did that, okay, I'm going to try that. - It is an amazing community - Yeah. - of people, they are very sage. I wanted to just touch on something that you mentioned, which is the shame. - Yeah. - You know you can't go to a meeting, or talk to addicts, without detecting or hearing about like lies, shame, et cetera. I heard you say in an interview with somebody else recently that truth-telling and secrets are sort of at the core of recovery. And yeah, tell us more about that. - Yeah. So one of the things that I found really fascinating about working with people in recovery, was how telling the truth, even about the merest detail of their lives, was central to their recovery. And I became really curious about that. Like why would truth-telling be so important? And of course there is the obvious thing that when people are in their addiction, they're lying about using, you know. So part of getting into recovery is to stop lying to the people they care about, about their use. But it's really more than that because what people in recovery have taught me is that it's not even just not lying about using drugs. I have to not lie about anything. I can't lie about why I was late to work this morning, which we all do all. Oh I hit traffic, no I didn't hit traffic, I wanted to spend two more minutes reading the paper and drinking my coffee, right. Or just lying about, you know, I don't know where I had dinner. Like, so people with addiction will get into, you know, the lying habit where they're lying about random stuff, 'cause they're sort of in the habit of lying. And how recovery is really about telling the truth, you know, in all ways. And so one of the things that I, I had a lot of fun with in writing the book, is sort of exploring the neuroscience around why truth-telling is important to leading a balanced life. And we know like every religion, since the beginning of time, is all about telling the truth. Well why, right? And there's really interesting neuroscience behind it that suggests that when we tell the truth, we actually potentially strengthen our prefrontal cortical circuits, and their connections to our limbic brain and our reward brain. And of course, these are the circuits that get disconnected when we're in our addiction, right? Our balance, in our reward pathway, our limbic brain, our emotion brain, is doing one thing, and our cortical circuits are completely disengaged from that, ignoring what's happening, which is easy to do because it's reflexive. We don't need to think about that balance for the balance to be happening. But we have to re-engage those circuits, anticipate future consequences, think through the drink, you know, not just how am I going to feel now if I use, but how am I going to feel tomorrow or six months from now? And that telling the truth is in fact a way to do that, to make these connections stronger. And there I talk about some studies in my book that kind of indirectly show that. So I find that really fascinating, plus just that like being open and honest with people really does create very intimate connections, and those intimate connections create dopamine. So we were talking a little bit about how you know a bunch of people who need like intensity in their lives. For me, I need a lot of intensity in my human connections. Like I'm really not interested in, and bored by and made anxious by, casual interactions. But you know, like having this kind of discussion with you, that's very intense and also intimate and self-disclosing, is very rewarding for me. So that's an important source of dopamine. Thank God I became a psychiatrist. - Yeah, absolutely. - Like I can't disclose all my stuff, but I am quite transparent with my patients, which is a slightly unorthodox. But, you know, when I think it's right, I'm also transparent with them. So that's, you know, that's a source of dopamine too, when we're honest and we disclose. You think people are going to run away from you, if you tell them about all like your weird neuroses, but really they don't. What they're like is oh thank God, I'm not the only one, right. - What I love about, I love many things about your book. I read it in one sweep. - Oh thank you. - And I was like wow. I was pleasantly surprised, but I was like wow, she's really opening up in this book, from the very beginning. And I don't want to give it away, but it's yeah, you're very open where it's appropriate. And also I think that this question about truth-telling, I always think about like tell the truth, be a hundred percent about the truth, but there's also this element about do you report previous lies, right? What about prior behavior? And I'm fascinated by this 'cause to me telling the truth has many facets, but the three sides of this thing in my mind, are one is reporting everything accurately. The other is what do you withhold, what do you not withhold, right? Because some people say tell the truth, or at least don't lie. That's sort of a- - Lies of omission, right. - Yeah, so lies of omission. Lies of omission. And then there's the, what I have to assume for most people, is a small to enormous batch of things that they lied about in the past, that still thread into the future. - Right. - So how important is it for the addict, or every person really, to, 'cause it sounds like cultivating the circuitry between prefrontal cortex and the dopamine system would be great for anybody. Since we're all addicts, - Right. - everyone should do it. But in all seriousness, it sounds like a good thing for everybody to do. How much work needs to be done on all the priors, all the stuff we've hidden? I mean not me, but all the stuff that everybody else has hidden. - Yeah, so the, you know, the steps of the 12-steps of Alcoholics Anonymous, a good number of those steps are about that very thing. The past, the ways that we've harmed people in the past. And the fourth step is about making amends, you know, by admitting the ways in which that we've contributed to harming others. And it is a really big piece of recovery. So, you know, how important, so for people with addiction, it's really, really important to go back and make amends. And, you know, the key idea there is you just go back and you apologize, you know, and you don't have to get any particular kind of response, or you don't need to be forgiven. It's the act itself of apologizing about the ways in which we've harmed or lied to people in the past, that is cathartic and renewing, and allows us to kind of shed this skin and be new in our lives and begin again. Sort of absolved, you know, of past sins, so to speak. So it is really important. You know, are there situations when it's maybe not a good idea, because of that person or the nature? Sure, you know, there are always going to be, it doesn't have to be like, it's not, we're talking about not like Kant's idea about I'd never lie, robbers in your house. You're a stowaway. You can't lie even about that. It's like no, there are probably situations where, - Absolutely. - you know. - For sake of other people's safety, - Right, and- - children's safety, sure. - Right, I mean there are, you can think of a million scenarios. But in general, you know, when we're taking stock, because I don't know about you, but I have a lot of regrets and guilt about a lot of things in my life. And they kind of haunt me, you know. It means I'll have nightmares, right. And I think that's true for most people. I mean I occasionally will meet somebody who's like I don't have any regrets in my life, I'm like wow. Like I cannot relate to that at all. So, you know, this idea of like catharsis and, well, I mean, in the 12-steps it's telling God, or your higher power, telling another human being, the ways in which you've wronged others. Considering your own character defects and how those have contributed. To me, that's a really important piece and something that we don't do enough in our current culture. Especially in psychiatry, frankly, where there's like a lot of eternally empathizing with patients, but not a whole lot of likes going well, you know, actually you kind of messed that up. Or like that was really bad on you, you know. And in my work, I don't necessarily use that language, but, you know, patients might say like I really feel badly about, you know, this thing. I'll be like yeah, I get it. I understand that you feel. - Well guilt is a- - [Anna] Right. - There's a circuit for that too. - Right, and it's important, right, and it's also important to recovery and to not becoming addicted. Experiencing a certain amount of appropriate shame for things that we have done and, you know, feeling the pain that comes with shame, which is an incredibly painful emotion, right. And I think that may be the one that we all try to avoid more than any other, is like that shame of not being liked or not being accepted or not being celebrated. - Or the thing that we did is really despicable. - Right, it's really, yeah, like oh my God, I did that horrible thing, right, right. So, I mean, I've done horrible things that I haven't gone back and said I did this horrible thing, but I'm, maybe I've tried to pay it forward. Like I've told my kids, you know, when I was younger I did this horrible thing and it still haunts me. So if you're ever tempted to do something like what I did, you might think about my situation. So, you know, some kind of way. But I think wrestling with that is important. - I think it's a really important element to all this, and there's not, I love that there's neuroscience being done on truth-telling, - Yeah. - and the value of truth-telling. - Yeah. - I think, if I were to predict a new and truly exciting area that people are going to be really curious about, in this huge sphere we call neuroscience, I hope they'll continue to do more work. Also, I'm so glad to hear that's happening here at Stanford. - No that's, the literature that I look at isn't Stanford work, but there's work. - Great. - It might be people at Stanford. - Great, regardless of where it's happening. More of that and all the rest please. I want to ask you about using drugs to treat drug addiction. These days there's a growing interest, or at least discussion about ibogaine. People going down, going out of country, because I think it's still illegal here, or is illegal here, going out of country to, I dunno, either inject it or smoke it or whatever it is. Or people going and doing Ayahuasca journeys or MDMA, which is still an illegal drug in this country, but there are clinical trials. There are people on this campus doing experimental studies. I don't know of clinical trials, but at Johns Hopkins there are clinical trials, et cetera. So this is a vast area, right? Different chemistries for different drugs and different purposes. But the rationale, as I understand it, is take people who are in a pattern of addiction, launch them into a experience that's also chemical and extreme, often of the extreme serotonin and or extreme dopamine type. So MDMA, - Right. - ecstasy for instance. Tons of serotonin dumped, tons of dopamine dumped. How neurotoxic, if neurotoxic, debatable, et cetera, et cetera. Not a topic for now. But a lot. And then somehow that extreme experience wrapped inside of a supported network in there, whether or not there's just someone there or whether or not they're actively working through something with the patient, is supposed to eject the person into a life where drug use isn't as much of interest. This violates, at a purely rational level, this violates everything we've talked about in terms of dopamine biology. It would, if this arrangement is the way I described it, cause more addiction, is anything but a dopamine fast, it's a dopamine feast. So we hear about successful transitions through this, at least anecdotally, and maybe some clinical studies. What is going on? What is going on? It doesn't make any sense to me. Yeah. - Yeah, so I think it's good that you're skeptical. I think we all should be skeptical. Having said that, there are clinical studies showing, you know, and these are small studies and they're short duration, small number of subjects, but, you know, taking people for example, who are addicted to alcohol, and then having them have this, let's say a psychedelic experience in a very controlled setting. - So either, typically it's a high dose psilocybin, or three dose, as I saw it for the MAP study of MDMA. - Right. - Of ecstasy. Those are sort of the, seem to be the kind of, - Yes, the typical, right. - the kind of bread and butter of this kind of work. - Right, right. But the thing to really keep in mind is that this is completely interwoven with regular psychotherapy, and that these are highly selected individuals. - In clinical trials. - Right, right. And these are clinical- - we're referring to legal clinical trials. - Right, right. And so, you know, I think the metaphor that helps me think about this is there are many ways to the top of the mountain, and these are sort of like taking the gondola instead of walking up. It sort of, instead of doing like a year of psychoanalysis where you're sitting on the couch every week reflecting on your life, it's a condensed version of psychoanalysis or psychotherapy, plus, you know, MDMA, which gets you there faster. - And creates the intimacy, presumably, because of the- - Well I think the main thing that happens when it's beneficial, is it just allows the person to get outside of their own head and look at their lives on a much broader sweep, and to consider themselves not mired in the quotidian sort of details of their life, but rather as a human on the large planet Earth, in the vast universe. So I think it takes, it's like when it works, it's a transformational experience because it gives the person another lens through which to view their lives, which I think for some people is positive and powerful, because they can come back from that and be like oh my gosh, I care about my family, and I don't, I want X, Y, or Z for them. And I realize that my continuing to drink is not going to, you know, achieve that. So it's almost like a spiritual or values-based. So I think it can be very powerful, but having said that, I truly am quite skeptical because, you know, addiction is a chronic relapsing and remitting problem. It's hard for me to imagine that there's something that works very quickly short-term, that's going to work for a disease that's really long-lasting. - Yeah, the two addicts I know that did MDMA-assisted psychotherapy as part of this thing, both got worse. - Yeah. - But the people I know who had severe trauma who did this, who took this approach, seem to be doing better. - Okay, interesting. - And so I, I think that the discussion, as we hear it now, is just sort of psychedelics, which is a huge category that includes many different drugs and compounds with different effects. And we hear about trauma and addiction lumped together. And I think that I'm a splitter, not a lumper, as we say in science. And I think it's going to be important for people to know that this is definitely not a one-size fits all kind of thing. But it sounds like it may have some utility under certain conditions. - Yeah, I think so. I'm trying to be very open-minded about its potential utility for certain individuals. But I can tell you in my clinical work, what is a very concerning unintended consequence of this narrative, is I have a lot of people who are looking for some kind of spiritual awakening who on their own, not in the context of any kind of therapeutic, psychological work, you know, microdose or want to try psilocybin or MDMA with a friend or wherever, so they can have this spiritual experience that they can figure out their lives. That's a disaster and almost never works out well. And I've then had people who literally, supposedly you can't get addicted to psychedelics because, you know, something with the biochemistry which I don't fully understand, 'cause it doesn't make any sense to me. But I have patients clinically who definitely are addicted to, you know, MDMA, to micro-dosing. So that's very concerning to me 'cause like, you know, Pollan's "How to Change Your Mind", I respect that work, but on the other hand, it's penetrated the culture- - Michael Pollan's book. - [Anna] Yeah, yeah. - And I don't know him and so I don't have a problem taking a stance. So I'll just say my stance on that is the narrative of popular authors can expand and wick out so fast, - Yes. - that pretty soon people are essentially taking their mental health into their own hands. And I actually, I have great optimism for this business of clinical use of psychedelics, including MDMA. Matthew Johnson at Johns Hopkins is doing fabulous work on this. And there are others too, of course. But those are controlled settings. - Right. - And the pharmacology is being tuned up. And one thing that I think is coming. There are several papers published recently in great journals like nature and science, et cetera, where there are scientists who are removing the hallucinogenic components of these drugs and finding that they still have the antidepressant effects. - Interesting. - And so the experience of a psychedelic, and the long-term effects of the psychedelic, might actually be dissociable. And so, again I, and I'm always careful to say I'm neither for something or against it. I just think that treading carefully is what's important. - I agree with you, and I can just tell you that the downstream effect for the average person, many of whom present in our clinic, is that they've misconstrued the data on the use of psychedelics for mental health conditions, to this idea that they're safe, or that anybody can take them in any circumstance and have this kind of awakening. And that's not what the data show, right? The data are these highly controlled settings, you know, carefully selected patients. So that's my worry, you know. - Sure. And I'm going to be sitting down with Matthew Johnson at some point, and we'll discuss this. And I think that, ah, that care and that cocoon of real clinical care, does seem to be an important component. - Yes. - Well I'm glad we could touch on it and, you know, I'm sure I'll get a bunch of comments telling me that, you know. But I think it is important to explore things from all sides, and that's what we do, as scientists. - Yes. - And if Michael Pollan wants to chat, we can do that too. That's fine. I very much enjoyed the book actually. - Yes, yes. - But I think that people run with ideas. - That's right. - They don't walk with them, they sprint. - That's right, right. Yeah. - There are a couple other things I just want to touch on, but they all relate to social media. - [Anna] Okay. - You were featured in "The Social Dilemma". It was a powerful movie. I think many people avoided seeing that movie because it reflects back on us just how addicted we all are and how manipulated we all are. - [Anna] Yes. - But it doesn't seem to have changed behavior much. I have to say that the movie changed my understanding and my perception, but not my behavior too much. If we look at addiction as a maladaptive thing, something that's making our lives worse or us less functional at work and in relationships, I could imagine a version of social media where it's making me more connected. I mean this is a podcast after all. - Yes, yes. - I post videos. This will show up on YouTube and elements of it on Instagram as well. So much like sugar or other things, I have to imagine that we need to regulate, not necessarily eliminate, this behavior. So I want to talk about what that looks like. And I want to talk about what you've referred to as this narcissistic preoccupation that social media is creating. That we are all far more keenly aware of how we look and how we sound and how we are being perceived, than we were 10 years ago. - [Anna] Right. - So first of all, social media, how addicting is it really? And what is healthy social media behavior? - So the first message I would want to get across about social media, is that it really is a drug and it's engineered to be a drug. And it's based on, you know, potency, quantity, variety, the bottomless polls, the likes, the way that it's enumerated, all of that. Which doesn't mean that we can't use it, but we need to be very thoughtful about the way we use it, just like we need to be thoughtful about the way we use any drug. And so that means with intention and in advance, planning our use, right. And trying to use it as a really awesome tool to potentially connect with other people, and not to be used by it or get lost in it. And of course, you know, people are going to come with different propensities for addiction to any drug, and that's true for social media too. Some people will have no problem using it in moderation or using it in a way that's adaptive. And other people will immediately get sucked in. And the key thing about getting addicted is when it's happening, nobody who's getting addicted thinks they're getting addicted, right. Let's face it, it's only after the fact that we go woops, you know, what was that about? - Remember texting and driving, there are all these books about texting and driving, how terrible it was. - Yeah. - Even the governments have largely given up. You see these billboards - Terrifying. - like don't text and drive, or any text can wait, or whatever. Not worth dying for. - Right, right. - But everybody's texting and driving. - Right and if you look at young people today, teenagers, I mean they're basically cybernetically enhanced, that the phone is there. You know, it's like they're talking to you and texting 12 friends at the same time, and there's no stopping it. I mean the genie is out of the bottle where, you know, we're not going back. - [Andrew] Right. - So we do need to figure out, you know, how to make this tool something that's, you know, going to be good for us and not ultimately harmful. And I don't have all the answers by any stretch of the imagination, but I do think, you know, some of the wisdom that we have learned from using other drugs, also applies to social media. Which is to say that we have to, again, put barriers in place that allow us to remain in control of our use, which means not too much, you know, not too often, not too potent. - Do you think in, going back to this idea of the unit of the day being a good attractable unit, a manageable unit of time for most people, so you're saying in advance, so allocating two hours in which you're going to allow yourself to have free reign use of the phone and all its apps and all its things, or even more restricted than that, meaning okay, I'm only going to allow myself 30 minutes a day to post and comment, and then that's a closeout completely. - Yeah, so I think it's, it depends on the person and sort of a combination. We talked earlier about, you know, having an itch and scratching yourself at night. We've gotten to a point with smartphones, people are pulling them out and they are utterly unconscious of doing so, pulling them out, you know, a couple of texts, a couple. They don't know they're doing it! - I have a friend who works in, delivers babies, and many pregnant mothers won't actually deliver without their phone in hand. And this used to be the hand that was connected to their spouse. This may be a comment on spouses more than on phones. But it sounds like it's a kind of a security blanket of sorts. - Right, like a transitional object, yeah. - Actually that reminds me, you've referred to the phone, I think it's the phone, but maybe it's our online persona or ourselves, as we've become sort of infantile in our need for, it's like a baby and a bottle. - Right, right. - And so I do wonder if we have regressed, and I do think we've regressed a bit in terms of our online behavior. Our inability to act like. I always thought an adult was somebody that can control their behavior. - Yeah. - That's the difference between a baby and an adult. You don't have to be a developmental neurobiologist for very long to understand that a young organism can't control its behavior, an older one can. So to me, a mature organism, mature in years organism that can't control its behavior, is a baby. It's an immature version of itself. And there's neuroscience to support that statement. I look at my own behavior with the phone sometimes and I think, I'm a grown man. Like what is the problem here, right? You know, I don't eat baby food, but I'm acting like a baby with the phone, all right, in the sense that I'm reflexively picking it up, I'm not being intentioned and deliberate with it. Do I need a full 30 days, Anna? - So yes, so- - 30 days away from my phone? - As you know, that's my recommend, the full 30 days to reset. If you're severely addicted, I recommend the 30 days. But if you're just a little bit addicted, like most of us, you probably don't need 30 days. In fact, a single day, not only would be challenging, but probably may be sufficient. - My phone is off for substantial segments of the day. - Okay, that's great. - And it drives other people crazy. People expect me to respond. But I don't care. - Yeah, right, right. - I really don't. And I actually take a little bit of pleasure in the fact that, well, because I think the point I'm trying to make is the right one, which is that it's not just right for me, but like why, I don't see a clause on text messages or emails that say must be responded to within X amount of time or else, or else. So I take the liberty of replying when I'm able to. - Yeah, that's right. - Or want to. - Right, which touches on one of the big challenges about social media, is that as more and more of us are spending more and more time on social media, we're divesting our libidinous energies, et cetera, from real-life interactions. So that means even when we want to choose to not be online connecting, we go outside and there's no there there, right. There's nobody else there. So I think our collective challenge, and it should be our mission, is to make sure that we are preserving and maintaining offline ways to connect with each other. 'Cause if we don't do that then we'll be very lonely, right, if we were not online. But if you have a tribe of folks that you can be with, none of whom are on their phones while you're together for that discreet amount of time, then it's wonderful and liberating and nobody's distracted. And I think that's really the key. And I think young people are figuring that out, you know. They're trying to create these spaces or try to, let's say, instead of doing a dopamine fast by yourself, do it with your friends, right. Then there's the FOMO is less, the fear of missing out because, oh you're all doing the dopamine fast together. So these are some of the tricks that we can come up with. - I like that. - Yeah, okay good. - I like that. I don't allow, I have a home gym and I love working out. I just enjoy it and always have. And I don't allow my phone in my gym anymore. - Right. - And I live in an area where I don't get any reception, like two meters outside my door. So all my dog walks now are just, and they were boring as hell. - Yes. - I also have a bulldog, he doesn't like to walk. It's really slow. And it was so boring for a while - Yes. - because I was so used to taking calls while I walk, - Right. - and it's super efficient when I do that. The walks now are some of my favorite part of the day, - Yeah, right. - because, and if the phone, if I were to get a call on one of those or they brought reception of the areas, I would be very dismayed. - Yeah, right. - So I can attest to this, and I don't think I'm a phone addict, but I do put work into regulating my phone behavior. - Yeah, so this is the key. You have to, with intention, prior to being in that situation, think of literal, physical and metacognitive barriers that you can put between yourself and your phone, or whatever your drug is, to create these intentional spaces where you're not constantly interrupting yourself, essentially, and distracting yourself, because I really do think, you know, I think we talked just before we started with the interview, you know, we're losing the ability to have a sustained thought, right? I mean we get so far and then, then you get to that point in the thought where it's a little bit hard to know what's coming next. And it's very easy to check your phone or check your email, or look something up on the internet. And then you never get that opportunity to finish that thought, which is really the source of creative energy and an original thought, right. You're not just reacting to what's coming at you. - Right, and something that could contribute to the world. - That's right. - I'm a big believer that you're either consuming or you are creating. And there is, I should mention, it's important, I do believe in neutral time. I think sleep is great. I'm a big proponent of sleep and I've talked a lot about it on the podcast, I care a lot about sleep. And not just for sake of performance. I actually just really like sleep. I think that being a constant consumer of visual information and information of all kinds, can be a problem. But there's some really great sources of information on the internet. - Yes. - And I certainly benefit from the fact that those channels exist. Narcissistic pre-occupation. Am I a narcissist? - You know, first of all, there's healthy- - Or is the fact that I asked, does that take me out of, would a narcissist never ask that question? - Oh yes, a highly sophisticated narcissist - Oh I see. - would know to do that. - Well I'm not very sophisticated. - So there's healthy narcissism, which means that we all invest our personal energies into things that we care about. And if our competence in that arena is threatened, we would all experience a narcissistic injury, and that's normal and healthy. But we are living in a narcissistic culture, I mean that's not news, this preoccupation with individual achievement and individual self-worth and individual self-confidence. And I think all of that is just fueled by social media, where we're not just seeing ourselves, but we're seeing people's reactions to ourselves, and every single, you know, thing we say or do, you know, we get likes and this and that. It's really insidious and it contributes, I think, ultimately to a lot of personal shame, because we're not really meant to be individuals bouncing around in the universe. We're social animals. And we're probably generally happiest, even for natural contrarians among us, when we're part of a tribe, right. And if we do too much to kind of separate ourselves from that tribe, I think that the brain's natural and instinctive corrective mechanism against that is self-loathing and shame. So, you know, it's so ironic because the culture tells us if we just achieve more, we'll like ourselves more. But the truth is actually the opposite. That I think when people get these pinnacles of personal achievement, you know, you have things like the imposter syndrome or whatever, you know. - Or you just, you know, we're at Stanford after a lot of high achievers. - Right. - Right. Some phenomenal, amazing people like yourself and other colleagues of mine that just, I'm always in awe. Like it's just amazing, like the mean is shifted so high. And also people who have amazing paths to get here, coming from very little and accomplishing so much. But it's also the pressure, - Yeah. - right. You know, the way that this career was described to me the day I got my job, was one colleague of mine, the late Ben Barres said, welcome to schizophrenia 'cause you're never going to be able to complete anything without getting interrupted. That was partially true, although I've created buffers. And the other one, very successful scientist, member of the National Academy, et cetera, said to me, you know, just remember, it's pinball. You never win. The best you can do is just keep playing. - Yes, right. - And I thought wow, okay. Okay. And then you just go. - Right. - But I think that as we achieve more, not just academics of course, but as anyone achieves more, there's the relishing in the accomplishment. There's often the desire for more, but there's also the pressure of, well now I have to do this for the next 30 years, even though I love it. It's the pressure of, well, if the mountain is this high, then how do I get here and here and here, and then you start shoveling more dirt on so you can keep climbing. And it's a lot of work. - [Anna] Yes. - And I think that the perception of success is that there's a roar of the crowd and you cruise. You don't cruise. They just give you more to do. - Right. - Or you give yourself more to do. - Well what I think is, at least in my life experience, and I've heard this from other people as well, you know, it's that prize that we're going for, that if we get it is so unsatisfying. And it's the prize that we never imagined that we kind of go, well, how did that happen, but gee, you know, that feels good. And so I'm very, what's the- - It's like a mirage - Yeah. - in the one case. - Yeah. - It's almost like dopamine can create these mirages. - Yes. - That there's some place there. - That's right. And if I just, it's that pot of gold. If I just- - Constant dopamine. - Right, right, that's right. - Constant dopamine. - And I think, you know, this really, I think, is related to our discussion earlier about this taking it one day at time, or paying attention to that, you know, 24-hour period in your environment. I am absolutely fascinated by the ways in which we accumulate success, when we do that, totally independent of the desire for success. It's really process-oriented. It's like, where am I today? How can I make today a good and meaningful day, a little bit better, or as good as some other days I've had? Constantly tweaking and experimenting with this experiment that we call our human existence. And when we do that in a way that's authentic and paying attention and value-driven, whatever our, you know, values are informed by, it is very, very interesting how those days again accumulate, and you find, well, I guess I contributed something of value there, but I wasn't trying to do that. You know, I think that's really, I mean, what I'm so amazed by is like, you know, 20 years ago when I went to Stanford Medical School, or 25 years ago, you know, I just, I was happy to just be a good doctor. I was like, I guess I'm just going to try to figure out how to be a good doctor, I'm here to learn that. And now I see these medical students, and they're wonderful. They're brilliant and they're - They are. - well-intentioned, all that. But they're like how can I, you know, write the great American novel, do my startup, go to Africa, apply for that grant? You know, it's like, really, I was just trying to learn how to be a doctor. And it's, as you say, it's a lot of pressure on them. And it's also kind of a weird leapfrogging of the real way to accomplish something. - Right. - Which isn't about like oh how can I accomplish something. It's like, what can I do today that would be of service. Right? And then finding that of trying to be of service, you know, and not really going for recognition, can sometimes lead to what people call success, although that wasn't what you were aiming for. - And it's all the more beautiful when it's not what you're aiming for. - Oh so much better, so much better. - Yeah, I'm a big believer that when one can align their compulsion with some greater good. - Yes, right. - A service to humanity or the planet or animals, whatever it is, that's where the really good stuff emerges. Because there's a lot of reciprocity there. The world starts to, you're supporting the world and then it starts to support you in a way that feels very fluid. - And it comes back. Right, and I mean that speaks to you like your generosity to me, vis-a-vis my book. And I have to say- - Well, I love the book. - I know, it's- - There's like, we're not in a business deal folks. It's just purely that I heard Anna lecture in my course, I wanted to learn more about dopamine. She taught me, I asked her if she would come on the podcast. Turned out she wrote this amazing book. She sent me an advanced copy of the book. I read it in one sweep, it's incredible. And I love it. So just like the eight year old version of me, now the 45 version of myself, I can't stop blabbing about the things I love. - Well it's awesome, but I have to say, I have been surprised by your generosity. It's not something I've encountered frequently at Stanford, which is a wonderful place. But there is a general sense that if I give away to somebody else, I've lost something, which is not the right way to think about it. Not how you are, and also not how the world works, 'cause when we give away to other people, we get back so much more. But it takes a long time and it might not come through that path. - I never think about reciprocity. But I was weaned by good advisers. - That's very nice, - Yeah. - yeah. - I think it just sort of got drilled into me that the more you give, the better your immediate life is. - Yes, yeah. - And I also don't have a long-term vision, you know. I just, I'm just excited about the book. I'm excited that people are learning about the brain and dopamine. I have to admit, having grown up in neuroscience essentially, I did not understand that pleasure and pain were orchestrated the way that they are. I'm very mindful of it now. - Oh good. - And it's changed a number of my behaviors. I know a number of people are going to have questions and want to get in contact with you. You are not on social media. - That's correct, yes. - You are true to your ideology. That's great. - And the reason for that is just, I wouldn't be able to control myself. I mean, that really would be my drug. People are my drug, intimacy is my drug, and I wouldn't be able to manage it. And so just, it was just easier for me to not do it at all, rather than try to moderate it. - Well the book, as you mentioned before, and as I can attest to, is it has a certain intimacy. People get to know you through the book. So definitely check out the book. If you have questions about the book, et cetera, you're welcome to send them my way. I will buffer you from all those questions. I'll filter them. Anna, Dr. Lembke, I should be formal, forgive me, I've been referring to you - No no, that's fine. - as Anna the whole way through, 'cause we're colleagues, but thank you so much for sharing this information. And I know I learned a ton. and I know everyone else is going to learn a lot more about addiction and the good side of dopamine. - That's right. Thank you for having me. It's been really, really great to talk with you. - Great, thank you. Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Anna Lembke. I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did. Please be sure to check out her new book, "Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence". You can pre-order it on Amazon or any places where books are sold. It's an absolutely fascinating and engaging read, all about addiction and dopamine. If you're learning from, and or enjoying this podcast, please follow us on YouTube by subscribing to the Huberman Lab channel. In addition, you can subscribe to the podcast on Apple and Spotify, and on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. If you have comments or suggestions for topics for future podcasts, please put those in the comments section below this episode on YouTube. In addition, we have a Patreon. That's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support us at any level that you like. Please also check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the episode. That's a terrific way to support our podcast and our ability to continue to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat guitar music]

========================================

--- Video 315 ---
Video ID: xmhsWAqP_0Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xmhsWAqP_0Y
Title: How to Control Your Sense of Pain & Pleasure
Published: 2021-08-09 12:00:23 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss our sense of pain and pleasure: where and how they each arise in our mind and body and various ways to control their intensity. I discuss the science of behavioral tools like acupuncture and hypnosis and directed pressure, including the neural circuits they each activate to modulate our experience of pain or pleasure. I also discuss whole body pain, pain "syndromes" and novel pain relief compounds such as Acetyl-L-Carnitine, SAMe and Agmatine. I discuss neuroplasticity of the pain system and the key role that visual perception plays in pain modulation. Finally, I address the link between dopamine, serotonin, and oxytocin, with arousal, pleasure and pain. As always, both basic science and various protocols are described.

Note: The description of the dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) was intentionally simplified and does not include mention of dorsal horn spinal relay neurons, etc.. For an excellent full text review of this anatomy and circuits for touch sensing, please see: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3811145/

#hubermanlab #pain #pleasure #dopamine #motivation

Thank you to our sponsors:
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Instagram discussion with Dr. Sean Mackey, MD, PhD - https://www.instagram.com/p/CMVq0X8Bk1D/
Agmatine study - https://bit.ly/3CtTwRn
Mechanistic basis of acupuncture - https://bit.ly/2VHi0pz

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Skin, Pain, Pleasure 
00:01:50 Protocol 1: Maximizing Motivation (with Dopamine & Pleasure)
00:07:12 Sponsors: InsideTracker, Helix Sleep, Athletic Greens
00:12:04 Pleasure & Pain, & Skin Sensors 
00:18:13 Sensing Touch with Your Brain: Magnification of Feet, Hands, Lips, Face, Genitals
00:22:16 Two-Point Discrimination, Dermatomes
00:28:11 Thoughts & Genes That Make Physical Pain Worse
00:33:45 Expectations, Anxiety, & Pain Threshold
00:40:27 Protocol 2: Cold Sensing Is Relative; Getting Into Cold Water
00:45:22 Protocol 3: Heat Is Absolute
00:48:10 Injury & Pain
00:52:04 Protocol 4: Plasticity of Pain: Key Role of Vision 
00:58:08 Sensing Disparate Body Parts As Merged
01:01:00 Pain “Syndromes”, Psychogenic Fever, “Psychosomatics”
01:04:40 Fibromyalgia, Naltrexone, Protocol 5: Acetyl-L-Carnitine 
01:12:24 Protocol 6: Agmatine, S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe), L-5-Methyltetrahydrofolate*
01:17:27 Acupuncture: Mechanism, Non-Responders, Itch & Inflammation
01:28:20 Laser Photobiomodulation, Protocol 7: Hypnosis (reveri.com) 
01:30:00 Protocol 8: Pressure-Based Pain Relief, “Gate Theory of Pain (Relief)”
01:37:53 Redheads & Pain Thresholds, Endogenous Opioids 
01:44:02 Protocol 8: Love & Pain, Dopamine
01:49:23 Pleasure & Reproduction, Dopamine & Serotonin, Oxytocin
01:51:40 Protocol 9: PEA, L-Phenylalanine (Precursor to Tyrosine)
01:55:40 Contextual Control of Pleasure by Autonomic Arousal, Dopamine Baselines
01:59:40 Pleasure-Pain Balance
02:01:24 Protocol 10: Controlling Pleasure, Dopamine & Motivation Over Time
02:06:40 Protocol 11: Immediate, Non-Goal-Directed Pleasure, PAG 
02:08:40 Direction of Touch: Pleasure Versus Pain, Arousal & Touch “Sensitivity” 
02:13:00 Synthesis & How to Conceptualize Pain and Pleasure, Support

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright upbeat music] - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we continue our discussion of the senses. And the senses we are going to discuss are pain and pleasure. Pain and pleasure reflect two opposite ends of a continuum, a continuum that involves detection of things in our skin and the perception, the understanding of what those events are. Our skin is our largest sensory organ and our largest organ indeed. It is much larger than any of the other organs in our body. And it's an odd organ if you think about it, it has so many functions. It acts as a barrier between our organs and the outside world, it harbors neurons nerve cells that allow us to detect things like light touch, or temperature or pressure of various kinds. And it's an organ that we hang ornaments on. People put earrings in their ears. People decorate their skin with tattoos and inks and other things. And it's an organ that allows us to experience either great pain or great pleasure. So it's a multifaceted organ and it's one that our brain needs to make sense of in a multifaceted way. So today we're going to discuss all that. And most importantly, how you can experience more pleasure and less pain by understanding these pathways. We will also discuss things you can do, and if you wish things you can take that will allow you to experience more pleasure and less pain in response to a variety of different experiences. Before I go any further, I want to highlight a particularly exciting area of science that relates to the skin and to sensing of pleasure and pain, but has everything to do with motivation. Motivation is something that many people struggle with, not everybody, but most people experience dips and peaks in their motivation even if they really want something. How should we think about these changes in motivation? What do they reflect? Well at a very basic level, they reflect fluctuations changes in the levels of a chemical called dopamine. Most of us have heard of dopamine. Dopamine is a neuromodulator meaning it modulates or changes the way that neurons nerve cells work. Most of us have heard that dopamine is the molecule of pleasure. However, that is incorrect. Dopamine is a molecule of motivation and anticipation. To illustrate how dopamine works, I want to highlight some very important work largely carried out by the laboratory of a guy named Wolfram Schultz. The Schultz Laboratory has done dozens of excellent experiments on the dopamine system and have identified something called reward prediction error. Although in some sense you can think about it as reward prediction variance. Changes in the levels of dopamine depending on whether or not you expect a reward and whether or not you get the reward. So I'm going to make this very simple. Dopamine is released into the brain and body and generally makes us feel activated and motivated, as if we have energy to pursue a goal. And it is released into the brain and body in anticipation of a reward. Measurements of dopamine have been made in animals and humans. And what you find is that when we anticipate a reward, dopamine is released, we will put in the work to achieve that reward. That work could be mental work or physical work, but when the reward arrives, dopamine levels drop back down to baseline. That's right. When we receive a reward, dopamine levels go back down to baseline. So the way to envision this as you can just imagine a sort of increase in dopamine as we anticipate something we're working towards it, we're working towards a goal. We're excited about seeing somebody or meeting somebody or receiving some reward and then the reward comes and dopamine goes down. Now that's all fine and good, but there is a way to get much more dopamine out of that process and therefore a way to have much more motivation, energy, and focus because those are the consequences of elevated dopamine. The way to do that is to not deliver the reward on an expected schedule. So experiments have been done where there's an anticipation of a reward, there's work, and then the reward only arrives every other or every third about of work, okay? So this would be like getting a pat on the head. If you're a dog or a, perhaps a child or an adult, or getting a monetary reward only for every third project or every third race that you win. Pick any kind of goal. It doesn't matter. These molecules don't care about what you're pursuing. They are a common currency of different types of activities. That's a regular reward schedule, and it will not alter the pattern of dopamine release that I described before. However, if the reward arrives intermittently almost randomly, so you anticipate a reward as a maybe it might come, it might come. Then you work, work, work, work, work, no reward. You repeat the work, work, work, work, work, work, and then you get a reward. So some trials, you do some trials, you don't, and it's completely random. Under those conditions, the amplitude, the amount of dopamine that's released into your system and the motivation to continue working hard or playing whatever kind of game you're playing, doubles or triples. And this is the basis of things like slot machines and gambling. And this is why so many people will give so much of their money up to casinos and the casinos always win. Sometimes people walk away with more money than they came to the casino with, but the vast majority of the time, the house wins as they say. And it's because they understand intermittent reward schedules. And you can apply this to stay motivated in your own pursuits. Rather than thinking about the pleasure of a reward, understand that dopamine is released in response to anticipation reward, and that is the fuel for work. And every once in awhile at random remove the reward. That's the way to continue to stay motivated. Not to reward every action or every goal. And this is also true, if you're trying to train up children or train up players on a team, you should not celebrate every win. I know that's a little counter-intuitive, we're going to go more into the biology of dopamine and how it relates to the pleasure system later on in the podcast, but for now understand intermittent reward schedules harness the biology of dopamine in ways that can allow you essentially infinite motivation over time. Before I go any further, I want to acknowledge that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many, if not all of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays with the advent of DNA tests, you can get further knowledge into the mechanisms that are going on in your body and how those mechanisms are changing as they relate to metabolism and hormones and other aspects that profoundly impact your wellbeing. The problem with most blood tests, however, is that you get information back and it will tell you whether or not your levels of something are higher, low, or within range, but it doesn't give you any directives. It doesn't tell you what to do with that information. With InsideTracker has this wonderful feature. It's a very easy to use dashboard that has suggestions about lifestyle factors, exercise, nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, that one could take in order to adjust those numbers according to your personal goals. So the whole thing is made very easy. In fact, they can come to your home to do the blood test and DNA test if you like. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code huberman@checkout. And I should also mention that through August 15th, 2021, you can get a free inner age test. That's a measure of your biological age according to your DNA and other factors with any purchase from InsideTracker store. So go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans and up to up and through August 15th, you can get a free inner age test. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix makes mattresses and pillows that are ideally suited to your sleep needs. Everybody's different. Some people sleep on their sides, some people sleep on their stomach, some people sleep on their back, some people run warm during the night, some people run cold. If you go to the Helix's website, helixsleep.com, you can take a quick two-minute quiz, and then it will tell you what your ideal mattress is. It will match you to your ideal mattress. I did this and I matched to the so-called Dusk mattress. I like a mattress that's not too firm nor too soft. I tend to run hot during the night and I tend to sleep on my side or on my stomach. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress about nine months ago, and I'm sleeping better than I ever have before. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress to one that's ideally suited to your sleep needs, go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two-minutes sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. And you'll get up to $200 off that mattress order, and two free pillows. They have a 10-year warranty and you get to try out the mattress for a 100 nights risk-free, they'll even pick it up for you if you don't love it, but I think you really will love it. So again, if you're interested, go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started drinking Athletic Greens way back in 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started drinking Athletic Greens and the reason why I still drink it once or even twice a day is because it takes care of all my foundational nutritional needs. It includes vitamins, minerals, and probiotics which are important for the gut microbiome, this colony of bacteria, healthy bacteria that we all have living in our guts. And when that bacteria is healthy, our brain functions better, our immune system functions better. There is now a lot of research to support that. Athletic Greens taste delicious. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice. And as I mentioned, I drink it once or twice a day, usually in the morning and again in the afternoon. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. That special offer is a year supply of vitamin D3K2. There's now a robust literature showing that vitamin D3 is critical for various aspects of our health, metabolic health, endocrine health, et cetera. And you'll also get five free travel packs. When you travel mixing up Athletic Greens is made really easy by these little travel packs. You just put them in a jar or other a water bottle, mix it with water. It's very easy to do on a plane or in the et cetera. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs and the year supply of vitamin D3K2. So let's talk about pleasure and pain. I think we all intuitively understand what pleasure and pain are. Pleasure generally is a sensation in the body and in the mind that leads us to pursue more of whatever is bringing about that sensation. And pain is also a sensation in the body and in the mind that in general leads us to want to withdraw or move away from some activity or interaction. That's not always the case. Some people actively seek out pain. Some people somehow can't seem to engage with or experience pleasure, but most people operate on this basis of pleasure and pain. Scientists would call this appetitive behaviors, meaning behaviors that lead us to create an appetite for more of those behaviors and aversive behaviors, behaviors that make us want to move away from something. The simplest example of that would be putting your hand near a hot flame, at some point, there would be a reflex or a deep desire to withdraw your hand. Tasting something delicious in general makes us want to eat more of that thing. Interactions with other people that we find delicious, also make us want to interact with those people more. None of this is complicated or sophisticated. This is simply to illustrate the fact that pleasure and pain tend to evoke opposite responses, opposite behavioral responses and opposite emotional responses. So how does that come about? Well, it really comes about by an interaction that starts at one end of our body, meaning our skin and the other end of the organs of our body, which is deep within the brain. So let's consider these two ends of the spectrum of pleasure and pain and what they contribute to those experiences of pleasure and pain. The organ that we call the skin, as I mentioned earlier, is the largest organ in our body. And throughout that organ, we have neurons, little nerve cells. Now to be really technical about it, and the way I'd like you to understand it is that the so-called cell body meaning the location of a cell in which the DNA and other goodies the kind of central factory of the cell, that actually sits right outside your spinal cord. So all up and down your spinal cord on either side are these little blobs of neurons, little collections of neurons. They have a name if you'd like to know for you aficionado or those who are curious, they're called DRGs dorsal root ganglia. A ganglion is just a collection or clump of cells. And those DRGs are really interesting because they send one branch that we call an axon, a little wire out to our skin, also to our muscles into our organs, but here we're talking about the skin. They send a wire out to our skin and that wire literally reaches up into the skin. It's actually in our skin and they have another wire from that same cell body that goes in the opposite direction, which is up to our brain and creates connections within our brain in the so-called brainstem. What this means is that the neuron in your body that we call the DRG that sends a wire an axon to sense what's going on in your big toe and then sends another axon in the opposite direction into the base of your brain, that is the largest cell in your entire body of any kind. Fat cell, muscle cell, nerve cell, et cetera. Is extremely long cells. It can be a meter or more depending on how tall you happen to be. So we have these cells that have wires they go off in two different directions and the wire that's within our skin will respond to any number of different categories of stimuli. These wires are positioned within the skin to respond to mechanical forces. So maybe light touch, some will only send electrical activity up toward the brain in response to light touch. Meaning if you press on the skin really hard, they don't respond. You stroke the skin lightly with your fingertips or a feather and they respond very robustly. Others respond to course pressure, the hard pressure, but they won't respond to a light feather, for instance. Others respond to temperature. So they will respond to the presence of heat or the presence of cold or changes in heat and cold. And still others respond to other types of stimuli, like certain chemicals on our skin. Many of you have probably experienced the sensation of eating a hot pepper. Well, I don't recommend doing this, but were you to take a little slice of jalapeno or other hot pepper, habanero pepper or something like that and rub it on your skin, you would actually feel something at that location. And that's because that pepper doesn't just create a sensation within your mouth, it will create a similar sensation on your skin. So these neurons are amazing. They're collecting information of particular kinds from the skin throughout the entire body and sending that information up toward the brain. And what's really incredible, I just want you to ponder this for a second. What's really incredible is that the language that those neurons use is exactly the same. The neuron that responds to light touch sends electrical signals up toward the brain, the neurons that respond to cold or to heat or to habanero pepper, they only respond to the particular thing that evokes the electrical response. I should say that they only respond to the particular stimulus, the pepper, the cold, the heat, et cetera, that will evoke an electrical signal, but the electrical signals are a common language that all neurons use. And yet, if something cold is presented to your skin, like an ice cube, even if you don't see that ice cube, if your eyes are closed, or someone comes up behind you and puts an ice cube against your bare skin back, you know that that sensation, that thing is cold. You don't misperceive it as heat or as a habanero pepper. So that's amazing. What that means is that there must be another element in the equation of what creates pleasure or pain. And that element is your brain. Your brain takes these electrical signals and interprets them. Partially based on experience, but also there are some innate meaning some hard wired aspects of pain and pleasure sensing that require no experience whatsoever. A child doesn't have to fall down but once to know on that first fall, that hurt. They don't have to touch a flame, but once and the very first time they will withdraw their hand from the flame. So no prior experiences required. Other things prior experience is required. For instance, if you're somebody that has an intense, intense aversion to spicy foods, that's probably because you've tasted spicy foods before. Likewise, if you really like sweet foods, it's probably because you've tasted them before. So you can start to make predictions based on prior experience, but the pain and pleasure system don't need prior experience. What they need is a brain that can interpret these electrical signals that can take these electrical signals and somehow create what we call pleasure and pain out of them. So what parts of the brain? Well, mainly it's the so-called somatosensory cortex. The portion of our neocortex, which is on the outside of our brain, that kind of bumpy part, not kind of if you have a normally formed brain, it will be bumpy. If you have a smooth brain that's not good. Some animals just have a smooth brain. Humans have a bumpy brain, which means it has a very large surface area. And those bumps are 'cause you squeezed it like a pizza and clump and you bunched it all up and put inside the skull. That's good. That means you have a lot of neurons. And in your somatosensory cortex, you have a map of your entire body surface. That map is called a homunculus. And if we were to take your cortex and lay it out on a table, I've actually done this with the cortices of various animals and humans included. What you would find is that there's literally a map of your entire body surface. But it wouldn't look exactly like you, this map would be very distorted. Why would it be distorted? Well, certain areas of your body have a much denser innervation as we call it, or put simply many more of these sensory wires from these DRGs within your skin. So this map of you that exists in your brain, and you do have one of these on each side of your brain, so you have two of these maps to homunculi, that is you, it's your representation of touch including pleasure and pain. And in that map, your lips are enormous. And your back is very, very small. And the area around your eyes and the area representing your face is absolutely enormous. So you would look like some sort of odd, weird clay doll from some sort of bizarre late night animation thing. And just imagine the psychedelic experience of that character of you and that's what it would look like. But it's not randomly organized. To the contrary, it's highly organized in a very particular way, which is that the areas of your skin that have the highest density of the sensory receptors are magnified in your brain. So it's sort of like having more pixels in a certain part of a camera than others, and in doing that allowing higher resolution in this case of touch, not a vision, but of touch sensation in certain parts of your body. What are the areas that are magnified? Well, the lips, the face, the tips of the fingers, the feet, and the genitals. And so this map of you has very large lips, face, tips of fingers, bottoms of feet, and genitals. And that's because the innervation, the number of wires that go into those regions of your body far exceeds the number of wires for sensation of touch that go to other areas of your body. You can actually experience this in real time right now by doing a simple experiment that we call two-point discrimination. Two-points discrimination is your ability to know whether or not two points of pressure are far apart, near each other, or you actually could perceive incorrectly as one point of pressure. You might want a second person to do this experiment. Here's how you would do it. You will close your eyes, that person would take two fine points. Don't make them too sharp, please. So it could be two pencils or pens or the backs of pens. Two pens I'm holding in my hands. If you're just listening to this, I'm just holding two pens. My favorite pens, these pilot, V5 or V7, which I love. If you were to close your eyes and I were to take these two pens and put their points close together about a centimeter apart and present them to the top of your hand, I'm going to just going to do that now to myself. You, even though your eyes were closed, you would be able to perceive that that was two points of pressure presented simultaneously to the top of your hand. However, if I were to do this to the middle of your back, you would not experience them as two points of pressure. You would experience them as one single point of pressure. In other words, your two point discrimination is better, is higher on areas of your body which have many, many more sensory receptors. You are more sensitive at those locations. Now this makes perfect sense once you experience it or you hear about it. However, most of us don't really appreciate how important and what a profound influence this change in density of receptors across our body surface has. And we can go a step further and describe another feature of the way that you're built and the way that you experience pleasure and pain, which is called the dermatome. The dermatome is literally the way in which your body surface is carved up into different territories. Much like a map of the United States is carved up into different territories of states and counties, et cetera. The dermatome is the way in which neurons connect to different parts of your body. Now, you've actually experienced the dermatome before. The dermatome is when you have a neuron that connects to a particular area of the body and that neuron doesn't just send one little wire out like one little line and go up into the skin to detect mechanical, or thermal, or chemical stimuli. It actually sends many branches out like a tree. But remember those branches of the tree come from one single neuron. Now, occasionally what will happen is you will experience something like cold, or heat, or pain, or tingling on a patch of your body. And occasionally that patch of body will actually have a very cleanly demarcated boundary, a very stark boundary with the areas around it. A good example of this would be the herpes simplex 1 virus, which if one has this virus, and I should mention that somewhere between 80 and 90% of people have this virus, this is not a sexually transmitted virus. This is a virus is transmitted very easily between people through various forms of contact non-sexual contact, it's present in children, it's present in adults and most people get it, some get symptoms and some don't some get recurring symptoms, some don't. We can talk about that at the end, if you like, but this virus lives on what's called the fifth cranial nerve also called the trigeminal nerve. The trigeminal nerve sends branches out to the lips, to the eyes, and to certain portions of the face. So for those of you listening, I've just kind of put my right hand across my face and to sort of simulate the three branches, the trigeminal aspect of this nerve. So tri three. Now, when the herpes virus flares up, as they say, in response to stress or other factors, the virus inflames that nerve and people experience tingling and pain on the nerve. Sometimes they'll get a cold sore or a blister on their lip or near their mouth, sometimes they'll get a collection of those. And that's because that dermatome is actually inflamed. Now other people will experience something like shingles. It's a fairly common viral infection. And what they'll notice is they'll get a rash that has a boundary. It's like, they'll get a bunch of bumps, sometimes blisters, and it'll have a sharp boundary. That boundary exists because the virus exists on the nerve. And so it actually is boundaried with the neighboring area of the body that's receiving input from another nerve and that one doesn't have the virus living on it. So anytime you see a rash or a pattern on the body surface on the skin that has a pretty stark boundary, chances are that's an event that's impacting the dermatome. I've experienced this before then not through herpes simplex, but through the experience of having a lot of blood sort of aggregating in a kind of a segment across the front of my face, it was really bizarre. I looked in the mirror and I thought, what is going on here? I was having an allergic reaction to something I'd eaten. And that allergic reaction clearly was affecting one of the nerves and therefore the dermatome and what it showed up was, it was almost like someone had drawn lines on my face that said, okay, this rash or this reaction rather can happen here, but not in a region right next to it. Whenever you see that chances are it's a reaction of the nerves of the dermatome. So you'll start to see these things more and more when you start to look for them. You don't always have to have a viral infection to experience this. Sometimes you'll just experience tingling or even a pleasant sensation, and it will be restricted in kind of a strict boundary on one location or your body surface and not another. Not corresponding to an organ like, okay, this arm or just your feet or something like that. But just a segment. It's almost like someone outlined a particular area of her body surface. That's the dermatome. So you've got sensors in the skin and you've got a brain that's going to interpret what's going on with those sensors. In fact, we can take an example of a sudden rash or inflammation at one location, the dermatome, and we can ask what would make it hurt? What would make it worse? What would make it go away? And believe it or not, your subjective interpretation of what's happening has a profound influence on your experience of pleasure or pain. There are several things that can impact these experiences, but the main categories are expectation. So sort of whether or not you thought or could expect that this thing was going to happen, right? If someone tells you this is going to hurt, I'm going to give you an injection right here, it might hurt for a second. That's very different and your experience of that pain will be very different than if it happened suddenly out of the blue. There's also anxiety, how anxious, or how high or low your level of arousal, autonomic arousal, that's going to impact your experience of pleasure or pain. How well you slept and where you are in the so-called circadian or 24-hour cycle. Our ability to tolerate pain changes dramatically across the 24-hour cycle. And as you can imagine is during the daylight waking hours that we are better able to tolerate, we are more resilient to pain, and we are better able to experience pleasure. At night our threshold for pain is much lower. In other words, the amount of mechanical or chemical or thermal meaning temperature stimulated that can evoke a pain response and how we rate that response is much lower at night. And in particular, in the hours between 2:00 AM and 5:00 AM, if you're on a kind of standard circadian schedule. And then the last one is our genes. Pain threshold and how long a pain response lasts is in part dictated by our genes. And later I'm going to discuss this myth or whether or not it's really a myth as to whether or not certain people in particular red heads, people who have reg pigmented hair and fair skin, whether or not their pain thresholds differ. And to just give you a little sneak peek into that, indeed they do and it's because of a genetic difference in a particular gene, in a particular pattern of receptors in the skin that are related to the pigmentation of hair and skin. So we have expectation, anxiety, how well we've slept, where we are in the so-called 24-hour circadian time and our genes. So let's talk about expectation and anxiety because those two factors can powerfully modulate our experience of both pleasure and pain in ways that will allow us to dial up pleasure if we like and to dial down pain, if indeed that's what we want to do. So let's talk about expectation and anxiety because those two things are somewhat tethered. There are now a number of solid experiments, both in animal models and in humans that point to the fact that if we know a painful stimulus is coming, that we can better prepare for it mentally and therefore buffer or reduce the pain response. However, the timing in which that anticipation occurs is vital for this to happen. And if that timing isn't quite right, it actually can make the experience of pain far worse. So here I'm summarizing a large amount of literature, but essentially if subjects are warned that a painful stimulus is coming, their subjective experience of that pain is vastly reduced. However, if they are warned just two seconds before that pain arrives, it does not help. It actually makes it worse. And the reason is they can't do anything mentally to prepare for it in that brief two second window. Similarly, if they are warned about pain that's coming two minutes before a painful stimulus is coming electric shock or a poke or cold stimulus or heat stimulus that's pretty extreme, that also makes it worse because their expectation ramps up the autonomic arousal. The level of alertness is all funneled toward that negative experience that's coming. So how soon before a painful stimulus should we know about it if the goal is to reduce our level of pain? And the answer is somewhere between 20 seconds and 40 seconds is about right. Now, I'm averaging across a number of different studies, but if you have about 20 seconds or 40 seconds advance warning that something bad is coming, you can prepare yourself for that, but the preparation itself and the arousal that comes with it, the kind of leaning in, okay, I'm either going to relax myself or I'm going to really kind of dig my heels in and kind of meet the pain head on. That seems to be the optimal window. This can come and useful in a variety of contexts, but I think it's important because what it illustrates is that it absolutely cannot be just the pattern of signals that are arriving from the skin, from these DRGs, these neurons that connect to skin that dictates our experience of pain or pleasure. There has to be a subjective interpretation component, and indeed that's the case. So let's talk about the range of pain experiences. And from that, we will understand better what the range of pleasure experiences are that different people have because we are all different in terms of our pain threshold. First of all, what is pain threshold? Pain threshold has two dimensions. The first dimension is the amount of mechanical or chemical or thermal stimulation that it takes for you or me or somebody else to say, I can't take that anymore. I'm done. But there's another element as well which is how long the pain persists. I'll just describe myself for example, I don't consider myself somebody who has a particularly high pain threshold. I don't think it's particularly low either, but I wouldn't consider myself somebody that has a particularly high pain threshold. When I stubbed my toe against the corner of the bed, it absolutely hurts. But one thing that I've noticed is that I have very sharp inflections, very high inflections in my perception of pain, and then they go away quickly. I don't know if that's adaptive or not. It's probably not, but my experience of pain is very intense, but very brief. Other people experience pain in a much kind of slower rising, but longer-lasting manner. And to just really point out how varied we all are in terms of our experience of pain, let's look to an experiment. There been experiments done at Stanford School of Medicine and elsewhere, which involved having subjects put their hand into a very cold vat of water and measuring the amount of time that they kept their hand in that water. And then they would tell the experimenter very quietly, how painful that particular stimulus was on a scale of one to 10 so-called Likert scale for your aficionados. That simple experiment revealed that people experience the same thermal in this case, cold stimulus, vastly different. Some people would rate it as a 10 out of 10 extreme pain. Other people would rate it as barely painful at all, like a one. Other people, a three other people, a five, et cetera. Now what's interesting is that the same thing is true for experience of a hot, painful stimulus 120 degree hot plate, where you have to put your hand on it, and then at some point you remove your hand. Some people are able to keep their hand on there the whole time, but people rate that experience as very painful, a little bit painful or moderately painful depending on who they are. Now, that's interesting, probably not that surprising, however, but what is very interesting is that when the same experiment was done on medical doctors or medical doctors in training, they too of course experienced pain through a range of subjective experiences. Some of them just like any other person off the street said a particular stimulus of a particular temperature was very painful, other said it wasn't painful at all and some said it was moderately painful. And that turns out to be vitally important for the treatment of pain because pain is not an event in the skin. Pain is a subjective, emotional experience. You may have heard that we have a particular category of these DRGs that innervate the skin, which are called nociceptors. Nociceptor comes from the word noci, nocere I believe it is, which means to harm. However, nociceptors don't carry information about pain, they carry information about particular types of stimuli impacting the skin. And then the brain assigns a value of valence to it, a label and says that's painful. And where people draw the line between not painful and painful varies. Now, because physicians are people and because physicians treat pain, what we know from a lot of data now is that if someone comes into the clinic and says they're experiencing chronic pain or whole body pain or acute pain after an injury or one location, it doesn't really matter what the cause is or even if there's a cause at all, how the doctor reacts to that report of the patient's pain will dictate in many cases the course of treatment. And of course doctors, their goal is to treat the patient to going to the patient's needs, not their own. And that's what good doctors do. However, it's been found and I think now there is work being done to try and change this, but if a doctor has a very high threshold for pain, their interpretation of somebody else's report of pain is going to be different. They might not discount the patient, right? This doesn't necessarily mean that they think, oh, this person their pain is irrelevant, probably not. In fact, from having a high threshold for pain, if someone comes in and says, I'm in extreme pain, that doctor probably thinks, wow, this has to be really, really extreme, but they can be talking about two different experiences. Similarly, if a physician has a very low threshold for pain, and someone comes in and says, yeah, I'm experiencing some pain in my back. I've got the sciatica thing, but yeah, it's a little bit uncomfortable. It's like a, I don't know like a four out of 10. Well, that physician might interpret that four out of 10 as a pretty extreme sense of pain or pretty extreme experience of pain. And so you can start to see how the subjective nature of pain can start to have real impact on the treatment of pain because treatment of pain is carried out by physicians. In fact, there is no objective measure of pain. We can ask how long somebody can keep their hand on a hot plate or in a cold bath. You can do various experiments. They even have some extreme experiments where they'll shave a portion of the leg and they'll put on a very painful chemical compound and see how long people can tolerate that. These are very uncomfortable experiments as you can imagine, but in general, we don't have a way of measuring somebody else's subjective experience of pain. There is no blood pressure measure. There's no heart rate beats per minute measure of pain. So one of the great efforts of neuroscience and of medicine is to try and come up with more objective measures of pain. Similarly, pleasure is something that we all talk about. Ooh, that feels so good, or I love that or more of that please or less of that, but we have no way of gauging what other people are experiencing except what they report through language. And so this is really just to illustrate that this whole thing around pain isn't a black box. We do have an understanding of the elements. There are elements in the skin, there's elements of the brain, there's expectation, anxiety, sleep, and genes, but that it is very complicated. And yet there are certain principles that fall out of that complicated picture that can allow us to better understand and navigate this axis that we call the pleasure-pain axis. So rather than focus on just the subjective nature of pain, let's talk about the absolute qualities of pain and the absolute qualities of pleasure so that we can learn how to navigate those two experiences in ways that serve us each better. First of all, I want to talk about heat and cold. We do indeed have sensors in our skin that respond to heat and cold. And for any of you that have entered a cold shower or a cold body of water of any kind or ice bath, et cetera, you will realize that getting into cold is much harder if you do it slowly. Now, despite that people tend to do it very slowly. I have noticed an enormous variation with which people can embrace the experience of cold. I noticed it because I do some work with athletes and I do some work with military and I do some work with the general public. And one of the best tests of how somebody can handle pain is to ask them to just get into an ice bath. It's not a very sophisticated experience, but it really gets into the core of the kind of circuitry that we're talking about, both in the skin and in the brain. Some people regardless of sex, regardless of age, and regardless of physical ability can just get into the cold. They're somehow able to do it. Now, I don't know what their experience of the cold is. And neither do you. You only know your experience, but they're able to do that. Some do it quickly, some do it slowly. Others find the experience of cold to be so aversive that they somehow cannot get themselves in. They start quaking, they start complaining and many of them just simply get out. They can't do it. Some don't even get in past their knees. This isn't necessarily about pain threshold, but it's related to that. I think it can be helpful to everyone to know that even though it feels better at a mental level to get into the cold slowly and people ask, oh, I just want to get in slowly, I want to take my time. It is actually much worse from a neuro-biological perspective. The neurons that sense cold respond to what are called relative drops in temperature. So it's not about the absolute temperature of the water. It's about the relative change in temperature. So as you move from a particular temperature, whether or not it's in the air next to an ice bath or cold shower, or from a body of water that's warm to a body of water that's colder, or sometimes in the ocean, you'll notice it's warm. And then as you swim out further, you'll get into a pocket of water where it's much colder. That's when the cold receptors in your skin start firing and sending signals up to your brain. Therefore, you can bypass these signals going up to the brain with each relative change one degree change, two degrees change, et cetera, by simply getting in all at once. In fact it is true and maybe you've been told this before, and it is true that if you get into cold water up to your neck, it's actually much more comfortable than if you're halfway in and halfway out. And that's because of the difference in the signals that are being sent from the cold receptors on your upper torso, which is out of the water in your lower torso. Now, I wouldn't want anyone to take this to mean that they should just jump into an unknown body of water. There are all sorts of factors like currents, and if it's very, very cold, yes, indeed. You can stop the heart. People can have heart attacks from getting into extremely cold water, like a melted mountain stream that's been frozen all winter, or has been very, very cold or as a snow pack going into it. If very cold, you can indeed have a heart attack. So please be smart about how cold and what bodies of cold water you happen to put yourself into. But it is absolutely true that provided it safe, getting into a cold water is always going to be easier to do quickly and is going to be easier to do up to your neck. In fact, you actually want to get your shoulders submerged. There are a number of other things you can do if you really want and it's safe to do. You can put your face under and activate the so-called dive reflex, which also makes the tolerance of cold easier believe it or not. So it's very counterintuitive. It's like getting into water faster and more completely you will experience as less uncomfortable, less cold. And indeed that's the case. And that's because these cold receptors are measuring every relative drop in temperature. So every single one is graded as we say in biology, it's not absolute. As an additional point, if you're sitting in a body of cold water and it's not circulating, you'll notice that you start to warm up a little bit. Or even if you feel like you're freezing cold, if you move and that water around you moves, of course, then you'll notice it's got even colder. And that's because there's a thermal layer. You're actually heating up the water that surrounds your body like a halo around every aspect of your body. A sort of silhouette of you of heat where you're heating that water. When you move, you disrupt that thermal layer. Now heat is the opposite. Heat and the heat receptors in your skin respond to absolute changes in temperature. And this is probably because our body and our brain can tolerate drops in temperature much better than it can tolerate increases in temperature safely. So when you move from say a standard outdoor environment, I mean, here in the States we measure in terms of Fahrenheit. So maybe it's a 75 or an 80 degree, or even 90 degree day, and you get into a 100 degrees sauna, or if you're in a cool air conditioned building and you go outside and it's very warm outside, you sort of feel like the heat hits you all at once, boom. Hits you all at once, kind of like a slap in the face, but then it will just stay at that level. Your body will acclimate to that particular temperature. However, if that temperature is very, very high, you'll notice that your experience of that heat and your experience of kind of pain and discomfort and your desire to get out of that heat will tend to persist. You don't really adapt in the same way. And certain people who are really good at handling very hot sauna, get better at this. You learned to calm your breathing, et cetera, lower your autonomic arousal. Obviously you don't want to let your body temperature go too high because neurons cook, they die. If neurons die, they don't come back and that's bad. Many people unfortunately harm themselves with hyperthermia. Everyone has a different threshold for this, but in general, you don't want your body temperature to go up too high. That's why a fever of like 103 starts to become worrisome 104. You really get concerned if and it goes up into that range or higher, that's when you need to really cool down the body or get to hospital so they can cool you down. Heat is measured in absolute terms by the neurons. So gradually moving into heat makes sense, and finding that threshold, which is safe and comfortable for you, or if it's uncomfortable, at least resides within that realm of safety. So that's heat and cold, and those are sort of non-negotiables. You can try and lower your level of arousal. In fact, many people who get into a cold shower and ice bath I think the recommendation that I always give is that you have two possible approaches to that. You can either try and relax yourself, kind of just stay calm within the cold, or you can lean into it. You can actually take mental steps to generate more adrenaline to kind of meet the demands of that cold. And at some point we'll do a whole episode on how to use cold and heat to certain advantages we've done a little bit of this in past episodes using the cold to supercharge human performance and things of that sort. But in general, cold is measured in relative terms. And therefore getting in all at once is a good idea provided you can do it safely. And heat is measured in absolute levels by your brain and body and therefore you want to actually move into it gradually. So it's the kind of the inverse of what you might think. One of the most important things to understand about the experience of pain and to really illustrate just how subjective pain really is, is that our experience of pain and the degree of damage to our body are not always correlated. And in fact, sometimes can be in opposite directions. A good example of this would be x-rays. We all occasionally get x-rays at least in the US we get x-rays when we go to the dentist from time to time, and the occasional x-ray might be safe depending on who you are provide you're not pregnant, et cetera. I've gone to the dentist. They put you in the chair, they cover you with the lead blanket, and then they run behind the screen to protect themselves. And they beam me with the x-rays to get a picture of your teeth and your jaws and your skull, et cetera. Well, if you were to get too many x-rays, you could severely damage the tissues of your body, but you don't experience any pain during the x-ray itself. In contrast, you can think that your body is damaged and experienced extreme pain and yet your body can have no damage. A classic example of this was published in the British Journal of Medicine, in which a construction worker fell from I think it was a second story, which he was working and a nail went up and through his boot and he looked down and he saw the nail going through his boot and he was in absolute excruciating pain. They took him to the hospital and because the nail was so long and because of where it had entered, it exited the boot, they had to cut away the boot in order to get to the nail. And when they did that, they revealed that the nail had passed between two of his toes. It had actually failed to impale his body in any way. And yet the view, the perception of that nail entering his boot at one end and exiting the boot at the other was sufficient to create the experience of a nail that had gone through his foot. And the moment he realized that that nail had not gone through his foot, the pain completely evaporated. And this has been demonstrated numerous times. People that work in emergency rooms actually see variations on this. Not always that extreme, but many times what we see and how we perceive that wound or that event has a profound influence on how we experience pain. And I mentioned this, not just because it's a kind of sensational and fantastic example of this extreme, subjective nature of pain, but also because it brings us back to this element which is, we don't know how other people feel. Not just about pain, but about pleasure. We think we do, we have some general sense of whether or not an event ought to be painful or pleasurable, but actually we barely understand how we feel let alone how other people feel, and we can be badly wrong about how we feel meaning we can misinterpret our own sense of pain or our own sense of pleasure depending on what we see with our eyes and what we hear with our ears. So we hear a scream like a shrill scream, and we think it must be pain. And if we look at something that's happening to somebody and it fits a prior category or a prior representation of what we would consider painful stimulus, well, then we think that they're an extreme pain, but actually they might not be in pain at all. Now this highly subjective nature of pain and the way in which we use our visual system to interpret other people's pain and our own pain has actually been leveraged to treat a very extreme form of chronic pain. And it's an absolutely fascinating area of biology and neuroscience. And it's one that we can actually all leverage toward reducing our own levels of pain whenever we are injured. Or believe it or not, even in chronic pain. To describe this area of science requires a kind of extreme example, but I want to be clear that even if you don't suffer from this extreme example, there's relevance and a tool to extract for you. The extreme example is that of an amputated digit, meaning one of your fingers or your toes, or of an amputated limb. So people that have digits or limbs that are gone missing from an injury or surgical removal, will often have the experience that it's still there. The so-called phantom limb phenomenon. Now, why would that be? Well, when you remove a particular finger or limb, obviously that finger and limb is gone and the dorsal root ganglion neuron that would normally send a wire out to that particular region of the body, that wire is no longer there because that portion of the body is no longer there. And in some cases, those neurons die almost always, but not always. However, the map your so-called homunculus, your representation of yourself in the brain is still there. And this map, the so-called homunculus map that you have in that I have is very plastic. It can change. And so as a consequence areas of the map that adjacent to one another can actually start to invade other areas of the map. So for instance, there are neuroimaging studies that have documented that somebody that has say a complete removal of their left arm, the representation of their left arm still exists in the cortex. And experimentally if one is to stimulate that area of the cortex, that person, and if that person were you, would experience having that arm that it were being stimulated, even though it's not there. Now, someone who has an amputated arm doesn't need to have their brain stimulated in order to have the experience of that phantom limb being present. In fact, many people who have limbs that were amputated feel as if that limb is still present even though obviously it's not. And no matter how many times they look to the stump and just see a stump, somehow it doesn't reorganize that homunculus so-called central brain map. Now, that would be fine. You might even think that would be better, better to think you have the arm there than to feel as if it's missing, and yet many people who have amputated limbs report phantom limb pain. They don't feel that the arm is just casually draped next to them. They feel as if it's bunched up and it's an extreme pain. In fact, this kind of contorted stance that I'm taking right here in my chair is not unlike the way that these patients described this. They feel as if it's kind of cramped up, it's very uncomfortable for them. Now, and absolutely creative and you could even say genius scientists by the name of Ramachandra. That's actually his last name, his complete name is a little bit more complicated. So you all almost always hear Ramachandran referred to as Ramachandran or V.S Ramachandran because his full name is Vilayanur Subramanian Ramachandran. So a lot of letters in there, a lot of vowels, but Ramachandran is a neuroscientist. He was actually a colleague of mine when my lab was formerly at the University of California, San Diego. Has done a lot of work on this phantom limb phenomenon. And Ramachandra actually started off as a vision scientist. And he understood the power of the visual system in dictating our experience of things like pain and pleasure. And so what he developed was a very low technology yet neuroscientifically sophisticated treatment for phantom limb. It consisted of a box, literally a box that had mirrors inside of it. And the patient would put the intact hand or limb into one side, and obviously they couldn't put the amputated limb into the other side, but because of the configuration of the mirrors, it appeared as though they had two symmetric limbs inside the box. And then he would have them look at that limb and move it around. And as they would do this, they would report real time movement, or I should say real time perception of movement in the phantom limb. Now this is absolutely incredible but makes total sense when you think about the so-called top down or contextual modulation of our sensory experience, remember it's anticipation, it's anxiety, it's interpretation of what's happening that drives our perception of what's happening. And so, as he would have these patients move their intact limb to a more relaxed position, the patients would feel as if the phantom limb were relaxing. And this was used successfully to treat phantom limb pain in a number of different people. It didn't always work. And you can imagine sometimes it might be a little trickier like for a leg although there have been leg boxes that have been developed and arranged for this purpose. And what was remarkable is that they could finish these experiments and have the patient, the person enter a state of relaxation, reduced the pain in the phantom limb, and it would stay there even though, of course, as they exited the mirror box, they would go about their life and use their intact limb for its various purposes. I love this experiment because it really speaks to the subjective nature of pain and pleasure. It speaks to the power of the visual system, like what we see just like the nail through the boot experiment. What we see profoundly impacts our experience of pleasure and pain in this case pain. Now, there's another aspect to the phantom limb experience and of these maps, the so-called homunculus maps in the cortex that Ramachandran worked on, which has very interesting and reveals the degree to which these maps are plastic or can change in response to experience. Turns out that because of the locations of different body part representations within these maps, certain parts of our body that normally we don't think of as related can start to create merged experiences. What do I mean by that? Well, Ramchandran described a patient who had a somewhat odd experience of having lost their foot. So they actually had their foot amputated about midway up the Achilles. So lower portion of the calf and foot. I don't recall what the reason was for having it removed. And fortunately for this patient, they did not experience pain in that portion of their body, but rather they confided in him that whenever they would have sex, they would experience their orgasm in their phantom foot in addition to in their genitals, of course. And Ramachandra understood the homunculus map. And he understood that this was because the representation of the foot within the homunculus actually lies adjacent to, and is somewhat interdigitated with it actually kind of merges with the representation of the genitalia. Now that's a weird situation. And yet you now know that the density of innovation of the feet and the genitalia, as well as the lips and the face are actually the highest sensory innervation that you have in your entire body. And this speaks to, I think, a more important general principle for all people of the experience of pleasure or pain, which is that an aspect of our pain or pleasure can be highly localized. It can be because of a cut to a particular location on the body or it can because of a fall injury or a kind of bruise on one side of our body. And yet our experience of pleasure and pain can also be an almost a body-wide experience. And yet it's always most rich. It's always most heightened in these regions of our body that have dense sensory innervation. So we experience pain and pleasure according to local phenomenon receptors in the skin, and this homunculus map that has all these different territories, but because of the way that those territories are related, this kind of wild example of somebody experiencing orgasm in their phantom foot speaks to the larger experience. The more typical rather experience that I should say that all people have, which is that pleasure can be body-wide or we can experience it in our face or the bottoms of our feet and other areas of the body that we experience pleasure and similarly with pain. And that brings us to the topic of whole body pain, not just localized pain, as well as whole body pleasure not just localized pleasure. There are a number of examples of whole body pain that people suffer from. And one common one is called fibromyalgia. I want to just first share with you a little bit of medical insight. A few months back, I did an Instagram live with Dr. Sean Mackey who's an MD medical doctor and a PhD at Stanford School of Medicine that was recorded and placed on my Instagram. If you want to check it out, we can provide a link to that in the show notes. Dr. Mackey is the Chief of the Division of Pain at Stanford School of Medicine. So he's a scientist. He studies pain and he treats patients dealing with various forms of pain, whole body pain, like fibromyalgia, acute pain, et cetera. And he shared with me something very interesting, which is that anytime you hear or see the word syndrome, that means the medical establishment does not understand what's going on. A syndrome is a constellation of symptoms that point in a particular direction or some general set of directions about what could be going on, but it doesn't reveal a true underlying disease necessarily. It could be aggregative diseases or it could be something else entirely. And I want to make sure that I emphasize the so-called psychosomatic phenomenon. I think sometimes we hear psychosomatic and we interpret that as meaning all in one's head. But I think it's important to remember that everything is neural, whether that's pain in your body 'cause you have a gaping wound and you're hemorrhaging out of that wound or whether or not it's pain for which you cannot explain it on the basis of any kind of injury. It's all neural. So saying body, brain, or psychosomatic it's kind of irrelevant. And I hope someday we move past that language. Psychosomatic is interesting. There was a paper that was published in 2015, and then again in 2020 a different paper focused on the so-called psychogenic fevers or psychosomatic effects. I just briefly want to mention this because it relates back to pain. These studies have shown that there are areas of the so-called thalamus, which integrates and filter sensory information of different kinds. And within the brainstem, an area called the DMH and I can also provide a link to this study if you like, that shows that there is a true neurological basis. There are brain areas and circuits that are related to what's called psychogenic fever when we are stressed. And in particular, if we think that we were injured or that we were infected by something, we can actually generate a true fever. It is not an imagined fever. It is our thinking generating an increase in body temperature. And so this has been called psychosomatic. It's been called psychogenic, but it has a neural basis. So when we hear syndrome and a patient comes into a clinic and says that they suffer for instance, from something which is very controversial frankly like chronic fatigue syndrome, some physicians believe that it reflects a real underlying medical condition, others don't. However, syndrome means we don't understand. And that doesn't mean something doesn't exist. Fibromyalgia or whole body pain for a long time was written off or kind of explained away by physicians and scientists frankly, my community as one of these syndromes. It couldn't be explained. However, now there is what I would consider and I think others would and should consider from understanding of at least one of the bases for this whole body pain. And that's activation of a particular cell type called glial. And there's a receptor on these glial for those of you that want to know called the toll 4 receptor and activation of the toll 4 receptor is related to certain forms of whole body pain and fibromyalgia. Now, what treatments exist for fibromyalgia. And even if you don't suffer from fibromyalgia, and even if you don't know anyone who does this is important information because what I'm about to tell you relate to how you and your body, which is you of course can deal with pain of any kind. And there are actually things that one can do and take that can encourage nerve health in general. In other conditions like diabetic neuropathy, but in all individuals. So there are clinical data using a prescription drug. This is work that actually was done by Dr. Mackey and colleagues. The drug is called naltrexone. Naltrexone is actually used for the treatment of various opioid addictions and things of that sort, but it turns out that a very low dose, I believe it was a one 10th the size of the typical dose of naltrexone has been shown to have some success in dealing with and treating certain forms of fibromyalgia. And it has that success because of its ability to bind to and block these toll four receptors on glial. So this so-called syndrome or this thing that previously was called a syndrome, fibromyalgia actually has a biological basis. It was not just inpatients heads. And I really tip my hat to the medical establishment including Dr. Mackey and others who explored the potential underlying biologies of things like fibromyalgia and are starting to arrive at treatments. Now, I'm not a physician, I'm a professor, so I'm not prescribing anything. You should talk to your doctor of course, if you have fibromyalgia or other forms of chronic or whole body pain to explore whether or not these low dose naltrexone treatments are right for you. But I think it's a beautiful case study if you will, not a case study of an individual patient, but a case in study of linking up the patient's self-report of these experiences and using science to try to establish clinical treatments. There's another treatment, or I should say there's another approach that one could take. And again, I'm not recommending people do this necessarily. You have to determine what's right and say for you, I cannot do that. There's no way your situation's very far too much, and it would be outside of my wheelhouse to prescribe anything, but there's a particular compound which in the United States is sold over the counter and in Europe is prescription. It's one that I've talked about on this podcast before for other purposes. And that compound is acetylcarnitine. Acetylcarnitine as I mentioned is by prescription in most countries in Europe and the US you can buy this over the counter. There is evidence that acetylcarnitine can reduce the symptoms of chronic whole body pain and other certain forms of acute pain at dosages of somewhere between one to three and sometimes four grams per day. Now acetylcarnitine can be taken orally. It's found in 500 milligram capsules, as well as by injection. By injection in the States in the United States that is also requires a prescription or requires a prescription I should say. The over-the-counter forms are generally capsules or powders. Those apparently do not require a prescription. There are several studies exploring acetylcarnitine in this context, as well as for diabetic neuropathy. And what's interesting about acetylcarnitine is it's one of the few compounds that isn't just used for the treatment of pain, but has also been shown in certain contacts to improve peripheral nerve health generally. And for that reason, it's an interesting compound. I've also talked about acetylcarnitine on here previously, because it has robust effects on things like spur motility and health, including the speeds at which sperms swim, how straight they swim turns out that swimming for sperm is more efficient if they swim straight, as opposed to like those kids in on the swim team, they're like banging up against the lane lines and zigzagging all over the place. So it does turn out to be the case that the quickest route between any two places is a straight line and the good sperm know that, and the less good sperm don't seem to know that. And acetylcarnitine seems to facilitate straight swimming trajectories as well as speed of swimming and overall sperm health. And there is evidence from quality peer reviewed studies showing that acetylcarnitine supplementation can also be beneficial for women's fertility in ways that it affects perhaps we don't really know the mechanism, health and status of the egg or egg implantation. There are a large number of studies on acetylcarnitine. You can look those up on Pub Med, if you like, or on examine.com. There are some studies that I don't think are included there which are particularly interesting. One that I just would like to reference the last name of the first author is Mahdavi M-A-H-D-A-V-I. The title of the paper is Effects of l -Carnitine Supplementation on Serum Inflammatory Markers and Matrix Metalloproteinases Enzymes in Females with Knee Osteoarthritis. So this is a randomized double blind placebo controlled pilot study that showed really interesting effects of short term supplementation of acetylcarnitine. Longer term, the effects were less impressive. So it's pretty interesting that this compound has so many different effects. How could it have these effects? Well, it appears that it's having these effects through its impact on the so-called inflammatory cytokines. Inflammatory cytokines for those of you that don't know are secreted by the immune system in response to different stressors, physical stressors, mental stressors too food that you eat that isn't good for you. The so-called hidden sugars. Yes, will increase inflammation if they're ingested too often, or in amounts that are too high in quantity. Things like Interleukin 1 beta, things like C-reactive protein, things like interleukin 6. Interleukin 6 is kind of the generic inflammatory marker that all studies refer to. And yet there are other interleukins, please note that there are other interleukins like interleukin 10 that are anti-inflammatory. So immune system can secrete inflammatory molecules to deal with wounds and stress and things. And in the short term that's good, and in the longterm that's bad. And it can secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines like IL10. And these matrix metalloproteinases, it's kind of a mouthful, but these matrix metalloproteinases are very interesting. Anytime you see A-S-E, ASE that's generally an enzyme, which means that these compounds in this case, these matrix metalloproteinases are used to break down certain elements around wounds and scoring which might sound like a bad thing, but in some cases is good because it allows certain cells like glial cells so-called microglia to come in like low ambulances, like low paramedics and clean up wounds. So scarring and inflammation is kind of a double-edged sword. It can be good, but too much scarring. If it contains a wound too much, doesn't allow the infiltration of cell types to move in and take care of that wound and heal it up. So it appears that L-carnitine is impacting a number of different processes, both to impact pain and perhaps, and I want to underscore perhaps, but there are good studies happening now, perhaps accelerate wound healing as well. As long as we're talking about acute pain and chronic pain and supplementation and non-prescription drugs, at least in the United States that people can take to deal with pain of various kinds, I'd be remiss if I didn't mention the two that I get asked most often about, which are agmatine and S-adenosyl-L-methionine, which is sometimes called SAMe. Both of those have been shown to have some impact categorized on examine as notable impact on various forms of pain, due to osteoarthritis, or due to injury of various kinds of indifferent subject population, men, women, people of different ages, et cetera. SAMe in particular has been interesting because it's been shown head to head with drugs like Naproxen and other drugs of that sort, which are well established and sold over the counter in the US to work at least as well as some of those compounds at certain doses. But it's also shown that SAMe and some of those things take more time in order to have those effects. In fact, head to head with things like Neproxin have been shown that they can take up to a month in order to have the pain relieving effect. Now, whether or not that makes them a better choice or a worst choice really depends on your circumstances. I'm certainly not recommending that anybody take anything, but I do think it's interesting and important to point out that things like agmatine, things like SAMe have been shown under certain circumstances to be beneficial for pain and they are outside the realm of prescription drugs. I think this is a growing area of some people call them supplements, some people call them nutraceuticals. Look, at the end of the day these are compounds that affect cellular processes. And the more that we understand how they affect those cellar processes as we now do for things like acetylcarnitine, I think the more trust that we can put into them, or the more to which we might want to avoid them because of some of the side effects or contra-indications that those compounds could have. If you're interested in those other compounds, I do invite you as I always do to check out examine.com, but also to do your research on those compounds by simply putting them into Google or putting them into PubMed, which would be even better. And if you are going to go into PubMed, if you're going to start playing scientist, which I do encourage you to do, I would encourage you to not just read abstracts, but if you can, if the studies are freely available, I realized not all of them are freely available to try and read those studies at least to the extent that you can. There's a particularly nice study that you might look at that was published in 2010 in Pain Medicine, which is Keynan et al K-E-Y-N-A-N, which looked at the safety and efficacy of dietary agmatine sulfate on lumbar disc associated radiculopathy not laughing at the condition. It's a painful condition that describes a, it's a kind of a range of symptoms that relate to pinching of nerves. The spinal columns, I was laughing at my pronunciation of it. That particular study is quite good. And the conclusion of that study that they drew was that there were limited side effects and that dietary agmatine sulfate is safe and efficacious for treating and alleviating pain and improving quality of life and lumbar-disc associated pain. However, there were very specific dosage regimens that were described there and duration of treatment. And so you should not take anything that I say or that study to mean that you can just take this stuff willy-nilly or at any concentration of course, or dose. You always want to pay attention to what the science says. That paper fortunately is freely available online. And we will also provide a link to that study. For those of you that are interested in SAMe and its usage for the treatment of various types of pain, and perhaps other benefits, a number of companies have stopped making SAMe instead what they're now focusing on is what they think is a better or more bioavailable alternative, which is 5-methyltetrahydrofolate or 5-MTHF. This molecule is necessary for converting homocysteine to methionine, which is then converted to SAMe so rather than taking SAMe directly, the idea is to take something that's upstream of SAMe and make more SAMe endogenously available. This is a different strategy. I've talked about this strategy before for increasing other things like growth hormone, et cetera. There's always this question of whether or not in trying to increase the amount of a particular molecule in the body, whether or not taking that specific molecule was the best thing or working further upstream as it's referred to working on the precursor or increasing the levels of the precursor is the better way to go. It appears that this 5-MTHF is the strategy that people are now taking in place of taking SAMe directly. So in other words, they're taking this in order to get elevated levels of SAMe. Now, I'd like to turn our attention to a completely non drug, non supplement related approach to dealing with pain. And it's one that has existed for thousands of years. And that only recently has the Western scientific community started to pay serious attention to, but they have started to pay serious attention to it. And there is terrific mechanistic science to now explain how and why acupuncture can work very well for the treatment of certain forms of pain. Now, first off, I want to tell you what was told to me by our director or Chief of the Pain Division at Stanford School of Medicine, Dr. Sean Mackey, which was that some people respond very well to acupuncture and others do not. And the challenge is identifying who'll respond well and who won't respond well. Now, when I say won't respond well, that doesn't necessarily mean that they responded in a negative way, that it was bad for them, but it does appear that a fraction of people experienced tremendous pain relief from acupuncture and others experience none at all or very little to the point where they have to seek out other forms of treatment. The science on this is still ongoing. There was actually an excellent paper published on this in the Journal of the American Medical Association, one of the premier medical clinical journals. And it basically reinforced the idea that you have responders and non-responders. A number of laboratories have started to explore how acupuncture works. And one of the premier laboratories for this is Qiufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School. Qiufu has spent many years studying the pain system and a system that's related to the pain system, which is the system that controls our sensation of itch. Just as a brief aside about itch, itch and pain are often co associated with one another. I was recently in Texas, and I will tell you, they have some mean mosquitoes. They're small, but whatever they're injecting into your skin. Well, here I am talking now about my subjective experience of pain, whatever they injected into my skin felt to me like the most extreme mosquito bites I've ever had, not while they were biting me, not while they were injecting the venom, but boy, those Texas mosquitoes make me itch. How do they do it? Well, their venom creates little packets of so-called histamine that travel around those packets are called mast cells, little packets of histamine that go to that location and make me and presumably you want to scratch those mosquito bites. I scratch mine you scratch yours, but we both scratch our mosquito bites. And when we do that, the histamines are released. That gets red and inflamed and the itch even worse. The inflammation is actually caused by the histamine. Well, that experience of inflammation and pain and itch is what we call a pyrogenic experience. So we we have pain which is nociception, essentially, I know that the pain of aficionado always get a little upset because they say, oh, there's no such thing as as a pain receptor, it's no susceptive receptors and pain is subjective experience. Yes, I acknowledge all that. But for fluency, let's just think about pain as a certain experience and itch as a separate experience, but they often exist together because those mosquito bites were what I would call painful, or at least not pleasant. They didn't just itch, they were also painful nuts because itch brings with it inflammation and inflammation often brings with it pain relief, but it can also bring with it the sensation of pain. So itch and pain are two separate phenomenon. It was actually discovered through a really interesting phenomenon that relates to something that is actually consumed in supplement form, which is this tropical legume. It's actually a bean called Mucuna pruriens. That's M-U-C-U-N-A that's one word P-R-U-I-E-N-S Mucuna pruriens is a bean, it's as legume that this bean is 99% L-DOPA. It's dopamine or rather it's the precursor to dopamine and people buy this stuff and take it over the counter as ways to increase their levels of dopamine. It does make you feel really dopamine doubt, meaning it makes you feel a little high and really motivated and really energetic a lot like other drugs that will do that. I don't necessarily recommend taking Mucuna pruriens. I personally don't like taking it. Doesn't make me feel good. I crash really hard when I take it. But on the outside of this bean is a compound that makes people itch. So they remove this when you take it in supplement form. In fact, it's usually in capsule form, but the outside of this bean, it's like a hairy bean. And those little hairs contain a compound, which was actually used to study and identify these itchy receptors in the skin. So we don't have time to go into all the details of itch, but it's pretty interesting that you have these compounds out in nature that can make us itch. Inside them they have dopamine. I mean, this is really weird, but plant compounds are really powerful. So don't let anyone tell you that because something's from a plant or an earth that it's not powerful. There are very powerful plant and herb compounds. Mucuna prurien being one of them with dopamine on the inside and itchy stuff on the outside. Now, what does this all have to do with acupuncture? Well, Qiufu Ma's lab has not just identified the itch pathway, this pruritus genes as they're called, which causes itch and the pyrogenic phenomenon of itch being separate from pain. His lab has also studied how acupuncture causes relief of, but also can exacerbate pain. Now, the form of acupuncture that they explored was one that's commonly in use called electroacupuncture. So this isn't just putting little needles into different parts of the body. These needles are able to pass an electrical current, not magically, but because they have a little wire going back to a device and you can pass electrical current. Here's what they found. This is a study published in the journal neuron Cell Press journal, excellent journal, very high stringency. So what Qiufu Ma's lab found was that if electroacupuncture is provided to the abdomen, to the stomach area, it creates activation of what are called the sympathetic ganglia. These have nothing to do with sympathy in the emotional sense has to do with the stress response. Sympa just means together. So it activated a bunch of neurons along the spinal cord. And the activation of these neurons evolves neural adrenaline and something called NPY neuropeptide Y. The long and short of it is that stimulating the abdomen with electroacupuncture was either anti-inflammatory or it could cause inflammation. It could actually exacerbate inflammation depending on whether or not it was of low or high intensity. Now that makes it a very precarious technique. And this may speak to some of the reason why some people report relief from acupuncture and others do not. However, they went a step further and stimulated other areas of the body using electroacupuncture. And what they found is that stimulation of the legs of the hind limbs, as it's called an animals, and the legs in humans caused a circuit, a neural circuit to be activated that goes from the legs up to an area of the base of the brain called the DMV not the DMH, which I mentioned earlier, but the DMV like you go to the DMV, which is a miserable experience for most people, forgive me, DMV employees, but let's be honest most people don't enjoy going to the DMV as patrons, but we have to so we go. The DMV and low intensity stimulation, this electroacupuncture of the hind limbs activated the DMV and activated the adrenal glands, which sit at top of your kidneys and cause the release of what are called catecholamines. And those were strongly anti-inflammatory. In other words, electroacupuncture of the legs and feet can, if done correctly, be anti-inflammatory and reduce symptoms of pain. And can we think accelerate wound healing because activations of these catecholaminergic pathways can accelerate wound healing as well. So the takeaway from this is that while there are thousands of years and millions of subjects involved in explorations of electroacupuncture and acupuncture, Western medicine is starting to come into this and start to explore underlying mechanism. Now, for those of you that love acupuncture and are real proponents of it, it's worked for you, you might say, well, why does Western medicine even need to come into this? Why should they even be exploring this? But we should all be relieved that they are because what's starting to happen now is that as the mechanistic basis for this is starting to come to light, insurance coverage of things like acupuncture is starting to emerge as well. And this is in contrast to other therapies for which there's a lot of anecdotal evidence, but very little mechanistic understanding. One example of that would be laser photo biomodulation the use of lasers of different types really to treat pain and to accelerate wound healing. A lot of people claim that this can really help them. However, most places, at least in the States, won't cover this with insurance or don't perform this in standard clinics. And the reason is the underlying mechanism isn't known. I'm not going to get into the argument about whether or not mechanistic understanding should or should not be required in order to have insurance coverage of things that work. That's not what this is about. And that actually will be a boring discussion because I'm shouting at a tunnel through you. And I wouldn't be able to hear you shout back no matter what your stance on that is, but just trust me when I say that I am both relieved and delighted to hear that excellent medical institutions like Stanford are starting to think about electroacupuncture and how it can work. That places like Harvard Medical School are starting to explore this at a mechanistic level. And I do believe that there's an open-mindedness that starting to emerge for instance, the National Institutes of Health, not only has an institute for mental health and cancer research and an eye institute, but now complementary health, the so-called NCCIH. National Institutes of Complementary Health that is exploring things like electroacupuncture, meditation, various supplements and things of those sort. I do think that we're entering a new realm in which things like pain and pain management will be met with more openness by all physicians, at least that's my hope. So please take that into consideration right now. The mechanistic evidence for laser photobiomodulation is not strong. One of the major issues or the barriers to that is that most of the studies that are out there were actually paid for by companies that build devices for laser photobiomodulation. And so we really need independent studies funded by federal institutions that have no bias or financial relationship in order to gain trust in whatever data happen to emerge. There is a technique that at one time was considered alternative, but now has a lot of mechanistic science to explain how it works, and it does indeed work for the treatment of chronic and also for acute pain. And that treatment is hypnosis in particular self-hypnosis. Now, my colleague at Stanford in fact, my collaborator, Dr. David Spiegel, our Associate Chair of Psychiatry has devoted his professional life to developing hypnosis tools that people can use to help them sleep better, focus better, stay motivated, et cetera. While most people hear hypnosis and they think, oh, this is stage hypnosis. People walking around like chickens are being forced to laugh or fall asleep on command, et cetera. This is completely different than all that. This is self hypnosis and there are now dozens, if not more quality peer reviewed studies published in excellent journals done by Dr. Spiegel and others at other universities. It really all has to do with how self-hypnosis can modulate activity of the prefrontal cortex and related structures like the insula. The prefrontal cortex is involved in our executive function as it's called, our planning, our decision making, but also how we interpret context, what the meaning of a given sensation is. And that's extremely powerful. I just want to remind everybody that the currency of the brain and body has not changed in hundreds of thousands of years. It's always been dopamine, serotonin, glutamate, GABA, testosterone, estrogen. What's changed are the contingencies, the events in the world that drive whether or not we get an increase or decrease in testosterone or estrogen, the events in the world that dictate whether or not we get an increase or a decrease in dopamine. Believe me, the events that drove those increases and decreases were very different even a 100 years ago than they are now. And as we create new things and societies change, et cetera, they will continue to exchange information in the same currency, which is dopamine, serotonin, and all these other neuromodulators and chemicals. Hypnosis takes advantage of this by allowing an individual, you, if you like to change the way that you interpret particular events and to actually experience what would be painful as less painful or not painful. And that's just the example of pain. Hypnosis is powerful for other reasons too. It actually can help rewire neural circuits so that you don't experience as much pain so that you can sleep faster, focus faster. If this is all sounding very fantastical well, it's supported by data. The data are that when people do self-hypnosis even brief self-hypnosis of 10 or 15 minutes, a few times a week, maybe even returned to that hypnosis by just using a one minute a day hypnosis, they can achieve significant and often very impressive degrees of pain relief in chronic pain whether or not that chronic pain arises through things like fibromyalgia or through other sources. If you want to check this out, there's a wonderful zero cost resource that's grounded in this work. It's the app reveri.com. So R-E-V-E-R-I.com. There you can download a zero cost app for Apple phones or for Android phones. And there are a variety of different hypnosis scripts. These are actually self hypnosis scripts, and you'll actually hear Dr. David Spiegel talking to you. He can teach you about hypnosis and how it works. There are links to scientific studies that web address that I gave you before reveri.com. You can see the various studies and the various write-ups related to those studies and how this all works. And they're simple protocols. You just click on a tab and you listen to the self-hypnosis and it will take you into hypnosis. And several of those hypnosis grips have been shown clinically to relieve certain patterns of chronic pain. So it's a powerful tool, and I encourage you not to write off the non-drug non supplement tools as less than powerful because indeed many people experience tremendous relief from them. And of course, they also can be combined with drug treatments if that's right for you or with supplements and things of that sort to treat pain, if that's right for you. So again, electroacupuncture now often supported by insurance, not always, but often. Great mechanistic data starting to emerge. Hypnosis, terrific tool. There's even the self-hypnosis tool that one can access through the zero cost app Reveri and lots of great clinical data and scientific mechanistic data. There are neuro imaging studies showing that different brain areas are activated in hypnosis the so-called default network, kind of where your brains is kind of idols and the different circuits that are active in at rest shift with hypnosis and shift long-term in ways that positively conserve you. And then these things like laser photobiomodulation still more or less in that experimental medical community. I should say, Western Medical Community, not so certain, but hopefully there will be data soon, and hopefully those data will point to mechanisms that allow the insurance companies and other sort of medical bodies to support them if indeed they have a mechanistic basis. I just want to briefly touch on a common method of pain relief that speaks to a more general principle of how things like electroacupuncture, and also some of these new emerging techniques of kind of like active tissue release and this principle that you hear a lot about in sports medicine now that when you have pain or injury at one site, that you should provide pressure above and below that site. You may have seen this in the Olympics, which is ongoing now where people will put tape on their body at certain locations oftentimes. The logic or what they're saying is that this is designed to create relief in a joint or in a limb that's below the tape, not necessarily under the tape, but above or below. So for instance, if there's pain in one shoulder, sometimes we'll put it on the trapezius muscle or things of that sort. It turns out that there is a basis for this because of the way that these different nerves run in from the skin and from the muscles up into the spinal cord and into the brainstem providing pressure on one nerve pathway can often impact another pathway. And the simplest and most common example of this is one that we all do instinctually or intuitively even animals do this. This is something that in the textbooks is all is called the Gate Theory of Pain developed by Melzack and Wall kind of classic theory. Basically we have receptors in our skin, the so-called C fibers, that's just a name for these little wires that come from a particular class of DRGs that's very thin that brings about certain kinds of nasal scepter information. I want to say pain information, but then the pain people believe are not their pain people. Sometimes they're a pain because what they tell me is they're on pain receptors okay, nociceptors That information comes in C fibers and what happens when we injure something well, provided that we won't damage it worse by touching it, oftentimes what we will do is we will rub the source of pain or the location in which we were experiencing pain. And it turns out that's not an unuseful thing to do. When we rub our skin or an area, or we provide pressure nearby it, we activate the so-called A fibers, the bigger wires and neurons that innovate, meaning they jut into that area of skin. And those A fibers, the ones that respond to mechanical pressure actually are able to inhibit those C fibers, the ones that are carrying that so-called pain information. So rubbing an area or providing pressure above or below an injury actually provides real pain relief support for the location of that injury or that pain because of the way that these different patterns or these different types of neurons interact with one another. And when I say it inhibits it, I don't mean that it like shouts at it, what it does is it releases it's literally kind of like vomits up a little bit of a neurotransmitter called GABA. And GABA is a neurotransmitter that inhibits it quiets the activity of other neurons. And so it's acting as kind of an analgesic, if you will, it's acting as its own form of drug that you make with your body to quiet the activity of these pain neurons. So rubbing a wound provided it doesn't damage the wound worse or providing pressure above or below typically it's above a particular injury can have a real effect in relieving some of the pain of that injury. And some people have speculated this as through fascia, or this is through other bodily organs and tissues. And it might be we're going to do a whole episode on fascia. It's extremely interesting tissue, but right now it seems that the main source of that pain relief is through this A fiber inhibition of these C fibers so-called Melzack and Wall Gate Theory of Pain if you'd like to look it up and learn about that further. Now, let's talk about a phenomenon that has long intrigued and perplexed people for probably thousands of years. And that's redheads. You may have heard before that redheads have a higher pain threshold than other individuals. And indeed, that is true. There's now a study that looked at this mechanistically. There's a gene called the MC1R gene. And this MC1R gene encodes for a number of different proteins. Some of those proteins of course are related to the production of melanin. This is why redheads often not always, but often are very fair skinned. Sometimes have freckles, not always. And of course have red hair. Some people are really intense ginger's not psychologically or emotionally intense perhaps that too, but meaning their hair is very, very red. Others, it's a lighter red. So of course there's variation here, but this gene, this MC1R gene is associated with a pathway that relates to something that I've talked about on this podcast before during the episode on hunger and feeding and this is POMC. POMC stands for pro-opiomelanocortin and POMC is cut up. It's cleaved into different hormones, including one that enhances pain perception. This is melanocyte stimulating hormone. And another one that blocks pain beta endorphin. Now, if you listen to the episodes on testosterone and estrogen and the episodes on hunger and feeding, some of these molecules will start to ring a bell. Things like melano stimulating hormone relate to pigmentation of the skin relate to sexual arousal, et cetera, but it turns out that in red heads, because of the fact that they have this gene, this MC1R gene, the POMC Pro-opiomelanocortin, that's cut into different hormones, melanocyte-stimulating hormones and another one beta endorphin. Beta endorphin should cue you to the fact that this is in the pain pathway. The endorphins are endogenously made, meaning made within our body opioids. They actually make us feel numb in response to certain kinds of pain. Now, not completely numb, but they numb or reduce our perception of pain because of the ways in which they are released from certain brain centers. We'll talk about those brain centers in a moment. So what's really interesting is that this study showed that the presence of these hormones is in everybody. We all have melanocortin 4, we all have beta endorphins. We all have POMC et cetera, but red heads make more of these endogenous endorphins. And that's interesting. It allows them to buffer against the pain response. I have a personal anecdote to share with you about this red head and heightened levels of pain tolerance phenomenon. Obviously I'm not a redhead. I don't dye my hair, but my partner for many years was a red head and still is a red head. She had bright red hair and had that since childhood. Well, we had the fortunate experience of becoming friends with Wim Hof and family. They actually came out to visit us and did a series of seminars in the bay area. This was in 2016, as I recall. And my partner, she had never done an ice bath. She had never done any kind of real cold water exposure experience before, but as one particular gathering as is often the case when women's around, there was an ice bath and a number of people were getting into this thing. This was actually before a dinner event. And I think for most people who have never done an ice bath getting in for 30 seconds or a minute is tolerable, but it takes some effort. It takes some willpower and take some overcoming that pain barrier 'cause it is a little bit painful. Not a lot. Some people can stay in longer three minutes, five minutes without much discomfort. What was incredible is that without any desire to compete with anybody else, my partner redhead got into the ice bath and just like sat there for 10 minutes. In fact, at one point she just kind of turned to me and said, "I don't really feel pain. I'm not really in pain." And Wim loved this. Wim thought it was great. He thought it was the most terrific thing in the world. And he got back in the ice bath and they became fast friends, and I think they're probably still fast friends. So in any event, that's an end of one. What we call an anecdata example. Anecdata is not really a term that we should use too much 'cause it's N of one anecdotes are just that. They're just anecdotes. But it's been described many times in various clinics by anesthesiologists, by observation of coaches, et cetera, that redheads men and women who are redheads seem to have this higher pain threshold. And it does seem to be because their body naturally produces ways to counter the pain response. They produce their own endogenous opioids. Now this of course should not be taken to mean that redheads can tolerate more pain and therefore should be subjected to more pain, all it means is that their threshold for pain on average, not all of them, but on average is shifted higher than that of other individuals. And it remains to be determined whether or not other light skin, light haired individuals also have a heightened level of pain threshold. And I should mention because I mentioned the ice bath that of course pain threshold is something that can be built up and provide you do that safely in ways that aren't damaging your tissues because of course, pain is a signal that is designed to help you to keep from harming yourself, but provided that you can do that in a way that's safe and doesn't damage your tissues, increasing your pain threshold through the use of things like ice baths is something that really can be done. It has a lot to do with these contextual or top-down modulations of the experience. You can tell yourself that this is good for me, or I'm doing this by choice or whatever it is. You can distract yourself. There are a huge number of different ways that one could do that. One of the more interesting ways for which there are actually really good scientific data come from my colleagues, Sean Mackey's Lab. And that actually looked at how love and in particular, the experience of obsessive love could actually counter the pain response, not just in redheads, but in everybody. So that study I'll just briefly describe it involved having people come into the laboratory and experience any one or a number of different painful stimuli, but they had selectively recruited subjects that were in new relationships for which there was a high degree of infatuation so much so that the people couldn't stop thinking about or communicating with that new partner up to 80% of their waking time, which is a lot. That constant obsessing about that partner was correlated with. It wasn't causal necessarily, but was correlated with the ability to sustain higher levels of pain than people who were in more typical non obsessive forms of love, longstanding relationships, where there wasn't long obsessive love rather. And of course in this study, there were a lot of good control groups. They included a distractor, they included people obsessing about other things, their pet, et cetera. They included other forms of love and attachment, but it does seem that certain patterns of thinking can allow us to buffer ourselves against the pain response. And that should not be surprising. Certain forms of thinking are associated with the release of particular neuromodulators in particular dopamine. And dopamine, it may seem is kind of the thing that underlies everything, but it's not. Dopamine is a molecule that's associated with novelty expectation, motivation, and reward. We talked about this at the beginning of the episode, that it's really the molecule of expectation and motivation and hope and excitement more than it's associated with the receival of the reward. Well, dopamine is coursing throughout the brain at heightened levels and coursing throughout the body at heightened levels when we fall in love. This probably has some adaptive mechanism that ensure paired bonding between people or who knows, maybe it ensured not bonding to multiple people. Nobody really knows how dopamine functions in terms of pair bonding, but it is known that when people fall in love, new relationships create very high levels of dopamine. And that's probably the mechanistic basis by which these people were able to buffer the pain response by thinking about their partner or this new relationship that they're in almost obsessively or obsessively. Now that raises a deeper question we should always be asking. Yeah, but how, how? Well, the dopamine system can have powerful effects on the inflammation system. And it doesn't do this through mysterious ways. It does this by interacting through the brainstem and some of the neurons that innervate the spleen and other areas of the body, that deploy cells to go combat infection, inflammation, and pain. And the ways in which dopamine can modulate pain, and in this case, this particular study transform our experience of pain. Maybe even to something that's pleasureful is not mysterious. It's really through the activation of brainstem neurons that communicate with areas of our body, that deploy things like immune cells. So for instance, we have neurons in our brain stem that can be modulated by the release of dopamine and those neurons in the brainstem control the release of immune cells from tissues like the spleen or organs like the spleen. And those immune cells can then go combat infection. We've heard before that when we're happy, we're better able to combat infection, deal with pain, deal with all sorts of things that essentially makes us more resilient. And that's not because dopamine is some magic molecule, it's because dopamine affects particular circuits and tells in a very neuro-biological way in a biochemical way tells those cells and circuits that conditions are good. Despite the fact that there's pain in the body conditions are good. You're in love or conditions are good. You want to be in this experience. Or conditions are good this is for a greater cause that you're fighting or suffering for some larger purpose. So all of that has existed largely in the realm of psychology and even motivational literature in this kind of thing, but there's a real mechanistic basis for it. Dopamine is a molecule that can bind to receptor sites on these brain areas. Those brain areas can then modulate the organs and tissues of the body that can allow us to lean into challenge. And those challenges can be infection, it can be physical pain, it can be long bouts of effort that are required of us. And I think many people have described the feeling of being newly in love as a heightened level of energy, a capacity do anything. I mean, the whole concept of a muse is one in which some individual or some thing either imagined or real enters our life and we can use that as fuel. And that fuel is chemical fuel and that chemical fuel is dopamine. And it really does allow for more resilience and can even transform the experience of pain or what would otherwise be pain into an experience of pleasure. So, along those lines, let's talk about pleasure. With all the cells and tissues and machinery related to pain, you might think that our entire touch system is designed to allow us to detect pain and to avoid tissue damage and well, a good percentage of it is devoted to that. A good percentage of it is also devoted to this thing that we call pleasure. And that should come as no surprise. Pleasure isn't just there for our pleasure. It serves adaptive role, and that adaptive role relates to the fact that every species has a primary goal which is to make more of itself otherwise it would go extinct. That process of making more of itself sexual reproduction is closely associated with the sensation and the perception of pleasure. And it's no surprise that not only is the highest density of sensory receptors in and on and around the genitalia, but the process of reproduction evokes sensations and molecules and perceptions associated with pleasure. And the currency of pleasure exists in multiple chemical systems but the primary ones are the dopamine system, which is the anticipation of pleasure and the work required to achieve the ability to experience that pleasure, and the serotonin system which is more closely related to the immediate experience of that pleasure. And from dopamine and serotonin stem out other hormones and molecules, things like oxytocin, which are associated with pair bonding. Oxytocin is more closely associated with the serotonin system biochemically and at the circuit level meaning the areas of the brain and body that manufacture a lot of serotonin, usually not always, but usually contain neurons that also manufacturer and make use of the molecule oxytocin. Those chemicals together create sensations of warmth, of well being, of safety. The dopamine molecule is more closely associated with hormones like testosterone and other molecules involved with pursuit and further effort in order to get more of whatever could potentially cause more release of dopamine. So this is a very broad strokes, no pun intended description of the pleasure system. There are of course, other molecules as well. One in particular that's very interesting is something called PEA. PEA, it stands for Phenethylamine sometimes also referred to as Phenethylamine depending on who you are and where you live, how you pronounce it doesn't really matter. PEA is a molecule, which is incredibly potent at augmenting or increasing the activity of certain cells and neural circuits that relate to the pleasure system. PEA has purportedly been thought to be released in response to ingestion of things like certain forms of dark chocolate. Some people take it in supplement form. It's a bit of a stimulant, but it also seems to heighten the perception of pleasure in response to a particular amount of dopamine and or serotonin. So for instance, in a kind of a arbitrary experiment and units type example, if a given experience evokes a particular amount of serotonin and dopamine and gives rise to a subjective experience of pleasure of say level three out of 10, the ingestion of PEA prior to that experience can increase the rating of that experience as more pleasureful. Maybe a four or a five, or even a six. And PEA is known to be present in or I should say it's releases stimulated by a number of different compounds, such as dark chocolate, certain things like aspartame and certain people can actually increase the amount of PEA released. Some of these glutamate related molecules like aspartame or things are in the glutamate pathway can increase PEA release. And then some people will actually take PEA in supplement form for its mild stimulant properties as well as for increasing the perception of, or the ability to experience pleasure. It's not a sledgehammer. It's not like dopamine itself. People that take things like Mucuna pruriens, L-DOPA or drugs of abuse, which I certainly don't recommend things like cocaine or amphetamine experience tremendous increases in dopamine, not so much increases in serotonin. Some people will take serotonin in precursor form like 5HTP or serotonin itself, or they'll take the amino acid precursor like tryptophan. I'm not saying these things as recommendations for increasingly one sense of pleasure, I'm describing them because of what they do generally falls into two categories. The first category is to raise the foundation, what we call the tonic level of dopamine and serotonin. So if levels of serotonin and dopamine are too low, it becomes almost impossible to experience pleasure. There's a so-called anhedonia. This is also described as depression. Although it needn't be long-term depression. So certain drugs like antidepressants like Wellbutrin Bupropion as it's commonly called or the so-called SSRI, the serotonin selective re-uptake inhibitors like Prozac, Zoloft and similar will increase dopamine and serotonin respectively. They're not increasing the peaks in those molecules. What we call the acute release of those molecules, what they're doing is they're raising the overall levels of those molecules. They're raising the sort of foundation or the tide if you will, think about it as your mood or your pleasure rather is like a boat, and if it's on the shore and it can't get out to sea, unless that tide is high enough, that's kind of the way to think about these tonic levels of dopamine and serotonin. Now, most of us fortunately, do not have problems with our baseline or autonic levels of dopamine and serotonin release. Things like PEA in that case will cause a slight increase in that tide and make the ability of certain experiences to increase dopamine further more available. What we call this in neurosciences so-called gain control. I can kind of turn up the volume, bring us closer to the threshold to activate certain circuits. And this is really what we mean when we say a neuromodulator, okay? This is why when you are very happy about something, let's say you're out with your friends. You're really excited. Maybe depending on where you live and what's going on in your area of the world right now, like I have a niece and she's been locked up in quarantine for a long time recently because it was deemed safe. She got to go to summer camp. I have never seen that kid so happy to spend with her friends. She was so excited and it was really amazing to see how excited she was. Her baseline levels of dopamine were clearly up so much so that when she saw her friends, she literally started squealing. They were squealing, she was squealing. Everyone was squealing. I wasn't squealing. I would admit it if I was squealing. I wasn't squealing, but it was such a delight to see and I'm sure that made my dopamine levels go up, which was, she was just so excited such that anything and everything felt like an exciting stimulus. This is pleasure, right? And I don't want to write off the experience from an neuro-biological reductionist standpoint, quite the opposite. It's really beautiful to see again this principle that different experiences and the experience of pleasure from different things. Seeing your friends for the first time, summer camp for a kid, whatever it might happen to be use the same currency, dopamine use the same currency serotonin. And this is a principle that I hope in listening to this podcast and even some of it's repetitive features from one episode to the next. I'm hoping that those will start to embed in your mind that the brain and body use these common currencies for different experiences. So yes, if your dopamine and serotonin, or I should say if your dopamine and or serotonin levels are too low, it will be very hard to achieve pleasure to experience physical pleasure or emotional pleasure of any kind. That's why treatments of the sort that I described a minute ago might be right for you. Obviously we can't determine if they're right for you. It's also why they have side effects. If you artificially increase these molecules they're associated with pleasure, oftentimes you get a lack of motivation to go seek things like food. People don't get much interest in food 'cause why should they if their serotonin levels are already up. Again, there's a ton of individual variation. I don't want to say that these antidepressants are always bad. Sometimes they've saved lives. They've saved millions of lives. Sometimes people have side effects that make them not the right choice. So it has to be determined for the individual. Things like PEA or a more subtle effect. I should mention PEA supplementation is something that a number of people use but it's very short-lived. Because of the half-life of this molecule was very brief, the effect only lasts about 20 minutes or so. Things like L-dopa, Mucuna pruriens lead to longer baseline increases in dopamine. But remember, any time you raise a baseline, you reduce the so-called signal to noise. What it means is if you're riding around at really high dopamine, at first, everything will start to seem exciting like my niece and seeing her friends for the first time. Everything's exciting. But then what will happen is when your dopamine levels return to more normal levels, it will take a much greater dopamine increase of much bigger event, more novel, more exciting in order to achieve the sense that what you're experiencing is pleasureful. And this is because of the relationship between pleasure and pain. Now, in a future episode we are going to go deep into this relationship between pleasure and pain, but just briefly as a precursor to that and because it's relevant to the conversation that we've been having, you might want to be wary of any experience, any experience, no matter how it arrives, chemical, physical, emotional, or some combination, you might want to be wary of letting your dopamine go too high and certainly you want to be wary of it going too low. Because of the way that these circuits adjust. Basically every time that the pleasure system is kicked in in high gear, an absolutely spectacular event, you cannot be more ecstatic. There is a mirror symmetric activation of the pain system. And this might seem like an evil curse of biology, but it's not. This is actually a way to protect this whole system of reward and motivation that I talked about at the beginning of the episode. It might sound great to just ingest substances or engage in behaviors where it's just dopamine, dopamine, dopamine, and just constantly be motivated, but the system will eventually crash. And so what happens is when you have a big increase in dopamine, you also will get a big increase in the circuits that underlie our sense of disappointment and re adjusting the balance. And with repeated exposure to high levels of dopamine, not naturally occurring wonderful events, but really high chemically induced peaks in dopamine, high magnitude, chemically induced peaks in dopamine. What happens is those peaks in dopamine start to go down and down and down in response to the same, what ought to be incredible experience. We start to what's called habituate or attenuate, and yet the pain increases in size. And this has a preservative function in keeping us safe, believe it or not. But what I just described is actually the basis of most if not all, forms of addiction something that we will deal with in a future episode in depth. So what should you think about all? How should you think about pleasure and how should you think about pain? What is too much pleasure? Well, that's going to differ from person to person, but to the extent that one can access pleasure repeatedly over time, ideally without chemical augmentation, certainly not excessive chemical augmentation, that means that this pleasure system is tuned up well and can continue to experience pleasure. However, if you find yourself engaging in the same behavior over and over again, but achieving less and less pleasure from it, chances are you want to adjust down how often you engage in that behavior. And or adjust down your expectation of reward every time you engage in that behavior. What do I mean by that? Well, at the beginning of the episode I talked about how dopamine will allow us to get into bouts of hard work. We will work very hard to pursue a reward, and that's really what dopamine does. And then when the reward comes that doesn't increase our dopamine. In fact, our dopamine levels go down. One of the key things that we can all do to adjust our ability to experience pleasure is to engage in that intermittent reward schedule. You can either adjust down the peak in dopamine, meaning not let yourself ever get too happy, but that's no fun, right? Life is about occasionally achieving or experiencing ecstasy, but every once in a while, remove the reward. And of course, I don't mean ecstasy the drug that's a separate matter. The MDMA trials are a separate matter. Very interesting, I want to be clear. I meant psychological and physical ecstasy of the natural sort. I've immense interest in what's going on in the MDMA trials, but just for clarity purposes, that's a separate topic that we will cover in an episode very soon. So how do you adjust this dopamine system? Well, every once in a while at random, not in a predictable way, you remove the reward and that will keep you and your dopamine system tune up in the proper ways. The gain of the dopamine system, as we say, will be adjusted so that you can continue to experience dopamine and serotonin when you actually get the reward. This can be translated into a huge number of different domains, but I want to give some examples because I'm sure that many of you are asking, wait, what does this actually mean? Okay, let's say you're a student, or this could be a student in academia, or this could be a student of a physical practice. Every once in a while when you do something really well, maybe that's even just showing up to the practice rather than pat yourself on the back, just tell yourself yeah, that's the minimum that's expected of me. When everyone's excited about something that you're doing, maybe you're excited about it, try and adjust down your excitement a little bit. I know this might seem counterintuitive, but you're preserving the ability to experience excitement in a variety of contexts. Let's say you get a big monetary award. Well, that's great. I'm happy for you. And that's wonderful. However, you should be a little bit wary if you care about your dopamine system and you care about your ability to get subsequent monetary rewards, excuse me, awards rewards doesn't matter which through effort, if you want to be able to maintain the ability to exert effort, well, then you probably wouldn't want to run out and immediately buy something with that monetary reward. In other words, you wouldn't want to layer on more dopamine release, okay? You might, but you might not. You might skip it. What you'll find then is that your motivation is essentially infinite. This is what I described at the beginning of the episode. And again, it's because dopamine is this currency. It's like these days you hear a lot about Bitcoin, and Ethereum, and Dogecoin, and USs dollars, and Euros and other stuff. But the currency that you use in your body doesn't matter what external currency those are. In fact, as you watch the value of different currencies go up whether or not it's cryptocurrency or standard currency, the value is actually reflective of the dopamine that exists inside of people. So all the excitement about a particular currency crypto or otherwise is really just dopamine. That's the currency that we all use. And there's no negotiating that. That's just the way that we're built. Now, to give yet other examples. Let's say you're teaching other people how to do something and they do something exceptionally well. If you reward them every single time. and in particular, if you reward them with something that's even greater than the experience of what they did. So let's say kids win a soccer game and they're ecstatic. They're jumping all over the place. They're super excited and you reward them with an even bigger experience, a celebration, you are actually inhibiting their ability to perform the same set of activities that led them to the win if, and I really want to underscore if you reward them every time. Of course we should reward kids and each other and ourselves for our accomplishments, but you don't want to do it every time. And sure there will be some disappointment from suddenly removing the reward that you expected, but that's exactly the point. That's what keeps these circuits tuned up properly. Now there's the other form of pleasure, which is the more immediate visceral or sensory experience of pleasure. This is distinct from goals and goal-directed behavior. I'm talking about the immediate experience. This is more of the serotonergic system. There are other systems involved too, but this is also the system that draws out those endogenous opioids from a particular structure. We have a structure in the back of our brain called PAG P-A-G, it's the periaqueductal gray area. Very interesting brain area that is associated with pain, but also with pleasure because under certain conditions, it deploys endogenous opioids and gives us a kind of blissed out feeling. This is not like the opioids of the opioid epidemic sort that people take and unfortunately have led to tremendous amounts of suffering and abuse. These are endogenously released opioids. These are the kinds of opioids that come out from long distance bouts of physical exercise and running. These are the opioids that are deployed in response to giving birth and overcoming the tremendous pain of childbirth. So PAG is very contextual and there are few types of stimuli or I should say events in life... I'm really showing my nerdy side. There are a few types of stimulate, I'm talking about experiences that evoke endogenous opioid release from PAG. One is sexual activity. Sexual activity can increase pain threshold. And here I am not suggesting or getting involved in anyone's particular proclivities or personal experiences. You're welcome to editorialize this however you like, however, what I'm talking about are animal data and yes, human data as well, that show that pain thresholds are increased anytime PAG is activated because of the release of these endogenous opioids. There's also the immediate experience of whether or not a particular form of touch is pleasureful or not. And there there's some very interesting biology that relates to really how those little wires from those DRGs innovate our skin. Work studies I should say done by David Ginty's lab at Harvard Medical School, the Ginty lab has spent years working on the somata sensory system, the touch system has identified a particular category of neurons that innervate the skin and then those neurons of course send that information up to the brain too. And they actually respond to direction of touch. Now, some of you might be more sensitive to this than others, but it turns out that certain hairs like to be deflected one way versus another. Whether you like cats or not, you can do this experiment. You can pet a cat in the direction that they're fur lies. So it lies down in a particular direction. You'll notice that there's actually a gene that dictates that the hairs lie down in a particular direction. And if you pet them in a way that's co-operating with that direction. So not pushing the hairs up, but rather stroking the hairs on the back of the cat. Well, you'll notice as they often like that. Not all cats some cats are pretty grouchy, but if you stroke their hair, they will often per, they'll often push into you. If you were to stroke their hair in the opposite direction, pushing the hairs up against the direction that they want to lie down, cats do not like that. And it turns out that people don't like that either. Some people do like to have their hair pushed in a direction against the direction in which it wants to lay down. But there is more typically response a feeling like it's pleasureful for instance, when someone brushes or combs their hair in the direction that it wants to lay down. And that's because the way in which these neurons, they innovate these hairs sends information up to the brain bifurcates actually, it splits into brain centers that evoke a sense of pleasure or a sense of not pleasure. It's not necessarily pain. So you might find that certain people are very particular. They like to be touched in a certain way, but not others. You might be one of those people. And areas of our skin that have high density of receptors are very, very sensitive in a real way, in a real sense of the word to patterns of touch and whether or not a touch is too firm or too light. And that will be modulated by overall levels of arousal. And when I talk about arousal, what I'm talking about is how alert or how sleep we are. It is impossible to experience pain when we are deep in sleep. I don't mean sleeping like of the typical night's sort. I mean, of the anesthesia sort. That's the purpose of anesthesia to bring the brain and body into a deep plane of rest, very deep in fact, and it's very hard if not impossible to achieve or experience pleasure when we are in a very low state of arousal as well. When we are in heightened states of arousal, we can achieve pain, we can experience pain and we can experience pleasure. And under those heightened states of arousal, we are more sensitive. Literally the passage of electrical signals from those locations on the body that have heightened degrees or higher degrees, I should say of receptors, use your imagination. They include the lips, the face, the feet, and the genitals and nearby areas, literally nearby areas. Under conditions of higher arousal two things happen, the ability to achieve or experience pleasure at those locations goes up and our tolerance and our threshold for pain also goes up. So the principle here is that as our levels of arousal, that foundation of arousal goes up or down, so too goes up and down our ability to achieve pleasure and pain. And so these two extremes of being deep within anesthesia or another extreme as asleep or an heightened levels of arousal, our ability to achieve pleasure and pain are going to scale according to those. And this is why, and I'm certainly not suggesting this, but this is why some people will take stimulants or drugs of abuse that increase arousal in order to achieve pleasure of other kinds. The problem is is that those drugs in particular are things like cocaine and methamphetamine and amphetamine become their own form of reinforcement so much so that the person doesn't seek out any other form of excitement or arousal. So today we weren't talking about addiction. We weren't necessarily talking about motivation, but we touched on those topics as sort of a precursor of what's to come. We talked about the pathways in the skin and in the brain and elsewhere in the body that control our sense of pleasure and pain. We described a number of different tools ranging from hypnosis to different supplements, to electroacupuncture and various other tools that one could use to modulate your sense of pleasure or pain. And of course, in thinking about pleasure, we have to think about the dopamine system and the serotonin system and some of the related chemical systems. I realized that today's podcast had a lot of scientific details. We've timestamped everything for you so that you don't have to digest it all at once of course I don't expect that everyone would be able to understand all these details all at once. What's more important really is to understand the general principles of how something like pleasure and pain work. How they interact, and the very seldom systems within the brain and body that allow them to occur and that modulator or change their ability to occur. And of course your subjective experience of pleasure or pain. So I do hope that this was on hole more pleasureful than painful for you. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're learning from it, and you'd like to support us, you can do that in a number of different ways. Some of which are totally cost-free. The first one is please subscribe to the YouTube channel. That really helps us. In addition, you can leave us comments and suggestions for future podcast episodes on the YouTube channel. You can also subscribe on Apple and or Spotify or all three that would really help us. And on Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review and leave us feedback. There are other ways to support the podcast as well. We have a Patreon that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. In addition, please check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. We only work with sponsors and brands that we absolutely love their products and that we wholeheartedly endorse, and that we use ourselves. In addition, we've partnered with Thorne. Thorne as a supplement company, and we've partnered with them because they have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients they use and the quantity of the ingredients they use. By quantity I mean that unlike a lot of supplement companies out there, the amounts that are listed on the bottle are absolutely what you find in those capsules and tablets in the bottle. If you go to Thorne that's T-H-O-R-N-E/U/Huberman, you can see the supplements that I take and you can get 20% off any of those supplements as well as any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Just go into the Thorne site through that portal, thorne/u/huberman and even if you navigate off from that location in the site, you'll get 20% off any of the items that you might select from other locations within the Thorne site. If you're not already following us on Instagram, it's Huberman Lab at Instagram, and there I do various tutorials about neuroscience, offer neuroscience related tools all backed by science. And last but not least, I thank you for your time and attention and thank you for your interest in science. [bright upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 316 ---
Video ID: gbQFSMayJxk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gbQFSMayJxk
Title: Dr. Matt Walker: The Science & Practice of Perfecting Your Sleep
Published: 2021-08-02 12:00:19 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Matt Walker, Professor of Neuroscience and Psychology and the Founder & Director of the Center for Human Sleep Science at the University of California, Berkeley. He is also the author of the international best-selling book Why We Sleep and the host of "The Matt Walker Podcast." We discuss the biology of sleep, including its various stages and what specifically happens to those stages when we don't get enough sleep. We also discuss the effects of sunlight, caffeine, alcohol, naps, hormones, exercise, marijuana, sexual activity, and various supplements on sleep. The episode consists of both basic science information and many science-supported actionable tools. 

Thank you to our sponsors
ROKA: https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

#HubermanLab #Sleep

Dr. Matthew Walker
Podcast: https://www.sleepdiplomat.com/podcast
Twitter: https://twitter.com/sleepdiplomat
Instagram: https://instagram.com/drmattwalker
Website: https://www.sleepdiplomat.com
"Why We Sleep": https://amzn.to/3Ik9kdN

Social
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introducing Dr. Matt Walker
00:02:00 Sponsors: Roka, InsideTracker
00:06:00 What Is Sleep?
00:10:20 REM (Rapid Eye Movement) aka 'Paradoxical Sleep'
00:16:15 Slow Wave Sleep aka 'Deep Sleep'
00:24:00 Compensating For Lost Sleep
00:32:20 Waking in the Middle Of The Night 
00:39:48 Uberman (Not Huberman!) Sleep Schedule
00:42:48 Viewing Morning SUNLight
00:49:20 Caffeine
01:07:54 Alcohol
01:14:30 Growth Hormone & Testosterone
01:16:14 Emotions, Mental Health & Longevity
01:20:40 Books vs. Podcasts
01:21:20 Lunchtime Alcohol
01:25:00 Marijuana/CBD 
01:36:00 Melatonin
01:54:14 Magnesium
01:58:10 Valerian, Kiwi, Tart Cherry, Apigenin
02:15:00 Tryptophan & Serotonin
02:19:24 Naps & Non-Sleep-Deep-Rest (NSDR)
02:28:23 Is It Possible To Get Too Much Sleep?
02:34:35 Sex, Orgasm, Masturbation, Oxytocin, Relationships
02:47:30 Unconventional Yet Powerful Sleep Tips 
02:59:10 Connecting to & Learning More from Dr. Walker
03:04:42 The New Dr. Matt Walker Podcast, Reviews & Support

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Matthew Walker as our guest on the Huberman Lab podcast. Dr. Walker is a professor of neuroscience and psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. There, his laboratory studies sleep. They study why we sleep, what occurs during sleep, such as dreams and why we dream, learning during sleep, as well as the consequences of getting insufficient or poor quality sleep on waking states. Dr. Walker is also the author of the international best selling book "Why We Sleep". Our discussion today is an absolutely fascinating one for anyone that's interested in sleep, learning, or human performance of any kind. Dr. Walker teaches us how to get better at sleeping. He also discusses naps, whether or not we should or should not nap, whether or not we can compensate for lost sleep, and if so how to best do that. We discuss behavioral protocols and interactions with light, temperature, supplementation, food, exercise, sex, all the variables that can impact this incredible state of mind and body that we call sleep. During my scientific career, I've read many papers about sleep and attended many seminars about sleep yet my discussion with Dr. Walker today revealed to me more about sleep, sleep science and how to get better at sleeping than all of those papers and seminars combined. I'm also delighted to share that Dr. Walker has started a podcast. That podcast entitled "The Matt Walker Podcast", releases its first episode this month and is going to teach all about sleep, and how to get better at sleeping. So be sure to check out the Matt Walker podcast on Apple, Spotify or wherever you listen to podcasts. Before we begin, I'd like to mention that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost of consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolutely highest quality. The company was founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford and everything about the design of their glasses is with performance in mind. I've spent my career studying the visual system and how it works and I can tell you that ROKA glasses take into account the science of the visual system such that whether or not you're wearing them on a very bright day, or you walk into a shadowed area or there's cloud cover, you can still see everything with perfect clarity. That also reflects the fact that the lenses that they use are of the absolute highest optical quality. The other terrific thing about ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses is that they're designed to be worn in all conditions. You can use them while running, while cycling, even if you get sweaty, they won't slip off. And they look great. One problem I have with a lot of so called performance eyeglasses and sunglasses out there is that they look crazy. They make people look like cyborgs. ROKA glasses have a terrific aesthetic, you can wear them to dinner, you can wear them at work, and you can wear them in all sorts of sports activities. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to ROKA, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's ROKA roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and then reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And nowadays, with the advent of DNA tests, you can also get insight into your immediate and long term health by way of understanding your DNA. One issue with many DNA and blood tests, however, is that you get the numbers back about metabolic factors, hormones, genes, et cetera, but there's no directive as to what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have a very easy to use dashboard, and that dashboard not only gives you your numbers, but it gives you simple directives related to nutrition, supplementation, exercise and other lifestyle factors that allow you to move those numbers into the ranges that are right for you and your health goals. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/Huberman and if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans, just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Belcampo, Belcampo is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic grass fed and finished certified humane meats. I don't eat a lot of meat, I eat meat about once a day, but when I do, I make sure that it's high quality and both humanely and sustainably raised. Conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots and eat a diet of inflammatory grains, but Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, resulting in meat that's higher in nutrients and healthy fats. Now, I've talked many times before on this podcast about how getting sufficient levels of omega threes is very important for metabolic health, hormone health, mood, essentially all aspects of one's health. Belcampo meats have high levels of omega threes, because of the grasses they feed on. The way Belcampo raises its animals isn't just better for our health, it also has a positive impact on the environment. They practice regenerative agriculture, which means that their meat is climate positive and carbon negative, meaning it's good for you, and it's good for the environment. You can order Belcampo's sustainably raised meats to be delivered to you using my code Huberman by going to belcampo.com/Huberman and if you do that, you'll get 20% off your first order. I'm a big fan of their keto meatballs I also really liked their boneless rib eyes, I eat those pretty much once a day. Again, that's Huberman for the code. And it's belcampo.com/huberman for 20% off your order. And now my discussion with Dr. Matt Walker. Great to finally meet you in person. - Wonderful to connect. I mean, it's been too long, but I suspect it would have been a shorter time before we'd met lest the pandemic, thank you for coming up. - No, thank you, yeah, I'm delighted that we're finally sitting down face to face. I've been tracking your work both in the internet sphere, and I read your book and loved it. And also from the perspective of science, you actually came to Stanford couple of years ago and gave a lecture for BrainMind. - Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. - And there, of course, you talked about sleep and its utility and its challenges and how to conquer it, so to speak. Let's start off very basic, what is sleep? - Sleep is probably the single most effective thing you can do to reset your brain and body health. So that's a functional answer in terms of, you know, what is sleep in terms of its benefits. Sleep as a process though, is an incredibly complex physiological ballet. And if you were to recognize or see what happens to your brain and your body at night, during sleep, you would be blown away. And the paradox is that most of us, and I would think this too, you know, if I wasn't a sleep scientist, we go to bed, we lose consciousness for seven to nine hours, and then we sort of wake up in the morning, and we generally feel better. And in some ways that denies the physiological and biological beauty of sleep. So upstairs in your brain, when you're going through these different stages of sleep, the changes in brainwave activity are far more dramatic than those that we see when we're awake. And we can speak about deep sleep and what happens there, REM sleep is a fascinating time, which is another stage of sleep, often called dream sleep, which is rapid eye movement sleep, that stage of sleep some parts of your brain are up to 30%, more active than when you're awake. So again, it's kind of violating this idea that our mind is dormant. And our body is just simply quiescent and resting. So I would happy to just sort of double click on either one of those, and also what changes in the body as well. But it is an intense evolutionary adaptive benefit and system. That said, though, I would almost push back against an evolved system when we think about the question of sleep and what sleep is. Our assumption has always been that we evolved to sleep. And I've actually questioned that and I have no way to get in a time capsule and go back and prove this, but what if we started off sleeping, and it was from sleep, that wakefulness emerged? Why do we assume that it's the other way around? And I think there's probably some really good evidence that sleep may have been the proto state, that it was the basic fundamental living state. And when we became awake, as it were, we always had to return to sleep. You know, in some ways, at that point, sleep was the price that we paid for wakefulness. And that's another way of describing what sleep is. But again, I think it sort of denies that the active state of sleep, it's not a passive state of sleep either. And then finally, you can say what is sleep across different species? And in us human beings, and in all mammalian species and avian species as well, sleep is broadly separated into these two main types. And we've got non rapid eye movement sleep on the one hand, and then we've got rapid eye movement sleep on the other. And we can speak about how they unfold across a night and their architecture because it's not just intellectually interesting from the perspective of what sleep is, it's also practically impactful for our daily lives. And I'd love to sort of go down that route too. But you navigate, you tell me I can. - No, no, let's definitely go down that route. So you mentioned how active the brain is, during certain phases of sleep. When I was coming up in science, REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep was referred to as paradoxical sleep, is that still a good way to think about it? Paradoxical because the brain is so active, and yet we are essentially paralyzed, correct? - Yeah, it really is a paradox. And where that came from was simply the brainwave recordings, that if all I'm measuring about you, is your brainwave activity, it's very difficult for me sitting outside of the sleep laboratory room to figure out, are you awake, or are you in REM sleep? Because those two patterns of brain activity are so close to one another, you can't discriminate between them. Yet, the paradox is that when you are awake, I go in there and you're sort of sitting up, you're clearly conscious and awake. But yet, when you go into REM sleep, you are completely paralyzed. And that's one of the I think that's part of the paradox. But the paradox really just comes down to two dramatically different conscious states. Yet, brain activity is dramatically more similar than different. And the way I can figure out which of the two you are in is by measuring two other signals, the activity from your eyes and the activity from your muscles. So when we're awake, we will occasionally have these blinks, and we'll have sort of seek heads. But during REM sleep, you have these really bizarre, horizontal shuttling eye movements that occur. And that's where the name comes from rapid eye movements. - Are they always horizontal? - Mostly, they are horizontal. - That's interesting. - And that's one of the ways that we can differentiate them from other waking eye movement activity, 'cause it's not always like it can be sometimes horizontal, but can also have diagonal and also vertical in that plane. But then the muscle activity is the real dead giveaway, just before you enter REM sleep, your brainstem, which is where the dynamics of non REM and REM are essentially played out and then expressed upstairs in the cortex and downstairs in the body, when we go into REM sleep, and just a few seconds before that happens, the brainstem sends a signal all the way down the spinal cord. And it communicates with what are called the alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord which control the voluntary skeletal muscles. And it's a signal of paralysis. And when you go into dream sleep, you are locked into a physical incarceration of your own body. - Amazing. - You know, why would Mother Nature do such a thing? And it's in some ways very simple. The brain paralyzes the body so that the mind can dream safely. Because think about how quickly we would have all been popped out of the gene pool. You know, if I think I'm, you know, one of the best skydivers who can just simply fly, and I've had some times those dreams, too, you know, and I get up on my apartment window, and I leap out. - You're done. - You're done, you know. So that's one of the sort of that's part of the paradox of REM sleep, both it's brain activity similarity, despite the behavioral state being so different and this bizarre lockdown of the sort of brain of the body itself. Now, of course, the involuntary muscles thankfully aren't paralyzed. So you keep breathing, your heart keeps beating. - Is this why men have erections during REM sleep, and women have vaginal lubrication during sleep? - That's one of the reasons part of the other reason though there is because of the autonomic activity. So there is a nervous, a part of our nervous system called the autonomic nervous system, and it controls many of the automatic behaviors. And some of those are aspects of our reproductive facilities. During REM sleep, what we later discovered is that you go through these bizarre what we call autonomic storms, which sounds dramatic, but it actually is when you measure them. That you'll go through periods where your heart rate, decelerates and drops and your blood pressure goes down and then utterly randomly, your heart rate accelerates dramatically, and what we call the fight or flight branch of the autonomic nervous system or the sympathetic nervous system, badly named 'cause it's anything but sympathetic, it's very aggravating, that all of a sudden fires up and then it shuts down again. And it's not in any regular way. And it's when you get those autonomic storms, you get very activated from a physiologic perspective that you can have these erections and you have vaginal discharge et cetera. - But you're totally paralyzed? - But you are still paralyzed. There are only two voluntary muscle groups that are speared from the paralysis, bizarre. One, your extra ocular muscles, because if they were paralyzed, you wouldn't be able to have rapid eye movements. And the other that we later discovered was the inner ear muscle. And we've got no good understanding as to why those two muscles groups are speared from the paralysis. It may have something to do with cranial nerve but I don't think it's that, I think it's perhaps something more sensory related. Some people have argued that the reason the eyeballs are speared from the paralysis is because if your eyeballs are left for long periods of time, inactive, you may get things such as oxygen sort of issues in the aqueous or vitreous humor. And so the eyeballs have to keep draining. - The drainage systems of the anterior eye are made to require movement. - Exactly. - People with glaucoma have deficits in drainage through the anterior chamber, but there I'm speculating. I'm also speculating, when I ask this, I would imagine that there are states in waking that also resemble slow wave sleep, or rather that there are states that slow wave sleep also resembles waking states. You've beautifully illustrated how REM sleep can mimic some of the more active brain states that we achieve in waking. What sort of waking state that I might have experienced or experience on a daily basis might look similar to slow wave sleep, non REM sleep, if any? - It's a genius way of thinking about it turns the tables I love it. We almost never see anything like the true ultra slow waves of deep non REM sleep. So we spoke about these two stages non REM and REM. Non REM is further subdivided into four separate stages, stages, one through four, increasing in their depth of sleep. So stages three and four that's what we typically call deep non REM sleep. Stages one and two light non REM. - So maybe take me through the arc of a night just so that. So I put my head down, well, for you, what time do you normally go to sleep? - So I'm usually sort of around about 10:30pm guy. And usually I'll naturally wake up sort of a little bit before 7:00, sometimes before 6:45 or 7:00, I have an alarm set for 7:04am. - You heard it here, folks Matt Walker does use an alarm clock. - I rarely, rarely I'm usually sort of. - He doesn't recommend it, but he does use it. - Yeah, I usually. - You're human after all. - Oh, I am so human. And I've had my sleep issues and I'd love to speak about that too. But it's only just, you know, in the event that, you know, 'cause I like to keep regularity too. You've got to keep those two things in balance. And 7:04 just because, you know, why not be idiosyncratic. I don't know why we always set things on these hot numbers. So yep so when you. - So you go to sleep around 10:30, so using you as an example, because I imagine a number of people go to sleep at different times. But 10:30 is about when I go to sleep, 11 is for me. But so you go to sleep at 10:30, so for that first, let's say three hours of sleep, what does the architecture of that sleep look like as compared to the last three hours of your sleep before morning? - Yeah, so I should note that that sort of, you know, 10:30 to 7:00 that's just based on my chronotype and my preferential it's different for different people. I'm not suggesting that that's the perfect sweet spot for humanity's sleep. It's just my natural sweet spot. - But I imagine most people probably go to sleep somewhere between 10pm and midnight. - It's somewhere between 9 and midnight. - And most probably wake up between 5am and 7am or 5:30 and 7:30. - Yeah, yeah at least in if you look at sort of first world nations, that's a typical sleep profile. So when I first fall asleep, I'll go into the light stages of non REM sleep stages one and two of non REM. And then I'll start to descend down into the deeper stages of non REM sleep. So after about maybe 20 minutes, I'm starting to head down into stage three non REM and then into stage four non REM sleep. And as I'm starting to fall asleep, as I've cast off from the usually with me, murky waters of wakefulness, and I'm in the shallows of sleep stages one and two, my heart rate starts to drop a little bit. And then my brainwave pattern activity starts to slow down. Normally when I'm awake, it's going up and down, maybe 20, 30, 40, 50 times a second. As I'm going into light, non REM sleep, it will slow down to maybe 15, 20 and then really starts to slow down down to about sort of 10 or eight cycles per second, eight cycle waves per second. Then as I'm starting to move into stages three and four, non REM sleep, several remarkable things happen. All of a sudden, my heart rate really does start to drop. Oh, and I'll come back to temperature, I'm going to write temperature down 'cause I always forget these things. Now I'm solidly in the foothills of middle age. So as I'm starting to go into those deeper stages of non REM sleep, all of a sudden, hundreds of thousands of cells in my cortex all decide to fire together and then they all go silent together. And it's this remarkable physiological coordination of the likes that we just don't see at during any other brain state. - That's really interesting, other than recordings from the brains of animals and a little bit from humans, I don't think I've ever seen the entire cortex or even entire regions of cortex light up like that. - Yeah, it's stunning. It's almost like this beautiful sort of mantra chant, or this sort of, you know, it's a slow inhale and then a meditative exhale, inhale, exhale. And these waves are just enormous in their size. - And the body is capable of movement at this time, there is no paralysis. - There is no paralysis, but for the most part, muscle tone has also dropped significantly. - Interesting. - At that point. And then you will, or I will then stay there for about another 20 or 30 minutes. So now I'm maybe 60, or 70 minutes into my first sleep cycle. And then I'll start to rise back up, back up into stage two non REM sleep. And then after about 80 or so minutes, I'll pop up, and I'll have a short REM sleep period, and then back down, I go again, down into non REM, up into REM. And you do that reliably, repeatedly, and I will be doing that, and I do do that every 90 minutes. At least that's the average for most adults, it's different in different species. What changes to your question is the ratio of non REM to REM within that 90 minute cycle as you move across the night. And what I mean by this is, in the first half of the night, the majority of those 90 minute cycles are comprised of a lot of deep non REM sleep, that's when I get my stage three and four of deep non REM sleep. Once I push through to the second half of the night, now that seesaw balance changes. And instead, the majority of those 90 minute cycles are comprised either of this lighter form of non REM sleep, stage two non REM sleep, and much more and increasingly more rapid eye movement sleep. And the implication that I was sort of speaking about pragmatically is, let's say that I have to, and I usually never do early morning flights or red eyes, just because I'm a mess if that happens, I'm not suggesting other people shouldn't. - I'm suggesting people not not do that. Every time I've taken a red eye or I've done that two or three days later, I get some sort of general feeling of malaise, my brain doesn't work as well, I think red eyes should be abolished. For the pilots too I mean, and for the. - And we can speak about those, there's data. - And for the emergency room, I mean, long shifts have been shown to lead to, you know, physician induced errors that lead to a lot of fatalities. I mean, there are a lot of reasons why staying up too long, or being up at the wrong times, if you're not adapted to it is just terrible. - You have the data and all of those cases, you know, particularly physicians too there was some recent data looking at suicidality. And the rates of suicide in training physicians are, you know, far, far above the norm. And I don't suspect that, you know, the schedules are helping them I suspect that sleep is a missing part of that explanatory equation, but. - I teach medical students and they they're phenomenal, but yeah, they're under extremely challenged conditions. - We shouldn't put them under those conditions. - [Andrew] No, it's not optimizing performance, I have one. - But sorry, I was sorry. - No, no, this is important. These it's an important digression. I have one question, which is you're saying that as across the night, a greater percentage of these 90 minute cycles are going to be occupied by REM sleep as you progress through the night. I'm aware that, based on work that you've done and from your public education efforts and others that we have so called circadian forces, and we have other forces that are driving when we sleep and when we want to sleep, etcetera. Without going into the details of those, I've a simple question, the experiment is the following. Let's say, God forbid, you are prevented from going to sleep at your normal time and you stay up for the four hours or five hours that normally you would be in predominantly slow wave sleep. - If let's say you finally get to lie down at 3am a time when normally your sleep would be occupied mostly by rapid eye movement sleep, will you experience a greater percentage of rapid eye movement sleep because of these so called circadian forces, meaning that's what's appropriate for that time? Or will your system need to start at the beginning of the race that were, as I'm referring to it, that we're calling sleep? And for if that's not clear to anybody, basically, what I'm asking is, if you are forced to skip the slow wave sleep part of the night, will your system leap into rapid eye movement sleep? Or does it have to start at the beginning and get slow wave sleep first? In other words, does one sleep state drive the entry to the next sleep state? - Great question, so there is some degree of reciprocity between the sleep states I should note that when we drive one of those up, we often but not always see a change in the other. There are some pharmacologies that have shown an independence to that. And we've also played around with things like temperature, and sometimes you can, you know, nudge one and not seem to upset or perturb the other. But to your, I think, lovely point, the answer is, it's a mix, but it's mostly the latter. Meaning you will mostly go into your REM sleep phases, and be significantly deficient in your deep sleep. So just because I start my sleep cycle at 3am, rather than at 10:30pm, it doesn't mean that my brain just says, well, I've got a program, and I'm just going to run the program, and the way the program runs is that we always start with a first couple of hours of deep sleep. So we're just going to begin act number one, scene one, it doesn't do that. Now, I will get some deep sleep to begin with and part of that is just because of how sleep works. Based on how long I've been awake, longer I'm awake, there is a significantly greater pressure for deep sleep. But we actually use exactly what you just described as an experimental technique to selectively deprive people of one of those stages of sleep or the other. So we will do first half of the night deprivation, and then let you sleep the second half. So that means that you will be mostly deep sleep deprived, and you will still get mostly all of your REM sleep. And then we switch it, so you only get your first four hours, which means you will mostly get deep non REM sleep, but you will get almost no REM sleep. So in both of those groups, they've both had four hours of sleep. So the difference between them in terms of an experimental outcome is not the sleep time because they both slept for the same amount. It's the contribution of those different stages. Now, we actually have more elegant methods for sort of selectively going in there and scooping out different stages of sleep. But that's the way we used to do it old school was just using this timing difference. - And who suffers more? Those that lack the early phase, and were those that lack the later phase of the night sleep? In other words, if I have to sleep only four hours for whatever reason, am I better off getting the early part of the night's sleep or the second half of the night sleep? - Depends on what the outcome measure is. - So that gets right to the differences between slow wave sleep and REM. - Right. - I was probably misinformed. But my understanding a very crude understanding I should say before. - I very much doubt I'll contrary with someone like you. - Which is that's very nice of you. The first part of the night the slow wave sleep is restorative to the musculature to motor learning, and that the dream content tends to be less emotional. The second half of the night, being more emotional dreams and sort of the unpairing of the emotional load of our previous day and other experiences. So in other words, if I were to deprive myself, excuse me of REM, I would be hyper emotional, not maybe not as settled with the kind of experiences of my life. Whereas if I deprive myself of slow wave sleep, I would feel a more physical malaise. Is that correct? Or is that far too simple? And if it is too simple, please tell me where I'm wrong? - No, I think much of that is correct. And it's sort of that plus. So for example, during deep non REM sleep, that's where we get this. It's almost a form of natural blood pressure medication. And so when I take that away from you, the next day, we're usually going to see autonomic dysfunction, we're usually going to see abnormalities in heart rate blood pressure. We also know that during deep non REM sleep, that there is a certain control of specific hormones. For example, we know that the insulin regulation of sort of metabolism, meaning how will you look from a regulated blood sugar perspective versus dysregulated, pre diabetic look of profile. That's where deep sleep seems to matter if we selectively deprive you of that we can see. - Growth hormone. - Growth hormone is different actually. So that's a beautiful demonstration where growth hormone seems to be more REM sleep dependent. And that's why we can come on to the effects of alcohol and there's some really impressive frightening data on alcohol and it's disruption of sleep. But then we also know testosterone, peak levels of testosterone happen during REM sleep. - So the second half of the night, essentially. - Which is the second half of the night. So it really just means that the, your profile of mental and physical dysfunction will be different under both of those conditions. Which one would you prefer? I would prefer neither of them. And it really depends on what you're trying to optimize for. So it's just so complicated, sleep is just so pluripotent, you know, it's so physiologically systemic, that it's almost impossible not to undergo one of those two things, just deep sleep deprivation, or just REM sleep deprivation, and not show a profile that you would really prefer to avoid. And that's the reason from an evolutionary standpoint, that we've preserved those stages of sleep. I mean, sleep is just so idiotic, you know, from an evolutionary perspective. - Or maybe waking is idiotic. - Or waking is, you know, well, yeah. - Based on your previous idea. - Who've you been talking to? I think that comment is very specific to me. Yeah, I am normally always an idiot when working. But I think this idea that sleep, you know, is so profoundly detrimental to us, if you were to take it at face value, you know, you're not finding a mate, you're not reproducing, you're not foraging for food, you're not caring for you're young and worst of all, you're vulnerable to predation, on any one of those grounds sleep probably should have been selected against. But it wasn't sleep has fought its way through heroically every step along the evolutionary path. And therefore, every sleep stage has also survived as best we can tell. What that means is that those are non negotiable. If mother nature had found a way to even just sort of, you know, thin slice some of that sleep from us, there would have been vast, I'm sure evolutionary benefits, but looks as though she hasn't. And I'm usually in favor of her wisdom after 3.6 million years, so. - Yeah, it's incredible. I want to introduce a another Gedankenexperiment, other thought experiment. So in this arc of the night, slow wave sleep predominates early in the night, and then REM sleep. There's a scenario that many people including myself experience on a regular basis. Which is they go to sleep, sleeping just fine, three, four hours into it, they wake up. They wake up, for whatever reason, maybe there was a noise, maybe the temperature isn't right, we will certainly talk about sleep hygiene, etcetera. They get up, they go to the restroom, they might flip on the lights, they might not, they'll get back in bed hopefully they're not picking up their phone and starting to browse and wake up the brain through various mechanisms light and cognitive stimulation, etcetera. They go back to sleep, let's say after about 10, 15 minutes, they're able to fall back asleep. And then they sleep till their more typical wake time. How detrimental is that wake up episode or event in terms of longevity, learning, et cetera? I would love to sleep the entire night through every night, but most nights I don't. And yet, I feel pretty good throughout the day, some days better than others. So if you were to kind of evaluate that waking episode, and compare it to sleeping the whole night through, what are your your thoughts on that? - So I think if you're waking up sort of frequently, as you're describing, I would probably get your estate in order because my guess is within the next year, you're going to be you're going to be done for, no I'm kidding you. Absolutely kidding you. It is perfectly natural and normal, particularly as we progress with age, you know, children tend to have typically more continuous sleep. Now it's not that they aren't waking up for brief periods of time they are and in fact, we all do. When we come out the other end of our sleep cycle at the end of our REM sleep period of the 90 minute cycle, almost everybody wakes up and we make a postural movement, we turn over because we've been paralyzed for so long and the body will also like to shift it's weight or position. - Do we ever look around? Ever open our eyes and look around? - You, sometimes people will open their eyes, but usually it's only for a brief period of time and they usually never commit those awakenings to memory. Your situation and it's my situation as well, I usually now at this stage of life, I don't sleep through the night. I'll usually have a bathroom break and then I'll come back. That's perfectly normal. We tend to forget that in sleep science, we think of sleep efficiency so of the total amount of time that you're in bed, how much of that percent time is spent asleep? And we usually look to numbers that are above 85%, or more as a healthy sleep efficiency. So if you're to think about me going to bed and I spend, you know, let's say, eight and a quarter, eight and a half hours of time in bed, with a normal, healthy sleep efficiency, I still may be only sleeping a total of seven and a half hours, or seven and three quarter hours. Meaning that I'm going to be awake in total, not in one long about, but I'm going to be awake for upwards of 30 minutes, net some time. Sometimes that can be after a 10 minute, you know, dalliance after having gone to the bathroom, and I'm just gradually drifting back off again. Other times, it will just be for a couple of minutes. And most of those you don't commit. So I think we need to stop, we don't need to get too worried about, you know, periods of time awake, just because we're not sleeping throughout the night. I would love to do that, too. And I remember when that used to happen, and it still happens occasionally. - Every once in a while, it feels great when it does happen. - And it's a lovely thing. - It's a surprise right? Like oh my goodness I slept through the whole night. - It is now a surprise, yeah it is a surprise. But for the most part, I think we can be more relaxed about that where we have to be a bit more attentive, though, is if you're spending long periods of time, not being able to get back to sleep. And usually we define that by saying, if it's been 20, 25 minutes, normally, that's the time when we would really say okay, let's explore this, what's going on? Let's see what's happening. The other thing is if it's happening very frequently, so even if you're, you know, not awake for 25 minutes stretches, but you're finding yourself waking up and being consciously aware that you've woken up for maybe six, seven or eight times throughout the night and your sleep is very what we call fragmented the great science of sleep in the past five or 10 years has been yes, quantity is important, but quality is just as important. And you can't have one without the other in terms of a good beneficial next day outcome. You can't just get four hours of sleep, but brilliant quality of sleep and be unimpaired. Nor can you get eight hours of sleep, but have very poor quality of sleep and be unimpaired the next day. So that's why I just sort of want to asterisk, this idea of let's not get too worried about waking up and having some time awake, that's perfectly normal and natural. But if it's happening very frequently throughout the night, or those periods of time, or long stretches of time, upwards of 25 minutes, then let's look into it. - Well, I can assure you just helped a lot of people feel better about this waking up episode that I and many other people experience. - I hope so 'cause I think it's really important that we, you know, I think I've been desperately guilty of perhaps, you know, early on being too puritanical about, you know, sleep and I've retrospected, and I've tried to explore why this was the case, you know, it was almost sleep or else, dot, dot, dot. And at the time when I was starting to write the book, which was back in 2016, you know, sleep was still a neglected stepsister in the health conversation of today. And I could see all of the, - That has certainly changed. - And it's changing, you know, and not because it's my efforts, but because of all of my colleagues. - I would say, well, it's great that you give attribution to the other people involved. And of course, it's a big field. But I think you've done a great service by cueing people to the importance of this state, not just for avoiding troublesome outcomes, but also for optimizing their waking state. It's really, you know, I view sleep as this period that feels good, but we're not aware of how it feels when we're in it necessarily. It has tremendous benefits when you're doing it well, so to speak, and it has tremendous deficits when we're not. And I think it was an important thing for you to do to cue people to this issue. And I would say mission accomplished, that people are aware of the need for sleep. I think that knowing that waking up in the middle of the night is normal, provided it's not too frequent is great and will also help people who may have been overly concerned about that. I do want to use this as an opportunity to raise something about the so called Uberman schedule not to be confused with the Huberman schedule. Fortunately, no one has confused those yet. Some years ago, there was a discussion about the so called Uberman schedule, meaning the Superman schedule. So that's Huberman without an H, which I have nothing to do with. If you read your Nietzsche this will have a subtext. But regardless, the Uberman schedule, as I understand is one in which the person elects to sleep in 90 minute, bouts spread throughout the day and night, in an attempt to get more productivity and or reduce their overall sleep need. There was a paper published recently that explored whether or not this is good or bad for us. Maybe you just give us the take home message on that. - Yes, so these Uberman like schedules and there's lots of different forms of that, they tried to essentially pie chart the 24 hour period, into short bouts of sleep with some shorter or no, well, slightly longer periods of wakefulness, then short bouts of sleep then wakefulness. You know, you're, I sort of made it, I think a quip, it's almost like you're sleeping like a baby, you know, 'cause that's the way that babies will sleep. - In 90 minute naps. - That they will have, you know, these brief naps, then they're awake, then they're asleep then they're awake. And to the chagrin of parents across the night, it's basically the same, they're awake, they're asleep, they're awake, they're asleep. And that's more the schedule that these types of protocols have suggested. And there was a really great comprehensive review that found not only that they weren't necessarily helpful, but they were actually really quite detrimental. And on almost every performance metric, whether it be task performance, whether it be physiological outcome measures, whether it even be the quality of the sleep that they were having, when they were trying to get it, all of those were in a downward direction. And it's not surprising if you look at your the way that your physiology is programmed, if you look at the way your circadian rhythm is programmed, none of that screams to us that we should be sleeping in that way. - Well, I'm chuckling because we always hear sleep like a baby. This is how babies sleep. And I would say don't sleep like a baby, sleep like an adult be an adult, get your solid eight hours. - It's Billy Crystal's line, he was, you know, a long standing suffering insomniac, he says I sleep like a baby, I'm awake every 20 minutes. You know, and I think this is another one of those demonstrations that when you fight biology, you normally lose. And the way you know you've lost is disease, sickness and impairment. And I think if you sleep, in accordance with the natural biological edict that we've all been given, life tends to be both have a higher quality and a longer duration. - Yeah, I agree. Along those lines, as a vision scientists, I've been very excited by the work on these non image forming cells in the eye, the so called melanopsin cells that inform the brain about circadian time of day. And I'm a big proponent of people getting some sunlight, ideally sunlight, but other forms of bright light in their eyes early in the day and when they want to be awake. Essentially, during the phase of their 24 hour circadian cycle when temperature is rising, and then starting to get less light in their eyes as our temperature is going down in terms of later in the day and in the evening. Are there any adjustments to that general theme that you'd like to add? Or is in any way? - No, I think that's exactly what we recommend right now. Which is try to get at least 30 to 40 minutes of exposure to some kind of natural daylight. Now, there may be parts of the world where, you know, it's. - You're from your from a rather cloudy part of the world. - I am from Liverpool, England, and the Northwest of England is not known for its beach resorts and fine weather. I remember I sort of, I went back home for a trip when I'd first been out in California, and I thought, why is the sky so low? Just you know, constantly we joke that in the UK, we usually have nine months of bad weather and then three months of Winter. And then that's your entire year in terms of climate. But to come to your point, you're exactly right, try to get that daylight. Now it can be you know, working next to a window and you're getting that natural sunlight. But that natural sunlight is even on a cloudy day in England is usually far more potent than anything that you'll get from indoor lighting, despite you thinking sort of from a perception wise, maybe the much closer than I would think. - Yeah, I've been I'm sorry to interrupt. I've been a big proponent of there's a an app called Light Meter, which will it's a free app, I have nothing to do with it that will allow you to get a pretty decent measurement of the amount of light energy coming toward you. And if you hold it up to a cloudy morning, where you don't think it's very bright out kind of a dismal day, you'll notice that there'll be 1,000, 2,000, even you know, 5,000 Lux, Lux just being a measure of brightness, of course. And then you can point the same light meter toward an indoor light that seems very bright and very intense and it'll say 500 Lux and you realize that the intensity as we gauge it, perceptually is not really what the system is receiving. So outdoor light is key. How do you get this natural stimulation? Or I should just say light stimulation early in the day, what is your typical, what does Matt Walker do to get this light stimulation? - I am no poster child, but usually I will, if I'm working out I usually work out most days. And I shopped around and I found a gym that has huge amounts of window exposure facing to the East. This is going to sound so ridiculous you know, Matt Walker chooses a gym on the basis. - I love it - Of the solar impact so he cannot you know correct his circadian. - There are a lot of criteria for selecting gyms, this one is actually grounded in physiology, and biology and so. - And selfishness about my own sleep. - No it's great. So you get the your exercise and your light stimulation simultaneously? - That's right, yep, yeah. - And so you're stacking cues for wakefulness early in the day. - Exactly, so both exercise and daylight are wonderful cues for circadian rhythm alignment, and also circadian rhythm reset each day. And so I will use both exercise, I mean, I'm neither a strong morning type or a strong evening type. And my preference to exercise is probably sometime in the middle of the day, probably somewhere around 1pm sorry, not 1am. But I'm usually working out probably around the sort of seven, sort of 45 8am time, that's usually when I'll start my workout. And there I will start with cardio spin bike facing a window. And luckily, for the most part here in California, there's usually sunlight coming through. But it doesn't matter to me because just as you said, even when it's a cloudy day that Lux coming through of light, the intensity is splendid. So I would prefer to favor my exercise just because for efficiency too, I want to get also working on the day, I'll try to match my exercise more with my circadian light exposure than I would probably if I'm going to do I really want to crush a workout, or do I want to just, you know, make sure it's a good workout? I would prefer to work out, you know, at a different time. But I like that because of the daylight. And we can speak about exercise timing at some point, because there's a lot of discussion around that, when is the right time to exercise during sleep. And we can sort of bust some myths there too. So I think you're spot on with the suggestion, get some morning daylight, try to get that exposure, usually at least 30 to 40 minutes, there was some great work recently coming out in the occupational health domain, where they moved workers from offices that were just facing walls and you know, didn't have any exposure to natural daylight. And then they did a time period during that study where they actually were in front of a window and working. And they measured their sleep and their sleep time and their sleep efficiency increased quite dramatically. I'm forgetting the numbers now but I think the increase in total sleep time is well over 30 minutes. And the improvement in sleep efficiency was five to 10%. You know, and if you're batting an 80%, you know, sleep efficiency average, we're a bit concerned about that. But add 10% to that and now you're in you know, a great echelon of healthy sleepers. And all you did was just spend some time working in front of windows. - That's great and probably folks might want to consider spending a little less time with sunglasses provided they can do that safely, you know, driving, etcetera. You're not alone with your exercise behavior and facing East. So the one and only Tim Ferriss told me recently that his morning routine nowadays consists of jumping rope while facing East to get the sunlight stimulation of the eyes. And as Matt and I both know, it has to be of the eyes, right? These portals are the only way to convey to the rest of the brain and body about the time of day and wakefulness. Along the lines of wakefulness, I have a number of questions about caffeine. The dreaded and beloved caffeine, I love caffeine, but I like it in relatively restricted periods of time. So I'm a big fan of waking up and even though I wake up very groggy, allowing my natural wakefulness signals to take hold, meaning I wake up very slowly, but I don't drink caffeine right away. I sort of delay caffeine by a little while, usually 90 minutes to two hours. And that idea came to me on the basis of my understanding of how caffeine and the adenosine receptor interact. I have a feeling you're going to pronounce adenosine differently than I do. - No, no, I will with that, I will go with adenosine. - I've tried to go with your skeletal instead skeletal and synapse and synapse. - Schedule and schedule. - There we go. But to make it really simple for folks, how does caffeine work to make us feel more alert? And does the timing in which we ingest caffeine play an important role in whether or not it works for us or against us? So maybe we just start with how does caffeine work? Why is it that when I drink mate or coffee, which are my preferred sources of caffeine, do I feel a mental and physical lift? - Yeah so I'm going to suggest counter to what most people would think, drink coffee. - Or mate, is mate okay also? - [Matthew] Yeah, yeah, yeah. - Whatever form you enjoy. - We'll come on to sort of why I suggest that but when it comes to coffee, I would say the dose and the timing makes the poison. So let's start with how caffeine works. Caffeine is in a class of drugs that we call the psychoactive stimulants. So it works through a variety of mechanisms, one is a dopamine mechanism dopamine we often think of as a reward chemical or, but dopamine is also very much an alerting neurochemical, as well. And caffeine has some role it seems to play in increasing dopamine. But its principal mode of action, we believe in terms of making me more alert and keeping me awake throughout the day is on the effects of adenosine. And to explain what adenosine is from the moment that you and I woke up this morning, this chemical adenosine has been building up in our brain. And the longer that we're awake, the more of that adenosine accumulates, - Is it mask, may I ask, is it accumulating in neurons in glia, or in the blood vessels? Where and is it also accumulating in my body? Where is this adenosine coming from? And where is it accumulating? - Yeah, so the adenosine here that we're talking about that is creating the sleep pressure is a central brain phenomenon. And it comes from the neurons themselves combusting energy. And as they're combusting energy, one of the offshoots of that is this chemical adenosine. And so as we're awake throughout the day, and our brain is metabolically very active, it's accumulating and building up this adenosine. Now, the more adenosine that we have, the sleepier that we will feel. So it really is like a sleep pressure is what we call it. Now, it's not a mechanical pressure, don't worry, your head's not going to explode, it's a chemical pressure. And it's this weight of sleepiness that we feel gradually growing as we get into the evening. - May I just interrupt you again to just ask do we know what the circuit mechanism is for that? I mean, not to go too far down the rabbit hole, but for the aficionados and for myself, we have brain mechanisms like locus coeruleus that are release things that our brain areas locus coeruleus is just being a brain area, of course that release things that proactively create wakefulness. So are those neurons shutting down as a consequence of having too much adenosine? Or are there areas of the brain that promote sleepiness that are getting activated? Because these, you can imagine both things working in parallel, one or the other would accomplish the same endpoint? - Yeah and it's both. And so there are two main receptors for adenosine the A1 receptor and the A2 receptor. And they have different modes of activating brain cells or inactivating or decreasing the likelihood of firing. And adenosine works in this beautiful, elegant way, where it will inhibit and shut down the wake promoting areas of the brain whilst also increasing and dialing up the volume on sleep activating, sleep promoting range. - Biology is so beautiful. - [Matthew] Oh it's fantastic. - There's a push pull, I mean, and we could have a larger discussion at some point about that, everything seeing dark edges seeing light edges. Our ability to smell or to sense pressure on this, everything's a push pull in Biology. - Oh it's great, yeah, yep. - So this is another example where as I am awake longer, adenosine is released in the brain. And my wakefulness areas are being actively shut down by that adenosine and my sleepiness brain areas, so to speak, are being promoted to be more active, is that correct? - That's right and it's a very progressive process. It's not like a step function, where and sometimes that happens occasionally, but it's usually because you've been sort of driving through and as we'll come on to have caffeine in the system, and then all of a sudden you just hit a wall and it just, you know engulfs you and you go from zero to the one of sleepiness within a short period of time. - What explains the fatigue after a hard conversation? The desire to go to sleep or desire to go to sleep during a hard conversation? - That's an interesting one. I think it's usually just based on personality type interactions. And for the most part. - Not that I've ever experienced that before. - No people with you don't, but with me, they. - Oh no, no, I've experienced the desired to some conversations, I'm halfway through them and I feel like I want to take a nap. - Yeah. - Right. - And I would love to look at you know, people's sleep history. We've sort of seen that time and time again, but and then it could be, you know, with folks like me, people just lose the will to live within about five minutes of speaking with me, so. - Not true, they hear that sleep is important. [cross talking] - Unrelated. - [Andrew] That's awesome. - And that's flattery, that's great. But so the way that then caffeine comes into this equation, as they're saying, it's usually a kind of a linear process. Or maybe it's probably closer to an exponential in terms of your subjective feeling of sleepiness. And we haven't really been able to measure that in humans, because normally, we it's hard to actually, you know, stick something into the brain and be, you know, sucking, siphoning off stuff every couple of minutes, as you could do in animal studies. And keep asking people every couple of minutes, how sleepy do you feel, how sleepy? And track to see if there's a linear rise in, you know, adenosine, which then creates an exponential rise in subjective sleepiness or what the dynamics are, but I'm kind of nerding out. Caffeine comes into play here, because caffeine comes into your system and it latches on to those welcome sights of adenosine the adenosine receptors. But what it doesn't do is latch on to them and activate them. Because if it was doing that, then it would, you know, in lots of ways it would dial up more sort of sleepiness. It does the opposite. The way that caffeine works is that it comes in, competes with quite sharp elbows with adenosine competitively forces them out of the way, hijacks that receptor by latching onto it, but then just essentially blocks it. It doesn't inactivate the receptor, it doesn't activate the receptor, it functionally inactivates it in the sense that it takes it out of the game for adenosine. So it's like someone you know, coming into a room, and you're just about to sit down on the chair, and caffeine comes in and just pulls out the chair. And you're like, well, now I've got nowhere to sit. And caffeine just keeps pulling out the chairs from adenosine and adenosine even though it's at the same concentration in your brain, your brain doesn't know that you've been awake for, you know, 10 hours, 16 hours at that point when you've downed a cup of coffee. Because all of that adenosine that's still there can't communicate to the brain that you've been awake for 16 hours because. - But the adenosine is still in brain circulation. - Correct. - So the real question is what happens when caffeine is dislodged from the adenosine receptor? - Unfortunate things happen. And that's what we call the caffeine crash. Which is caffeine has a half life and it's metabolized and. - Do you recall what the half life is? - Yeah, the half life is somewhere between five to six hours. And the quarter life therefore is somewhere between 10 to 12 hours. It's variable, different people have different durations of its action, but for the average adult five to six hours. That variation, we understand it's down to a liver enzyme or a set of liver enzymes of the class that we call the cytochrome P450 enzymes. And there are I think last I delved into the data, which is pretty recently, there are two gene variants that will dictate the enzymatic speed with which the liver breaks down caffeine. And that's why you can have some people who are very sensitive to caffeine and other people who say, you know, it just doesn't affect me really that much at all. - These are the people that have a double espresso after a 9pm dinner and can sleep just fine. - Well, and we'll come onto. - Well at least subjectively they think they are sleeping. - Subjectively, yeah, and we should speak about that assumptive danger too. So then the caffeine is in the system and after some time period, it will be inactive in the system. So let's say that, you know, I've been awake for 12 hours now. And it's you know, 8pm and I'm feeling a bit tired, but I want to push through and I want to keep working for another couple of hours, so I have a cup of coffee. All of a sudden I was feeling tired, but I don't feel like I've been awake for 12 hours anymore. Because with the caffeine in the system, maybe only half of that adenosine is being communicated through the receptor to my brain. 100% of the adenosine is still there, only half of it is allowed to communicate to my brain. So now I think oh I haven't been awake for 12 hours, I've just been awake for six hours, I feel great. Then after a few hours, and the caffeine is starting to come out of my system, not only am I hit with the same levels of adenosine that I had before I'd had the cup of coffee several hours ago, it's that plus, all of the adenosine that's been building up during the time that the caffeine has been in my system. - So sort of an avalanche of adenosine. - It is a tsunami wave, yeah and that's the caffeine crash. - And it's interesting because the caffeine crash at two o'clock in the afternoon when you have work to do is a terrible thing. But what about the person, maybe this person is me in my 20s, who says, I'm going to drink caffeine all day long. And then I want the crash. Because at nine or 10pm, if I stop drinking caffeine at say, 6pm, and I crash, then I crash into a slumber, a deep night of sleep. Is that sleep really as deep as I think it is? Because given the half life of caffeine that you mentioned a few moments ago, I have to imagine that having some of that caffeine circulating in my system might disrupt the depth of sleep, or somehow the architecture of sleep in a way that even if I get eight, or who knows even 10 hours of sleep, it might not be as restorative as I would like it to be. - Yeah, and that is the danger, just sort of that, you know, those people that you described who say, and I, a lot of them will speak with me too say, look, I can have two espressos with dinner and I fall asleep fine and I stay asleep. Because usually those are the two phenotypes that we typically see with too much caffeine. I just can't fall asleep as easily as I want to, or I fall asleep, but I just can't stay asleep. And caffeine can do both of those things quite potently. - How late in the day do you think is assuming somebody, translate this folks, if you go to bed earlier or later, you have to shift the hours accordingly. But given somebody who typically gets into bed around 10:00, 10:30, and falls asleep around 11:00, 11:30. When would you recommend they halt caffeine intake? And these are not strict prescriptives, but I think people do benefit from having some fairly clear guidelines of what might work for them. Would you say cut off caffeine, by what time of the day? - I would usually say take your typical bedtime and count back sort of somewhere between 10 to eight hours is probably getting a little bit close. But take back sort of 10 hours or eight hours of time, that's the time when you should really stop, you know, using caffeine is the suggestion. And the reason is because for those people who even just keep drinking up until you know, into the evening, you're right, that they can fall asleep fine, maybe they stay asleep, but the depth of their deep sleep is not as deep anymore. And so there are two consequences. The first is that for me, and it can be up to by 30%, and for me to drop your deep sleep by 30%, I'd have to age you by between 10 to 12 years, or you can just do it every night to yourself with a couple of espressos. The second is that you then wake up the next morning, and you think, well, I didn't have problems falling asleep and I didn't have problems staying asleep, but I don't feel particularly restored by my sleep. So now I'm reaching for three or four cups of coffee the next morning, rather than just two or three cups of coffee. And so goes this dependency cycle, that you then need your uppers to wake you up in the morning, And then sometimes people will use alcohol in the evening to bring them down because they're overly caffeinated and alcohol, and we can speak about that, too, also has very deleterious impacts on your sleep as well. So you're right that it's not just the quantity of your sleep, or even difficulties falling or staying asleep, it can also be deep sleep. But here again, I think, you know, I don't want to be frightening people. And I mentioned this before, I think one of the real problems that I or mistakes that I made, because I didn't you know, I'd never had much public exposure before the book. And I was so saddened by you know, the disease and the suffering that I was seeing as a consequence of a lack of sleep in our society. And the fact that it wasn't really being discussed very much. I sort of came out, you know, a little bit headstrong, more than a little bit headstrong. And I think I was, you know, perhaps too much gas pedal and too little, you know, break as it were. And I don't think that's the right way to approach a health message within the public sphere. And I've become much softer in how I think about these things. I have ideas about what the ideal world looks like for sleep. But I also realize that none of us live in this thing called the ideal world. - We certainly don't. - So, you know, I want to be really mindful of that, and I think I've done a really bad job of being sort of too forthright, particularly for people who struggle with sleep, you know, early on, when I would offer these sort of messages about sleep. I want to be, you know, I want to be theoretical when it comes to the science, I want to be faithful to the science. But I also don't want to go out and scare the living daylights out of people, particularly people who are struggling with their sleep, 'cause it's probably only going to make matters worse. So I've been beautifully schooled by learning how to be a slightly better public communicator. I'm nowhere near of the standing that you are, you are very elegant and it's very intuitive to you. I'm still with training wheels, but I'm getting a little bit better. But I just want to say that when I'm speaking about caffeine, 'cause it sounds as though I'm very sort of overt about it. But I will come back to why I say drink coffee. But I just want to make that point. - Yeah, well, I appreciate you making that point. And I'm sure our listeners will too. I still will stand behind my statement, which is that what you've done for the notion that sleep is vital for all aspects of health and for performance, mental and physical and wakefulness, the message and the packaging it was contained in and is has been clearly clearly net positive people needed to be cued to this. - Thank you. - The I'll sleep when I'm dead mentality is one that I had, it's one that other people have. People in a huge number of vital communities, not just your students, but also people that this the messaging that you provided and continue to provide has positively impacted the first responder community, the medical community, there're still steps that need to be taken the military community, and of course, the civilian community. And so I think these adjustments about yeah, caffeine is okay, just restricted to the early part of the day, if you can, most days, I mean, I think the law of averages. It's like the light viewing behavior I think it is critical to view sunlight or natural, some other form of bright light early in the day but if you miss a day, it's not that your whole system is going to dissolve into a puddle of tears. That'll happen on the second or the third day, no I'm kidding, you've got a couple of days. Biology works in averages except with respect to accident or injury. A car accident is a car accident, right? You don't get to have three of those before the brain damage occurs if the accident's severe enough. But with sleep behavior, these homeostatic type behaviors, or with food, one chocolate sundae, is it going to kill you know? No. Every night? Yeah. It's going to make you demented and kill you early. We know this. And so I think the middle ground is often a hard place to achieve. So I think you've done a phenomenal job. But I appreciate you raising these points. And I think it's clear that we all need to that we all can and should do certain things better, including being gentle with ourselves from time to time when we deviate from these ideal circumstances. Along these lines, I do want to talk about alcohol because I think caffeine and alcohol represent the the kind of two opposite ends of the spectrum. Clearly there are other stimulants. There your Adderalls and your high energy drinks that people use. But alcohol and caffeine are the most commonly consumed stimulants and sedatives, depressants as they're sometimes called. So what happens when somebody has a glass? We always hear a glass or two of wine in the evening or a cocktail after dinner or before dinner, how does that impact their sleep? And then we'll be sure to circle back in terms of what is reasonable ranges of behavior when it comes to avoiding alcohol or if it's age appropriate, et cetera, enjoying alcohol? - Yeah, so alcohol, if we're thinking about classes of drugs, they're in a class of drugs that we call the sedatives. And I think one of the first problems that people often mistake, alcohol is often used as a sleep aid for people who are struggling with sleep when things like over the counter remedies, etcetera, or herbal remedies have just not worked out for them. And alcohol, unfortunately, is anything but a sleep aid. The first reason that most people use it is to try and help them fall asleep. - So and this process of this event that we call falling asleep, I have to imagine is a process. - It is a process. - Like everything in biology, and that that process involves in some way, as we talked about push pull before turning off thinking, planning, et cetera, and turning on some sort of relaxation mechanism. I have to imagine that these two things are knobs turning in opposite directions that gives us this outcome we call falling asleep. Alcohol, it seems is helpful for some people to turn off their thoughts or their planning. Is that right? - Yes, it is. And so I think, you know, if we look at the pattern of brain activity, if I were to place you inside an MRI scanner, where we're looking at the activity of your brain and watch you drifting off, some parts of your brain will become less active. Other parts will become more active. And this is the push pull model. It's inhibition excitation. But alcohol is quite different in that regard. Alcohol is because it's a sedative, what it's really doing is trying to essentially knock out your cortex. It's sedating your cortex, and sedation is not sleep. But when we have a couple of drinks in the evening, when we have a couple of nightcaps, we mistake sedation for sleep saying, well, I always when I have a couple of whiskies or a couple of cocktails, it always helps me fall asleep faster. In truth, what's happening is that you're losing consciousness quicker, but you're not necessarily falling naturalistically asleep any quicker. So that's one of the first sort of things just to keep in mind. The second thing with alcohol is that it fragments your sleep. And we spoke about the quality of your sleep being just as important as the quantity. And alcohol through a variety of mechanisms, some of which are activation of that autonomic nervous system, that fight or flight branch of the nervous system. Alcohol will actually have you waking up many more times throughout the night. So your sleep is far less continuous. Now, some of those awakenings will be of conscious recollection the next day, you'll just remember waking up, many of them won't be. And so but yet, your sleep will be littered with these sort of punctured awakenings throughout the night. And again, when you wake up the next morning, you don't feel restored by your sleep, you know, fragmented sleep or non continuous sleep in this alcohol induced way, is usually not good quality sleep, but you feel great on the next day. The third part of alcohol in terms of an equation is that it's quite potent at blocking your REM sleep, your rapid eye movement sleep. And REM sleep is critical for a variety of cognitive functions. Some aspects of learning and memory it seems to be critical for aspects of emotional and mental health. - You've described it before as a sort of self generated therapy that occurs while we sleep. - Yeah, it's overnight therapy, you know, it's emotional first aid. - Certainly people that don't get enough sleep are very easy to derail emotionally. Not that one would want to do that to people, but we all sort of fall apart emotionally. I always think of it as almost like our skin sensitivity can be heightened. - Yes, absolutely. - When we are sleep deprived. Our emotional sensitivity is such that when we're sleep deprived, such that it takes a much finer grain of sandpaper to create that kind of friction, things bother us. - [Matthew] Threshold to trigger. - Even online comments bother us when we're sleep deprived. and never when we're well rested. - I would love to say that I never look at them, except I look at. - Well actually, here I. - [Matthew] Maybe every one of them. - Here I will editorialize because the notion of not looking at comments is unreasonable to ask of any academic, because academics we are all trained to look at our teaching evaluations. And just like with online comments to ignore 20% of them, no, I'm kidding. We look at them all in any event. So in terms of translating this to behavior, I'm not, I don't particularly enjoy alcohol, I guess I might be fortunate in that sense. But I also have never really experienced the pleasure of drinking alcohol. I sometimes like the taste of a drink, but I never like the sensation. So that's, I don't have a lot of familiarity with this, but many people do, and I understand that. So let's say somebody enjoys a glass of wine or two with dinner and they eat dinner at 7pm. Is that likely to disrupt their sleep at all? Let's just sort of, let's make this a series of gradations. - And the answer is yes. I think once they just looked at a single glass of wine in the evening with dinner, and I would be untruthful if I didn't just simply say it has an effect. And we can measure that in terms of. - Less REM sleep. - Less REM sleep and one of the fascinating studies I can't remember what dose I think they got them close to a standard illegal blood alcohol level, so maybe they were a little bit tipsy. And yes, you see all of the changes that we just described, they sort of lose consciousness more quickly, they have fragmented sleep, and they have a significant reduction in REM sleep. But what was also interesting because REM sleep, as we spoke about before, is a time when some hormonal systems are essentially recharged and refreshed growth hormone being one of them, there was well over a 50% five zero drop in their growth hormone release during alcohol laced sleep at night. - And growth hormone is so vital for metabolism and repair of tissues. - Yeah, it's not just for kids. - [Andrew] Keeping body fat low. - This is essential in adults. - It's essential, along those lines, I just want to highlight the fact that this information that you're sharing that growth hormone is released is strongly tethered to the presence of healthy amounts of REM sleep is interesting to me, because I always thought the growth hormone was released in the early part of the night. - Well, it is released across both of those, but across the different stages, but what we also know is that when you disrupt REM sleep, there are those growth hormone consequences. So it's not an exclusive system just like with testosterone, we can see changes throughout non REM sleep, but if you ask when are the peak release rates of testosterone, it's right before we go into REM sleep, and then during REM sleep. - And of course, testosterone being important, both for males and females. - For men and women, yeah. - Right, for libido and tissue repair and well being. Nobody, regardless of chromosomal, hormonal, or any other background wants to have their normal levels of testosterone reduced acutely, that's just a bad it equates to a terrible set of psychological and physical symptoms. - Yeah, and the mortality risk that's associated with low testosterone is non trivial. - Prostate cancer. - Right, exactly, you know. So coming back to just the point on REM sleep that you mentioned regarding emotional instability, and we see that that's one of the things one of the most reliable signatures of just insufficient sleep doesn't have to be sleep deprivation. What we've discovered over the past 20 years here at The Sleep Center, is that there is no major psychiatric disorder that we can find in which sleep is normal. And so I think that firstly told us there is a very intimate association between your emotional mental health and your sleep health. But when it also comes to REM sleep, I think what's fascinating is that it's not just about your emotional health, it's not just about your hormonal health we've also been seeing other aspects of you know, cognition. But then there was a report, I think it could have been about two years ago, out of Harvard, I think it was Beth Clements group. They found that, and they replicated it in two different large populations. If you look at the contribution of different sleep stages to your lifespan, REM sleep was the strongest predictor of your longevity. And it was a linear relationship. It wasn't it sort of one of these U shaped or J shaped curves that we often see with total sleep, and mortality risk, it really was linear. That the less and less REM sleep that you were getting the higher and higher your probability of death. And then they did. - Was that death due to natural causes or accident? 'Cause I can imagine if you're not getting enough REM sleep, you're more likely to drive off the freeway, step off a cliff. - I think it was all cause mortal. - You just make bad decisions about anything in love relationships, which can also be life threatening. - Yeah, I've tried to lean into that and claim that with those bad relationship situations, oh, I just didn't have enough REM sleep last night. - Blame it on the sleep. - [Matthew] My darling you know. - The REM sleep difference. - And, but she's far wiser than I thought. But, so they did this great machine learning analysis and I may get these numbers backwards. But I think for every 5% reduction in REM sleep, there was a 13% associated increased risk of mortality. And I could have, I'll have to go back and check. But to me, and in the machine learning algorithm, what they ultimately spat out was that of all of the sleep stages, REM sleep is the most predictive of your longevity of your lifespan. So we often, I hear people saying, how can I get more deep sleep? Or they sometimes say how can I get more dream sleep? And my answer is a question. Why do you want to get more of that? And they'll say, well, isn't that the good stuff? And I'll say, well, actually all stages have good sleep. - It's all the good stuff. Well, it's like the exercise question and it took decades, for people to understand that moving around for about 150, probably 180 minutes a week at doing endurance type work, zone two cardio type work, it is correlated with living longer, feeling better, less diabetes, etcetera. There's really no way around it. I mean, you can ingest Metformin until the cows come home, you can take NMN, all of which I think have their place in certain contexts I'm a big fan of the work surrounding all those protocols. - Yeah likewise. - But without getting proper amounts of movement, meaning sufficient numbers, it doesn't matter how many 12 minute exercise regimes you follow per week, you need that threshold level. And it sounds like the same is true of REM sleep and total amount of sleep. There's just you pay the piper somehow. - Yeah, the return on investment I mean, to flip the coin, the return on investment is astronomical, you know, I think of sleep it is the tide that moves, you know, that raises all of those health boats. - And the most fundamental layer of mental and physical health. Whenever people ask me, even though I'm not a physician, they'll ask me, you know, what should I take or what should I do? The first question is always, how's your sleep? - Great, I love it. - Meaning how well do you sleep every night and how long do you sleep? And I always recommend your book, I always recommend your podcast, you know, the podcasts you've been a guest on, etcetera. Who knows, maybe you'll even release your own podcast at some point soon and keep because I do think people need to hear from you more often. One thing I don't want to return to the notion of public health discourse too much. But I do want to say one issue with books in general, is that they can be revised, but it's more or less a one and done kind of thing until the next book comes out. - Yeah, yeah - One thing I like about the podcast format is that updates can be provided regularly. Corrections and updates as new data come out. And so that's a wonderful aspect to this format. And hopefully the format that you'll be embracing, I think the world needs to hear more from you more often, about sleep, and its various contours, not less. And so I do have a question about drinking alcohol. Not that we want to promote day drinking, but let's say that the one or two glasses of wine or cocktail is consumed with lunch, something that isn't traditionally done nowadays, or in a late afternoon happy hour type cocktail. And then one is going to sleep seven or eight hours later, do you think that that will improve or somehow mitigate the effects of alcohol? Or if you have a drink, are you are you basically screwed for the next 24 hours? - No, I think there's going to be a time window dependency. Now, I don't know of anyone who has essentially done what you and I would like, which is the time separation dose dependent curve, where okay, you drink at 10am, then or 11, 12 one, two, three, four, five all the way up to you know, 10pm and estimate, what is the blast radius? And is it linear? Or is it nonlinear? Is it such that only when you drink in the last four hours? Do you just hit this exponential and it's bad, bad bad? Or is there some other curve that we could imagine there will be many possibilities. But certainly what we know is that the less alcohol and the less and more specifically the metabolic byproducts, aldehydes and ketones, they're the sort of the nefarious players. - And not the ketones that people are all excited about the other ketones, [cross talking] the chemists know what we're referring to. - But this is not about ketogenesis, please don't think that. - This is not about ketogenesis, there are ketone bodies, and that are released after ingesting alcohol that are not of the positive sort that a ketogenic diet might promote. - Right, so I think in terms of that alcohol profile, we certainly know that, you know, as you're heading into the evening hours, once again, timing and dose make the poison. But I think it's also important, once again, from that public message standpoint, and thank you, I think I am leaning into the sort of the podcast consideration arena, at some point, but I don't want to be puritanical here, you know, I'm just a scientist, and I'm not here to tell anyone how to live. All I'm trying to do is empower people with some of the scientific literature regarding sleep. And then you can make whatever informed choices that you want. Now, unlike you, it turns out, I'm not a big drinker. It's just because I've never liked the taste. And I'm surprised that they haven't taken away my British passport because I don't like lager or beer. But I also want to say that life is to be lived to a certain degree, it's all about checks and balances. So, you know, if I go out and you know, I have an ice cream sundae, I'm not big on those either, but, you know, sure, I know that my you know, blood glucose is not going to be ideal for another 12 hours maybe. That's just the price you pay for having some kind of relaxed, fun life. I don't want to look back on life and think, gosh, you know, I lived until I was, you know, 111 and it was utterly miserable you know. - Right. - So, but it's all about some kind of a balance. And my job is not to tell people a prescription for life, it's just to offer some scientific information. - No, I think you're doing a terrific job of that. People are I always say we have all these neural circuits and if it's working properly, we all have a circuit that allows us to skip over information or as we wish, right, if the circuits between your brain and your thumbs are working you can slide right along you can drop to the next content however you like. I would like to ask about marijuana and CBD. This is a discussion that I think five years ago would have ventured into the realm of illegal but now in many places not all medical marijuana is approved or is legal. And certainly it's in widespread use. Certainly not recommending people do it. I have my own thoughts about marijuana CBD. I've been fortunate, I suppose that I don't particularly like marijuana or CBD. I don't even know if I've ever tried CBD. First of all, does marijuana disrupt the depth of sleep, the architecture of sleep? And if so, as with alcohol and caffeine does when you ingest it or when it's in your bloodstream does, relative to when you go to sleep, does that play an important role? So does marijuana disrupt sleep? - Yeah, it does. And there's a pretty good amount of data on so we can break sort of cannabis down into two of its key ingredients. We've got THC tetrahydrocannabinol, and we've got CBD and CBD is sort of the less psychotic what we think of as the non psychoactive components. In other words, when you take CBD, you don't get high. If you take THC, you can get high. That's the psychoactive part of the equation. - Are both considered sedatives in the technical sense? - No, they're not. Neither of them have that class right now. THC can, seems to speed up the time with which you fall asleep. But again, if you look at the electrical brainwave signature of you're falling asleep with and without that THC, it's not going to be an ideal fit. So you could argue it's non natural, but many people use THC for that fact, because they find it difficult to fall asleep. And it can speed the onset of at least non consciousness, I guess is the best way of describing it. But there are problems with THC. And they are twofold. The first is that it too, but through different mechanisms seems to block REM sleep. And that's why a lot of people when they're using will tell me look, you know, I definitely, I was dreaming. Or I don't remember, you know many of my dreams. And then when they stop using THC, let's say I was having, you know, just crazy, crazy dreams and the reason is because there is a rebound mechanism. REM sleep is very clever. And alcohol is the same way in this sense, it's the same homeostatic mechanism. Some people will tell me, look, if I have a bit of a wild Friday night with some alcohol, you know, maybe I'll sleep late into the next morning. And I'll just have these really intense dreams. So and I thought I wasn't having any REM sleep, well, the way it works is that it's during in the middle of the night, really, when alcohol blocks your REM sleep. And your brain is smart it understands how much REM sleep you should have had, how much REM sleep you have not because the alcohol has been in the system. And finally, in those early morning hours, when you're getting through to sort of, you know, [cross talking] six, seven, 8:00am all of a sudden, your brain not only goes back to having the same amount of REM it would have had, it does that plus it tries to get back all of the REM sleep that it's lost. Does it get back all of the REM sleep? No, it doesn't. It never gets back all of the REM sleep, but it tries. And so you have these really intense periods of REM sleep. Hence you have really intense bizarre dreams. And that's what happens also with THC, you build up this pressure for REM sleep, this debt for REM sleep, will you ever pay it back? Doesn't seem as though you get back everything that you lost, but will you get back some of it? Yes, the brain will start to devour more because it's been starved of REM sleep for so long. But one of the bigger problems with THC that we worry about is withdrawal dependency. So as you start to use THC for sleep, there can be a dependency tolerance. So you start to need more to get the same sleep benefit. And when you stop using, you usually get a very severe rebound insomnia. And in fact, it's so potent that it's typically part of the clinical withdrawal profile from THC from cannabis. - And there's anxiety withdrawal. I you know, I don't ask anybody to change their behavior, we just as you said, we try and inform people about what the science says and let them make choices for themselves. People who are regular pot smokers, if you many of will insist they're not addicted, and maybe indeed they don't actually follow the profile of classical addiction, I don't know. I'm guessing some do, some don't. But if you ask them well, what if I took away all marijuana consumption for, I don't know, two weeks? That thought scares many of them. And many of them will experience intense anxiety without marijuana, which speaks to perhaps not addiction, but a certain kind of dependency. And again, you know, I know many pot smokers, some of whom have jobs that are quite high performing and they manage. - Here in Berkeley, I don't know any of those. - Yeah, none of those, right. What about CBD? I mean, we hear so much about CBD, I've been a little concerned about the fact that the analysis of a lot of CBD supplements out there has confirmed that much like with melatonin, the levels that are reported on the labels, in no way shape, or form, match the levels that are actually contained in the various supplements. Sometimes the levels are much higher than they're reported on the labels. Other times, it's much lower. What does ingesting CBD do to the architecture and quality of sleep? - Right now, I don't think we have enough data to make some kind of, you know, meaningful sense out of it. I think the picture that is emerging, however, is probably the following. Firstly, CBD does not seem to be detrimental in the same ways that THC is. So we can start by saying does it create you know, potential problems, not of the nature necessarily that we see with THC. But the devil is a little bit in the details from the data that we do have and it comes on to your valid point of purity. At low dose, CBD can seem to be wake promoting. So in lower doses, let see sort of five or 10 milligrams and trying to remember some of the studies off the top of my head, there it actually may enhance wakefulness and cause problems with sleep. It's only once you get into the higher dose range, that there seem to have been some, you know, increases sorry, increases in sleepiness, or sort of sedation like, increases. And that's usually I think, above about 25 milligrams, as best I can recall from the data. And then when we look in animal models, you typically see the same type of profile too. So then the question becomes and now again, you just don't know about, you know, purity. It's very difficult, although I think, and again, I'm not a user, not necessarily because I you know, have anything against it. It's just that's not, you know, necessarily my cup of tea. There are some firms that are now doing third party independent laboratory tests. I don't know how gamed that is, so I've got no sense of it. - I think some supplement companies are quite honest and accurate about the amounts of various substances that are in their products and some are not. And I think there's just a huge range. I think the FDA is starting to explore CBD there I certainly I saw some grant announcements to explore the function of CBD. Most of the work on CBD is being done by the general public adjusting it and seeing how they feel. I gave it to my dog who was had some dementia related sleep disturbances, and it actually created a heightened wakefulness it completely screwed up his sleep. - Okay, it sounds as though it just wasn't. - He's a bulldog. So if he's going to get access to sleep, he's going to take it. - Okay. - Really messed him up, took him took it away, he did better. But you know, that's a canine, so. - Right, and it could have been, you know, sort of dose related too. - Or binders or other things that are in there, sure. - Correct, yeah and we, but right now, if we were to, and I'm not making the statement, I don't think anyone can make the statement now. But if it ends up being that CBD is potentially beneficial for sleep, how can we reconcile that mechanistically? And I think there are, to me, at least, there are at least three candidate mechanisms that I've been exploring and thinking about. The first is that it's thermo regulatory. And what we found in some animal models is that CBD will create a profile of hypothermia. In other words, it cools the body the core body temperature down. And that's something that we know is good for sleep. The second is that it's an anxyolitic, that it can reduce anxiety. And that data is actually quite strong, even with some functional imaging work that's been coming out recently showing that one epicenter of emotion called the amygdala deep within the brain is quietened down with CBD. So I think that's at least a second non mutually exclusive. - That's great, that's conducive. - You know, possibility. I think the third is some recent data that's come out that was suggesting that CBD can alter the signaling of adenosine. So it doesn't necessarily mean that you produce more adenosine, but what it can do is perhaps modulate the sensitivity perhaps of the brain, so that the weight of that same adenosine is weightier in its brain signal, and therefore it creates this stronger pressure for sleep. So I think these are all tentative mechanisms. I think any one of them is viable, I think all three are viable together. But right now I think, does that sort of help think through the tapestry of THC and CBD? - Yeah very much so and actually, it's a perfect segue from we've talked about caffeine, alcohol, THC and CBD as sort of, we framed them anyway, as things that done in moderation at the appropriate times, are probably okay for most people. Certainly not for everybody, there will be differences in sensitivity. But that done at the incorrect times, and certainly in the incorrect amounts will greatly disrupt this vital stage of life we call sleep. CBD, it seems, represents a kind of bridge to the topic I'd like to talk about next, which is things that promotes more healthy sleep, or somehow contribute to enhancing the architecture and quality of sleep. So I'd love to chat for a moment about the kind of grand, the original I should say that not the granddaddy but the OG of sleep supplementation, which is melatonin. The so called hormone of darkness that's inhibited by light, etcetera. Frame for us, melatonin in the context of its naturally occurring form. And then I'd like to talk about melatonin the supplement because in my experience, anytime I say the word melatonin, people think about the supplement melatonin, which in itself is an interesting phenomenon that people are so cued to its role as something you take, we often forget that this is something that we make endogenously. I'd love for you to comment in particular on even though without necessarily getting into its precise nanograms per deciliter values, what are the typical amounts of melatonin that we release each night? And then I'd like to compare that to what is contained in say a three milligram or six milligram tablet that one might buy at the pharmacy. - Right, yeah. - So I go to sleep at night, has melatonin already kicked in before I shut my eyes and lay down my head? - Usually, yes, if your system is working in the correct way, as dusk is starting to happen, so let's say that you look at hunter gatherer tribes who aren't touched by electricity, and so that's sort of the puritanical state par excellence when it comes to electric light influence. And usually, it's as dusk is approaching, that's when melatonin will start to rise. And so when you lose the brake pedal of light coming through the eyes, that normally acts like a hard brake pedal that stamps down and prevents the release and production of melatonin. As that light brake pedal starts to fade with dusk, then we ease off the brake pedal and melatonin the spigot of melatonin is opened up, and melatonin starts getting released. And usually we'll see this rising peak of melatonin sometime, usually an hour, two hours later or around and it varies from different people around the time of sleep itself. But it's already been on the march for some hours before you actually hit sleep itself. - Interesting, and I was always taught and I'm assuming it's still true that the only source of melatonin in the brain and body is the pineal gland. Is that still true? - Yeah, it seems to be from best that we can tell the pineal gland sort of meaning pea like sort of shape. It's actually I think usually people say it's pea like, I think if you look at the Latin derivative, it's more, I think it's derived from pine cone, not pea because in fact, if you look at the pineal, it is more pine cone shaped and so is aptly named. - Any human brain I've ever dissected or I confess I've dissected a lot 'cause I teach neuroanatomy and have for years. I love looking at the pineal it's the one structure in the brain that's not on both sides. It's usually pretty easy to find. And it's a pretty good size. It looks like a, it looks like a pea. And it's sitting right there. And it's remarkable that it releases this hormone. Sort of probably our entire lifespan is inhibited by light. So our pineal starts to release this into the general circulation. I have to imagine we have melatonin receptors in the brain and body. - It's correct, so yep, essentially, your brain has a central Master 24 hour clock called the super charismatic nucleus that keeps internal time. Now it's not a precise clock if left to its own devices, nothing that a Swiss clock maker would be proud of. It runs a little bit long and laggy. - It's like an American clock. There are a couple of good American watches by the way, Hamilton's are very nice, but. - It's very much like a bug. - We're not famous for our timekeeping or our punctuality for that matter, but the Swiss are. - It's very it's not quite Swiss, like it's more Berkeley like, which is very relaxed. Oh you know what whatever. So in most adults, the average adult, I should say, your biological clock normally runs a little bit long, it's about 24 hours and 30 minutes, I think was the last calculation. But the reason that we don't keep drifting forward in time and kind of running consistently, you know, more and later and later, 30 minutes by 30 minutes by 30 minutes each day, is because your central brain clock is regulated by external things such as daylight and temperature, as well as food and activity. All of these are essentially different fingers that come along and on the wristwatch of the 24 hour clock will pull the dial out and reset it each day to precisely 24 hours. And I make that point because it knows 24 hour time, but it needs to tell the rest of the brain and the body, the 24 hour time as well. And one of the ways that it does this is by communicating a chemical signal of 24 hour nurse of light and day using this hormone, melatonin. And when it is at low levels, or it's non existent, it's communicating the message it's daytime, and for us diurnal species, it says it's time to be awake. Yet, at nighttime, when dusk approaches and the break comes off melatonin and we start to release it, then it signals to the rest of the brain and the body, look, it's dusk and it's nighttime. And for us diurnal species, it's time to think about sleep. So melatonin essentially tells the brain and the body when it's day and when it's night, and with that when it's time to sleep when it's time to wake. And therefore, that's why melatonin helps with the timing of the onset of sleep. But it doesn't really help with the generation of sleep itself. And this is why we'll come on to what those studies of supplementation have taught us. - So it tells the rest of my brain and body, it's time to go to sleep. It perhaps even aids with the transition to sleep but it's not going to for instance, ensure the overall structure of sleep or it's not the conductor that's guiding the sleep orchestra so to speak throughout the entire night. - Yeah, it's. - It's more like the people that essentially take you to your seat and sit you down and give you your program. - Right, exactly yeah, sort of the the fall, less sophisticated analogy I have is, you know, melatonin is like the starting official at the 100 meter race in the Olympics. - That's a better analogy, yeah. - It calls all of the sleep racers to the line and it begins the great sleep race. - Yeah, better analogy by the way. - [Matthew] It doesn't help dissipate, no, no, no, no. - Coming from the sleep researcher of all people. - But it doesn't participate in the race itself. That's a whole different set of brain chemicals and brain regions. Which then brings us on to perhaps the question of supplementation, which is, is it helpful for my sleep? Will I sleep longer? Will I sleep better? And if I am, what dosage should I be taking? Sadly, the evidence in healthy adults who are not older age suggests that melatonin is not really particularly helpful as a sleep aid. I think there's a recent meta analysis that demonstrated when it looked at all of the different sleep parameters, melatonin, and a meta analysis for those not knowing what that is, it's a scientific sort of method that we use where we gather all the individual studies and we put them in a big bucket and we kind of do this kind of statistical fancy sleight of hand. And we try to come up with a big picture of what all of those individuals studies tell us. And what that meta analysis told us is that melatonin will only increase total amount of sleep by 3.9 minutes, on average. - Minutes? - [Matthew] Minutes. - Not even percent. - And it will only increase your sleep efficiency by 2.2%. So it really. - This is as they say, in certain parts of California, that's weak sauce, that's a weak sauce effect. - The sauce is not strong, the force is not strong in this one, when it comes to a tool that in healthy people who are not of older age, it doesn't seem to be especially beneficial. Now, you know, results can vary. Everyone is different, of course. So we're talking about the average, the so called average human adult here. - Well, melatonin, in defense of what you're saying and also I should mention, I have a colleague at Stanford, Jamie Seitzer. - Oh, wonderful, genius. - Chuck Seitzer's lab at Harvard Med where he also trained terrific sleep researcher and I asked him about melatonin and he essentially said the same thing that you just said which is very little if any evidence that it can improve sleep and yet it's probably the most commonly consumed so called sleep aid. - Hundreds of million dollars industry. - Yeah, so either massive placebo effect or it's operating through some other mechanism related to quelling anxiety perhaps? - Well, yeah, that's essentially interesting, you know, there are some studies where you do see some, you know, effects. Now, again, when you do the grand average of all studies, it just doesn't seem to have an effect. But let's assume that for some people, it does have an effect let's not again be sort of completely dismissive of that, how could it have that effect? One of the reasons that I've become a little bit more bullish on melatonin from a sleep perspective and then melatonin more generally for a, maybe you can speak about this too, as a counter measure when you're undergoing insufficient sleep. There are two different routes there. The first reason that I think it could have a sleep benefit for some people is not because it helps in the generation of sleep, we know that it doesn't, it's because it too seems to drop core body temperature. - There it is, temperature again. I'm fascinated these days, more and more by temperature, as maybe not just a reflection of brain state and wakefulness and in sleep, but actually a lever that is quite powerful. - I think it's both. - And with all the interest in ice baths and hot showers and saunas and stuff, something that we will definitely touch on. Temperature variation is so key. So if melatonin is dropping body temperature by a degree or so something that you've said before can help induce a sleepy state. Maybe that's what's allowing people to get in to sleep. - I think that's one possibility. I don't think melatonin by itself will drop it by it sort of, you know, a degree, certainly not a degree Celsius. And for order in us to fall asleep, and then stay asleep across the night, we do need to drop our core body temperature by about one degree Celsius, or about two to three degrees Fahrenheit. And that's why it's always easier to fall asleep in a room that's too cold than too hot. I think that that's one potential avenue that we are considering thinking more deeply about when it comes to melatonin. And then the other is melatonin as an antioxidant. But let me table that for now. 'Cause I'll just get us sidetracked. That's what we know so far about melatonin in terms of its supplementation benefit or lack thereof. Two final points that I shouldn't forget, one is the only population where we typically see some benefit, and it often is prescribed is in older adults, because as we. - Older meaning 60 and older? - Yeah, 60, 65 and older because as we get older, you can typically have what's called calcification of the pineal gland. Which means that that gland that's releasing melatonin doesn't work as well anymore. As a consequence, they tend to have a flatter overall curve of melatonin release throughout the night. It's not this beautiful, lovely peak, and this bullhorn message of its darkness, please get to sleep. That's why older adults can have problems falling asleep or staying asleep. It's not the only reason by any stretch of the imagination. But it's one of the reasons and it's why melatonin supplementation in those cohorts, older adults, and especially older adults with insomnia, people have thought about that as maybe an appropriate use case. - Well, along those lines, if we were to compare dosages, I don't, do we know how much melatonin is typically released into the bloodstream per night? And can we use that as a kind of a rule of thumb by which to compare the typical amount that someone would supplement? Typically, the supplements for melatonin that I see in the pharmacy and elsewhere online range anywhere from one milligram to 12, or even 20 milligrams. My guess is that a normal night's release of melatonin typical for somebody in their 20s, 30s, 40s would be far lower than that, am I correct or wrong? - Yeah, it's many magnitudes lower. And this is one of the problems is that I see that too. I see, you know, typical doses are, you know, five milligrams or 10 milligrams and of course, you know, if you're a supplement company, you know, putting 10 milligrams versus five milligrams, if that's what you're actually doing, which we'll speak about purity as well. You know, it's kind of like the super gulp size, nobody wants to lower price, they just want you to you know, we'll just give you more for the same price. And that's how we'll compete. So it's been this escalating arms race of melatonin concentration, and it really does not look meaningful for, you know, for sleep in any way. What we've actually found is that the optimal doses for where you do get sleep benefits in the populations that we've looked at, are somewhere between 0.1 and 0.3 milligrams of melatonin. In other words, the typical doses are usually 10 times, 20 times maybe more than what your body would naturally expect. And this is what we call a supra physiological dose. In other words, it's far above what is physiologically normal? You know, and to put that in context, imagine I said to you, I want you to eat 20 times as much food today. - I thought you're going to use testosterone as example. You're going to take 300 times the normal amount of testosterone we know that would have tons of deleterious effects it would be terrible. And yet you can do this. One thing that I'm concerned about about these super physiological levels of melatonin is that many years ago, actually, here at Berkeley, when I was a graduate student, we would inject animals which were seasonally breeding animals with melatonin. And the consequence of that was that their gonads, either their testes or ovaries would shrink, many hundred fold or more. In other words, they would go from having nice healthy sized hamster testicles, what a hamster would consider healthy size for a hamster and they would shrink to the size of a grain of rice. So from like an almonds to a grain size of a grain of rice. I had to see that only once for me to be very concerned about super physiological levels of melatonin. And I realized that melatonin does different things in different species. We are not hamsters, we are not seasonal breeders seasonally restricted breeders, there might be more breeding during certain seasons, I don't know those data. But nonetheless, hormones are powerful. And sure there is an optimal, and sometimes we see that going slightly above endogenous levels for certain hormones not always, can have beneficial effects. And sometimes it can have detrimental effects. I'm just concerned about taking high levels of a hormone that has effects on the reproductive axis and that's one of the reasons why I get very concerned when I see people really getting aggressive about melatonin supplementation taking 100, 10, 500, sometimes even 10,000 times the amount that we would normally release. That's my concern, although it's not nested in any one specific human study. I just don't like to see, I certainly don't want to see other people and I don't want to personally take a hormone that's known to be androgen suppressive at high levels. Why would I take that? That's the question I ask myself. - I think it's a very, you know, good point. And if you look at some of the evidence around, you know, melatonins lethality if you want to go to that extreme, for the most part, you know, it's pretty safe. - You mean, you can take a lot of it before you die? - Right, exactly yeah. - But I don't know that that's the criteria. - That should be your yardstick for, because, you know, you really need to think about your, you know, your health, not just whether this thing is going to kill you or not as the decision matrix through which you pop a pill. And it comes on to this concern around melatonin because there was a study, I think it's one that you mentioned too where they looked at over, I think it was at least over 20 different brands of melatonin supplements. And what they found is that based on what it said, on the bottle versus what was in the capsules themselves, it ranged from, I think it was 83% less than what it said on the bottle to 478% more than what it said on the bottle. Now, if that's a 10 milligram, you know, pill, and it's 478% more than 10 milligrams, and we're already at 10 milligrams at many tens of times more than is a physiological rather than a supra physiological dose, we do need to be a bit thoughtful. - Yeah, remember those hamsters folks. Well, and I do appreciate the deep dive on melatonin because I think people need to understand that it's nuanced, it's a matter of dosages, and timing, etcetera. And then it may have its place as you mentioned in older individuals. And I should mention that I'm an avid consumer of supplements that I believe in for me and I have been for a very long time. So I'm by no means anti supplement. Some supplements I refuse to take or avoid taking others I quite avidly take and along those lines, I personally and I don't know what your thoughts on this are. But there are a few things that I've personally found beneficial. I love your thoughts on them. And I would love it if you would tell me that everything I'm about to refer to is placebo, that would be fine. So that's what we do, we're scientists we argue and then we remain friends in as it goes away. So magnesium, there are many forms of magnesium. Magnesium citrate is a as we know, is a terrific laxative. Magnesium malate seems, at least from a few studies seems to relieve some of delayed onset muscle soreness doesn't seem to create a kind of sedation. Two forms of magnesium that I'm aware of magnesium biglycinate and magnesium threonate. We believe based on the data can more actively cross the blood brain barrier. So you put in your gut, but some of that needs to go into your brain in order to have the sedative effect. What are your thoughts on magnesium supplementation? Do you supplement with magnesium? And what studies would you like to see done if they haven't been done already. - So I don't supplement with magnesium. But I do think threonate is interesting because of that higher capacity to cross the blood brain barrier and actually have a central nervous system effect. And the reason that that interests me is because the sleep is by the brain of the brain, and also for the brain, as well as for the body. We just don't have a particularly good set of studies that have targeted exclusively threonate. We do have lots of studies that have just looked at magnesium in general for sleep. And overall, the data is uncompelling. - Interesting. - And for a while, I was confused as to why, where did this come from this kind of myth of magnesium? So I started looking back into the literature and I've best traced it at least as far as I can tell, to early studies showing that those who are deficient in magnesium also had sleep problems. They had other problems too, of course, but sleep problems were one of that set of sequelae that came from having lower magnesium. And when they supplemented with magnesium and tried to restore those levels, some of those sleep problems dissipated. And then that seems to have gotten lost in sort of some game of sort of like whispers around the room and it's become translated into people who don't have sleep problems, who are healthy sleepers, and who are healthy in general, and who have healthy normal levels of magnesium, if they take more magnesium, they will sleep better. And the data really, there is not good. Once again, the only study that I've seen where magnesium did have some efficacy was in a study with older adults, I think they were 60 to 80 years old, it may have been exclusively women, now I think about it and they also had insomnia. And in that population, you did see some benefits. And my guess is that because it's an older community as well, they were probably deficient in magnesium. So they fit the former category of simply when you're deficient, and you restore, you can help sleep sort of return to normal. But if you are not deficient and you're healthy, and you're not old and you don't have insomnia, and you're supplementing thinking that it provides sleep, right now, the data isn't supportive of that. But I just don't think we have enough threonate data to actually speak about that, because it could just be a blood brain barrier issue so far with the other forms. - So maybe some additional studies looking specifically at threonate or bi-glycinate would be useful. - I'd love to have. - Magnesium is involved in so many cellular processes, you can imagine that this effect, if it truly exists is, as we say, in science in the noise, meaning it's in the jitter of the data, but to isolate the real effect one needs to do some more refined studies. What are some things that are of interest to you, if not things that you happen to take? These are not things that I personally take mostly because I just haven't experimented with them. valerian root is one, tart cherry and kiwi fruit. Tell me about Valerian root, tart cherry and kiwi fruit. This is new to me. I have certainly heard of them. And tart cherry and Kiwi sounds delicious, but what's happening with Valerian root tart cherry and kiwi and are we talking about eating tart cherries and Kiwis and Valerian roots? - Yes. - Or are talking about taking them in pill form? - Usually it's supplements, but it's also both for tart cherries and for kiwis. It's the actual, you know, fruit themselves. Valerian often touted as a beneficial sleep aid and lots of people swear by it too. But the evidence is actually quite against that. - Oh really? - Not that it makes your sleep worse, but of at least the seven good studies that I've been able to find, and typically these are of the nature of what we call a randomized placebo crossover design. And I won't bore people with what that means it's sort of one of the. - Good studies, solid studies. - Yeah, it's one of the sort of gold standard methods that we have when we're looking at intervention studies such as drugs studies. Five of the seven found no benefits of Valerian root on sleep. Then two out of the seven, the data was just insufficient. I think it was a power issue where they just couldn't make any strong conclusions. And then I think there was the most recent study, I think looked at two different doses of Valerian and I could have this wrong and they just failed to find any effects once again, but the stunning part of that paper, as I recall, they had this big table with all of the different sleep metrics that they looked at. And there were well over 25 different things that they tried to see if valerian impacted. And none of them were significant. Which stuns me because from statistical probabilities, we know, if you just randomly perform 25 statistical tests, chances are probabilistically, you'll just get one significant result by random chance. And even with random chance on their side, they still couldn't find a benefit of Valerian, so. - So Valerian root might be worse than nothing at all, if there is, so to speak. - I mean, again, placebo effect we can think about that too. And I would say that if you feel as though it's having a benefit for you, and with all of the caveats that we have with supplements, things like melatonin purity, concentration, et cetera, you know, maybe it's no harm no foul. But I'm not a you know, a medical doctor and I don't tell anyone about we have all of these disclaimers about not recommending such things. - And we'll include these, I mean, I always say, you know, we're not physicians, we don't prescribe anything. We're scientists and professors so we profess things. It's up to people to be responsible for their own health. Not just to protect us but to protect themselves. I do want to hear about tart cherry and kiwi fruit. What's the story there? - Strange, isn't it? I was, you know, I'm kind of a hard nosed scientist, and when people you know, some years ago started saying, oh, tart cherries, it's the thing or kiwi fruits, I was thinking, oh, my goodness, the sounds a bit. - You've been in California a little too long. - Yeah, I know, yeah, the sun is softened me some. But I thought, look one of the things that we have to do as scientists is be as open minded as possible. And I should not be so quick to dismiss. So I went to the literature just started reading as much as I could about it. And there were three really good randomized placebo crossover trials with tart cherries. And what they found was that in one study, it reduced the amount of time that you spent awake at night by over an hour. And then the other two studies, one of them found that it increased the amount of sleep that you've got by 34 minutes. The other it increased the amount of sleep that you got by 84 minutes. Which you know, these are, and what's striking is that they were independent studies, I think, meaning that they were from independent groups, and these were, you know, some of these guys, you know, and girl, I know pretty well, and they are really. - You know and trust their work. - Right, I really trust their work too. - Were they ingesting actual tart cherries or they're drinking the juice or in capsule form? - It was juice. So they in all three studies, it was juice. Although you can I think as a supplement, you can buy it in a capsule, and we've got no idea whether that changes the benefit or not. What was also interesting in I think it was that last study where they got an increase in sleep by 84 minutes, it also decreased a daytime napping significantly. - That's one that I could certainly make use of. I love my day time naps, but I'd love to skip them too. - Right and we can speak about naps and sort of the upside and downside of that. Which then made me think well, if that's the case, may be the net net benefit on sleep overall, is no different. It's just that it decreases the amount of time that some people were taking to sleep during the day, and giving it back to the night. But that wasn't the case, 'cause if you added the total amount of sleep that they were getting without tart cherries, both naps and nightly sleep combined, still, when you took tart cherries, you still got a net some benefit, of total amount of sleep. So you know, so far, when it comes to supplements, and those types of studies, they're good studies, and the data looks interesting. But as a drug itself, you know, if this was clinical drug, you know, three studies that are somewhat small in nature and have some positive benefit that's what we would call preliminary data of maybe a chin scratching kind so keep this in context. - Yeah, and depending on the margins for safety, one might think, well, given that it's a tart cherry as opposed to some pharmaceutical you need a prescription for then, you know, some people their threshold to experiment with supplements is quite low, some people their threshold is quite high. I feel like you know, there are two categories, or at least two categories of folks out there. People who hear oh, tart cherry can improve sleep, and we'll run out and try it. And people who hear well, that sounds crazy. Why would I do that? But of course, we have to remind people that tart cherry isn't really what we're talking about, presumably if this is a real effect, and sounds like it might be that there's a compound in tart cherries. - That's right. - That if we were to call it, whatever, whatever five alpha six, you know, some molecule, if we refer to it by its technical name, then people would say, oh, that sounds like a very interesting technical way to approaches sleep but doesn't sound very natural. So both groups are a little bit misguided in the sense that people who think that everything that comes from naturally occurring foods, plants, etcetera, things that grow out of the ground, that that's all safe, that's not true. And people that think that pharmaceuticals are the if it's not evidence with the purified molecule, then something's not of utility. Well, that's certainly not true. somewhere in the middle, I think lies the answer, which is, it sounds to me like tart cherry is at least an intriguing potential sleep aid. Intriguing potential sleep aid and underscoring potential. I'm certainly intrigued by it to the point where I might experiment a bit, but I'm an experimenter for myself. Before I ask you about kiwi, I've had quite good results from taking something called apigenin, which is a derivative of chamomile. But in supplement form, I think I take 50 milligrams about 30 minutes before sleep. And I subjectively experience a better night's sleep, so to speak. I don't measure I confess, I don't measure my sleep. I'm not a sleep tracker guy. But, you know, there are a few papers out there they're not what we would call blue published in Blue Ribbon journals, but they have control groups, and it looks somewhat interesting. And there when I say apigenin people get somewhat intrigued oh this molecule. Chamomile has long been thought to be a sedative, a mild sedative, but a sedative? Do you drink chamomile tea? Do you take apigenin? What are your thoughts on apigenin? - Yeah, I don't. And I have looked into some of the data regarding sleep as well. Right now from best I can tell it's mostly subjective data rather than objective hard sort of sleep measures. And that's why right now I you know, it's sort of unclear not no comment, but just unclear, not dismissing it, because I think you and I both ascribe to the idea of absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. So keep your mind open, at least I tell that to myself. I think if you're finding a benefit, and you can do what I would think of if I was personally experimenting, which is both the positive and negative parts of the experiment, what I mean by that is, you know, let's say that I now want to, you know, think about some kind of sleep supplement, I will take some kind of baseline set of recordings for a month, and I will just gauge where I'm at, sort of supplement free. Then I'll go on for a month or two, whatever I'm thinking of taking, and I don't, you know, supplement. But let's say that I want to and I experiment with that. And I feel as though based on my metrics be them objective from my aura ring or be them subjective from whatever I'm, you know, writing down in the morning, and both are important and valid, subjective and objective, we like both in the sleep world. And I think, okay, look, it's clearly that it seems to have some kind of an effect. The key thing, however, is then do the negative experiment, which is now come off it for another month, and see, do things get worse. And if I can see that by directionality, then I'm starting to think maybe I'm believing this a little bit more. So that's the way I would sort of typically approach you know, a supplementation regiment if I were to do it. And that's just me, that's just the way my mind works, but. - No, that's great. I think it's very scientific and organized in a way that allows you and would allow other people to make very informed decisions for themselves. I like that. I like to think in terms of manipulating any aspect of our biology, that behavioral tools always are the first line of entry, then nutrition, everyone has to eat sooner or later, even if you're fasting, then perhaps supplementation, then prescription drugs, and then perhaps brain machine interface, devices that you use to induce something. And those can be done in combination. But what concerns me is when I hear people say, well, what should I take without thinking about their behavior, their light viewing behavior, etcetera. But of course, these things work in combination. - And I think it's, you're right, that there's many when it comes to sleep, there are many low hanging fruits that don't necessarily require you to, you know, put sort of exogenous molecules in other words things like supplements into your body or, you know, use different types of drugs to help you get there. Now, when it comes to prescription sleep aids, I think I've been again a little bit too forthright. We know in clinical practice that there may be a time and a place for things like sleeping pills, they are a short term solution to certain forms of insomnia, but they are not recommended for the long term. And we also know that there are lots of other ways that you can get a sleep help or you can get a sleep curative profile from things like cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, which is a non drug approach, psychological. - And quite effective from what I understand, good data. - Just as effective as sleeping pills, great data more effective in the long term. There's a recent study published that after working with a therapist, some of the benefits lasted almost a decade, you know, now, if you stop sleeping pills, usually you have rebound insomnia, where your sleep goes back to being just as bad if not worse. And I think the same is true, when we think about supplementation, there are so many things that are easy to implement when it comes to sleep, that don't require venturing out into those waters. And again, we're not here to tell anyone about whether they should venture or not, that's completely your choice. All I'm saying is that if you want to think about optimizing your sleep, there are a number of ways that you can do it that don't necessarily require you to swallow anything or inject anything or you know, smoking or anything, or free base. - And of which the margins of safety are quite quite wide. That's the other one. - Yes, right thank you. So speaking of low hanging fruit, I don't know how it hangs in reality, but what about kiwi? They're delicious to me anyway. - Yeah, the humble kiwi fruit named not shouldn't be mistaken for the flightless bird of New Zealand, which is the native bird there. We're talking about the kiwi the fruit here, which those trees and shrubs are mostly South East Asia. Kiwi fruits have been previously touted as potentially having a sleep benefit, which again got me curious and I at first threw it out. To my knowledge, there's really only one published human study that's of any value. But what they did find was that it decreased the speed of time with which it took you to fall asleep. - These are you ingesting the whole kiwi. So it's ingesting the whole kiwi. - With the skin, I eat the skin, people cringe when they see me, or don't eat the skin? - Well, I think, no, no, no, I think the idea is some of the good stuff and I'll come on to this may actually be in the skin itself. - Oh wonderful, thank you. You just helped me win a bet. I'll give you your cut. - Okay, okay, yeah, you can pay me later. By the way this skin is use? No, no, no. He just told me to say that's how he wins, no, he did not. So the skin seems to be part of this potential sleep equation. And that study, you fell asleep faster and you stayed asleep for longer and you spent less time awake throughout the night. And I just thought, well, you know, that's one study, what can you really do with that? There was another study, however, in an animal model, which is, you know, a little bit more interesting. And once again, they found a very similar phenotype that the rats, sorry they were mice, the mice fell asleep faster. And they also spent longer time in sleep. The sleep duration also increased. What was also interesting mechanistically and this is not the mechanism that I think ties together tart cherries, kiwi fruit, and you know things like melatonin, because I think there could be one common binding mechanism. What they found in the animal study is that they could block those kiwifruit sleep benefits using a GABA blocking agent. Now GABA which stands for Gamma Amino Butyric Acid is one of the major inhibitory neurotransmitters of the brain. It's kind of like the red. - So a naturally occurring sedative, sort of? - Yeah, it's the kind of the red light on the traffic light signal, you know, others are green light. GABA is red light. So by playing around with some sort of clever drugs to manipulate the system, they could prevent the benefit of the kiwi fruit by sort of buggering around with the GABA receptor, meaning that perhaps part of the kiwi fruit benefit on sleep was mediated by the brain's natural inhibitory neurotransmitter system called the GABA system. - That's exciting. - And I thought that that was kind of, that convinced me a little bit more that maybe there's something here to read into. So to be determined, again, here is the banner, but you know, tart cherries and kiwi fruits the data surprised me, because in part I was so preoccupied with being you know, I don't know a bit pure-ish about and a bit snobby thinking come on, that's definitely not going to work, well the data certainly found out. [cross talking] - I look forward to a day when supplements are no longer called supplements, because at the end of the day, whether or not something has an effect, whether or not it's a whole kiwi fruit or a derivative of kiwi fruit will depend on the molecular compound. And as you mentioned, this potential mechanism via the GABA system, we both as scientists get excited about mechanism 'cause when you can trace a mechanism and a pathway it provides a rationale a grounding for why kiwi of all things or tart cherry of all things might help increase total sleep time. I'd be remiss if I didn't mention or ask about tryptophan and serotonin. I can anecdotally say, when I've taken tryptophan, the precursor to serotonin, or serotonin itself, I have a horrendous night's sleep. I fall asleep very easily. And I experience ridiculously vivid dreams. Neither pleasant nor unpleasant is kind of a mishmash. And then I wake up and I experience several days of insomnia. That and I've done the positive control and the negative control and all the variations there of to confirm that, at least for me supplementing with serotonergic agents is a bad idea for me. And tryptophan is a common sleep supplement and sleep aid that's discussed. The normal architecture of sleep involves the release of serotonin, but in a very timed and regulated way. What are your thoughts about serotonin in sleep? If you had to kind of put that into a nutshell. And then why supplementing with serotonin and or its precursor, tryptophan might be a good or a bad idea for somebody. - I think one of the potential dangers is that based on what's going on in your body, that can change the absorption of natural sort of tryptophan and serotonin uptake within the brain itself. So I'm always thoughtful when you're playing around with that mother nature dynamic as it were. The data as you described is a little bit all over the map. Some people say that it knocks them out other people say just like you do, it has a terrible impact on my sleep. And when I stop, it's pretty bad for a couple of days, it seems to have this lingering after effect. I think what could be happening here is we need serotonin to just as you described, to be modulated in very specific ways during the different stages of sleep. If you look at the firing of the brain epicenters where serotonin is released, and there's a bunch of them in the brainstem, what you find, and the release of serotonin too, when we're awake, it's usually in high concentrations, as we start to drift off to sleep, it lowers some, but not necessarily dramatically as we're going into non REM sleep. But then when we go into REM sleep serotonin is shut off. The other, one of the other neuromodulators noradrenalin also shut off. REM sleep is the only time during the 24 hour period, where we see noradrenaline and serotonin or norepinephrine, completely shut down. When I say serotonin, we're also talking 5-HTP, sorry, 5-HT, that's just its chemical name here. So whether it was speaking about serotonin or 5-HT is the same thing. Norepinephrine, noradrenaline, both of those need to be shut down for you to produce REM sleep. The other, one of the other neuromodulators, that then ramps up to produce REM sleep is acetylcholine. So these three neuromodulators have this incredible reciprocal dance that they have for you to generate what is called a natural architecture of sleep throughout the night. - It's the push pull again. - It's a push pull again, you know, it's you know, it's just and back. It's, you know, whatever you want to think of. That's why I think if you're trying to increase dramatically drive up your serotonin levels at night, and that sustains throughout the night, when you're trying to get into REM sleep, you could be artificially fragmenting REM sleep. Now, I don't know the data, I don't think anyone's really got the data. - No, I haven been able to find it. - But that's why I would be, you know if you were to say, Matt, two years time, that's the data helped me understand the potential mechanism or let's design some experiments, where would you go first? I would say let's look at the disruption of REM sleep, non REM sleep, reciprocal regulation, because, you know, you need serotonin to be, you know, up at one time down at another, so. - I agree with everything you said. And I'm personally never taking tryptophan or serotonin again, unless there's some clinical reason for that that I would need to do that. I want to ask about some other pro sleep behaviors. But before I do that, let's talk about naps. I love naps. I come from a long history of nappers. My dad always took a nap in the afternoon, I take a 20 or 30 minute nap or I do a practice which I took the liberty of coining NSDR, non sleep deep rest, some sort of just passive laying out their feet up elevated. Sometimes people do you or I'll do yoga Nidra, I'll do hypnosis or something of that sort, but 20 or 30 minutes of that has been very beneficial for me to get up from that nap or period of minimal wakefulness, we'll call it and go about my day quite well, and also fall asleep just fine. What are the data on naps? Do you nap? And what are your thoughts about keeping naps short meaning 20 to 30 minutes versus getting out past 90 minutes, two hours? So for you personally naps, yay, nay or meh? - I don't nap. And I've just never been a habitual napper. - Is that because you don't feel sleepy in the afternoon, or because? - I typically don't feel sleepy? - So you're just hardier then. - I am, I wouldn't say hardier, I may be less capable of falling asleep, my sleep drive. - But you're not dragging through the afternoon? - No, no, I don't drag through out the. - So you don't nap because you don't feel a need to nap? - That's right, yep. Now, it's not that I am immune to what we call the postprandial dip in alertness. I definitely feel as though there can be this kind of afternoon lull, where, you know, I'm not quite as on as I was at 11 o'clock in the morning. And we know the physiology to that, which brings us back to whether we were designed to nap. So for naps, we've done lots of different studies and other colleagues have done these studies too. Naps can have some really great benefits, we found benefits for cardiovascular health, blood pressure, for example, we found benefits for levels of cortisol, we found benefits for learning and memory, and also emotional regulation. - How long are the naps, typically, in those studies? - Anywhere between 20 minutes to 90 minutes. Sometimes we like to use a 90 minute window so that the participant can have a full cycle of sleep, and therefore they get both non REM and REM sleep within that time period. Then when we wake them up, we usually wait a period of time to get them past what we call sleep inertia, which is that kind of window of grogginess where you say to you, better half look, you know, darling, please don't speak to me for the first hour after I've. - Don't anything right now. - After the first hour of waking up, you know, I'm not just, I'm just not the best version of myself. So we wait for that time period, and then we do some testing. And we've done some testing before and after, and we look at the change. And that's how we measure what was the benefit of naps and the reason why we sometimes do 90 minutes so that they get all of those stages of sleep. And then we correlate, how much benefit did you get from the nap, and how much of that benefit was explained by what REM sleep you got, what deep sleep you got, what light sleep you got? So that's the only reason that we use that as an experimental tool. What we've also found is that naps of as little as 17 minutes can have some quite potent effects on for example, learning. None of this is novel, NASA pioneered this back in the 1990s. And during the missions, they were experimenting with naps for their astronauts. And what they found was that naps of little as 26 minutes, improved mission performance by 34%, and improved daytime alertness by 50%. And it birthed what was then called the NASA nap culture throughout all terrestrial NASA staff during that time period. So it's long been known that naps can have a benefit. Naps, however, can have a double edged sword there is a dark side to naps. And it comes back to our story of adenosine and sleep pressure. The longer we're awake, the more of that sleep pressure adenosine that we build up. But what I didn't tell you is that when we sleep, the brain gets the chance to essentially clear out that adenosine. And after about 16 hours of wakefulness, and then after about eight hours of sleep, eight hours of sleep seems to be able to allow the brain to decrease its adenosine levels back to normal. And so naturally, we should start to wake up which also aligns with your circadian rhythm. And those are two separate processes. But with about eight hours of good quality sleep seven to nine hours for the average adult, we are free of all of that adenosine. We've evacuated it essentially out of the brain, and we wake up naturally feeling refreshed. The reason that naps can be potentially dangerous is that when you nap, you are essentially opening the valve on the pressure cooker of sleep pressure. And some of that sleepiness is lost by way of the nap. So for some people and not all people and you're a great example of this. Some people, however, if they are struggling with sleep at night, and they nap during the day, it makes their sleep problems even worse. So for people with insomnia, we typically advise against napping. And the advice is if you can nap regularly, and you don't struggle with sleep at night, then naps are just fine. But if you do struggle with sleep, stay away from naps. If you are going to nap, try to limit your naps, try to cut them off a bit like sort of caffeine, maybe you know, eight to 12 hours maybe not that you know far off maybe sort of seven to six hours is a good rule of thumb. Try not to nap essentially late in the afternoon. And if you do take a nap and you want to maintain your you don't want to have that grogginess hangover that can happen after a full night of sleep for the first hour, try to limit it to about 20, 25 minutes. And that way you don't go down into the very deepest stages of sleep, which if I wrench you out of with an alarm, then you just kind of feel you almost feel worse, for the first hour after the nap. - I've definitely experienced that if I oversleep. Certainly if the sun goes down during my nap and I wake up and light overall lighting conditions have changed, I find it very hard to jolt myself back into the evening. And it can screw me up. So I try and keep those naps pretty brief. And I should say, I'm very happy to hear you mention individual differences and why some people might want to nap and other people might not want to nap, I have a colleague Liqun Luo he'll be familiar to many neurobiologist. - Yeah of course. - Who's a absolutely spectacular scientist, member of the National Academy, Howard Hughes investigator just a phenom, and has a ton of energy. But years ago, I learned that he always takes a nap in the afternoon, so much so that when he travels to give seminars at other universities, he will tell his post lunch host whoever it is that he's supposed to meet with, may I have your office for 30 minutes of our, sometimes 30 minute discussion or 60 minute discussion, because I like to take a nap. And he does that and then gives us his, his talks are typically in the afternoon in academic culture. And he describes the effect of the nap for him this short naps in the afternoon being so profound for his productivity. That's actually what inspired me to start feeling okay about my desire to nap. And so I think for me, that was great vindication for those that might feel guilty about wanting a nap. But I take to heart your note about avoiding naps if you have trouble falling and staying asleep, 'cause I think that I have family members who also if they nap, they're a wreck, they can't sleep. - Yeah, I think it's just, we've often been very pro sleep with sort of the sleep community. So I think it's good to always point out these potential dark sides of any aspect. But you're absolutely right, no one should feel guilty about getting the sleep that they need. And I think that's been one of the big problems in society society has stigmatized sleep with these labels of being slothful or lazy. And we're almost embarrassed, you know, to tell colleagues that we take a nap. I think sleep is a write of human beings. And I therefore think that sleep is a civil right of all human beings. And no one should make you feel unproud of getting the sleep that you need. - No, I love that. And I it's an important point. I also feel that one of the best ways to beat your competition in any endeavor is to outlive them. So now that we know that sleep can enhance longevity and lack of sleep can shorten one's life, that's all the justification I need anyway. Can somebody sleep too much? Is it possible to get too much sleep? - It's a very good question. And there are probably two things to say about it, there is a condition that we call hypersomnia. But that's a mixture of things, it's where people have either a very high sleep need, or they are very sleepy during the day. And they're typically falling asleep. And these can happen in a variety of different clinical contexts. One of the places where we've often seen hypersomnia believed to manifest is in depression. But if you look at some of those studies, it turns out, it looks more as though those people are simply reporting being in bed longer, but not necessarily sleeping longer. And that fits very well with one of the profiles that we know of depression, which is anhedonia, you don't get pleasure from normally pleasurable things. So you just don't want to go out into the world, you don't want to interact because you're depressed. So what do you do? You just stay in bed? - Blinds closed, watching TV, on the phone. - [Matthew] Right, and that just looks as though you know, - Felling miserable. - When people say, what time did you go to bed? And what time did you get out of bed? The mistake made in that question is okay, that's how much time their sleeping when you should have said, what time did you fall asleep? And what time did you wake up? And the answer could be very different. So that's hypersomnia from a clinical context. Can you sleep too much though? One of the data points that argues yes, that's possible is when we look at all cause mortality. Certainly what you find is that using the sweet spot of seven to nine hours, when you start to draw below seven hours, there is a relationship, which suggests that the shorter your sleep, the shorter your life. Short sleep in that regard predicts all cause mortality. But it's again, not a linear relationship like the one that we've seen with REM sleep. Once you get past nine hours, the mortality curve stops going down. And then once you get further 10 or 11 hours, it hooks back up again, it's almost like a J shape, tilted over a little bit and reversed. So there's this strange hook, what's going on here? Right now, sleep science has at least two non mutually exclusive explanations for this. The first is that if you look at some of those populations, the idea is that the whatever was causing them illness and took their lives was just too much for sleep to deal with. However, we know that when we get sick, one of the things that we do immediately in this whole mechanism and inflammatory mechanisms cytokine mediated, when we get sick, we want to sleep more. We just want to curl up in bed and you know, sleep it off. So the argument there is that it's not that sleep was killing people prematurely, it was that these people were calling on this the help of sleep, they were calling on this thing called the Swiss Army Knife of health, that is sleep. But whatever it is that they were facing was just too powerful for sleep to overcome. So it artificially looks as though more sleep leads to a higher risk of death, when sleep is actually responding to the mortality risk, and it lost the battle. That's one argument. The second is that we know that sleep quality and poor sleep efficiency is a very strong predictor of all cause mortality. And when you look at people who often report sleeping longer amounts, 10 or 11 hours, they typically report having very poor quality sleep. So because their quality of sleep is poor, they just try to sleep longer to try and get some of that back. So again, here now it's poor quality sleep masking as too much sleep leading to this artificial hook which looks like mortality. That's the second explanation. A third which is more of a Gedanken, which is just the kind of like a thought experiment and I have this mentality, I don't know how many other people share this. I actually think that could be a thing as too much sleep. Physiologically, I think it's possible. But the reason I think that is because it's no different than food, water or oxygen. Can you overeat? Yes, you can. Can you under eat? Of course. - Or light. light in the early part of the day, throughout the day, wonderful. Light late in the day and at night, detrimental. - Bi-directional, you know, for water, can you over hydrate, hypernatremia it can lead, you know, it happened in the 1990s and 2000, with the ecstasy craze, where governments were saying you're dehydrating you're dancing all night, please drink water. And they drunk too much water, their blood electrolytes went you know, all over the place, and they were having cardiac arrests or stroke. - Yeah people were dying. - And they were dying because of excessive hydration. Can you get too much oxygen, hypoxemia? And it can cause free radical damage, which can be profoundly harmful and kill brain cells. Can you sleep too much? You know, which is the fifth element of the life equation, you know, alongside you know, food, water, oxygen, you know, so forth. I should say I can't even count. Clearly I'm sleeping well. Yes, I think that could be that possibility. Are most people in danger of getting too much sleep? Or contrary, if you look at the data. So but I don't dismiss that idea. I think it's possible. - That's a very thorough and very nuanced, and yet very clear answer. So I, it's so interesting to think that a lot of the data that's out there that talking about being in bed too long that it's just trying to compensate for the actual fragmentation of sleep. So what I'm coming away with is that there are many paths to this and both positive and things to avoid. But the idea is to get most nights, a similar amount, probably seven to nine hours, somewhere in there, of high quality sleep. That this notion of sleep quality is going to become, I would hope, a phrase that more people think about and learn about and cultivate as a practice. I want to ask about a set of behaviors that I'm at least I'm aware of at least one company is starting to track in their sleep monitoring device, and that's orgasm, and sex orgasm and masturbation topics that are, you know, are somewhat sensitive. But from the perspective of biology, right, none of us would be here were it not for sperm meets egg in some fashion, either in a dish or in vivo. But what are the data as you know them to be or maybe your lab is even doing this kind of work and exploration about the role that sex, orgasm, masturbation play in getting to sleep and staying asleep and sleep quality? Certainly those behaviors and those physiological events have been part of our evolutionary history. What's the story there? What can we say about this in terms of science and dare I say practice? - Yeah, I mean, it's almost that caricature of you know, in the movies where, you know, a couple makes love and then all of a sudden, you just sort of hear snoring or, you know, that happens with the idea that it somewhat some neurogenic that it's sleep promoting. - Well, the post orgasmic increase in prolactin. - Well, that's very, is interesting. - Is thought to be a set a naturally occurring sedative, that presumably has a function in. - And oxytocin has that also that benefit where you see, you know, a dissipation of the fight or flight branch of the nervous system, which has to happen for you to fall asleep. That's why we often see, you know, here at The Sleep Center, we'll see a phenomenon called wired and tired where people say, look, I am so desperately tired I just I'm so so tired, but I can't fall asleep, because I'm too wired. So your sleep drive, you're desperately tired, it's there but because you're wired, because you've got too much sympathetic activation, too much cortisol as well, you can't fall asleep. It's an impressive roadblock to anything like good sleep. And it's one of the principal mechanisms that we now believe stress and physiological activation, that is the underlying cause of many forms of insomnia. But coming back to sex, the data is actually quite compelling, that both either subjectively assessed sleep quality, or objective amount of sleep, sex that has resulted in orgasm, and I think it's that latter part that typically needs to happen. - I would imagine so. - That, you know, so between two mutually exclusive individuals, where both are, you know, beneficial in terms of receiving an orgasm. [cross talking] - Yeah, I would say any discussion about sex, we were referring to consensual, age appropriate, species appropriate, context appropriate. - Wow, I would never have even gone to the species appropriate. - I put species in there because it's the internet, and people will come up with all sorts of ideas. So I think that age appropriate, I think age appropriate, consensual, context appropriate and species appropriate, covers all the bases, but if I missed any, put them in the comment section, and we'll be sure to take note. - Yeah, no, I think that's really well said and important to say. So the data that is the when you look at couples who have orgasm. We've also, however, found benefits of masturbation, and it's not frequently spoken about. But what if you do some surveys, it turns out that people will often use masturbation as a sleep tool, if they're struggling with sleep. And I know, this sort of sounds almost like a strange conversation, or it's a taboo conversation but I think we just need to be very open about all of this. - I started off in science, one of the things I worked on early in my career, not the very first topic was the topic of early influences of hormones, estrogen and testosterone on sexual development of the brain and body. And when you are weaned in a laboratory like that, regardless of what era, you look at sex and its behaviors, and its hormones, and its physiologies as a scientist, and so that's to be clear what we're doing here, we're exploring these behaviors from that perspective. I mean, one thing is for certain, everyone is here because a sperm met an egg, either in a dish or in vivo, as we said before, and at least in 2021, there's no way around that fact. And what preceded that is typically this act we call sex and sometimes, hopefully, I like to think orgasm is associated with that sexual activity. Masturbation is one dimension of that is something that I think it can and should be discussed, if in fact, there are data that relate it to sleep. - Yeah, and both of those routes seem to lead to a sleep benefit. Now, I'm not saying that it's all about the orgasm. I think as we spoke about with oxytocin, there is some degree of par bonding that if you have a partner, and you experience you know, an intimate loving, you know, relationship that involves that, then you can have hormonal benefits that are sleep promoting, that may not necessarily be seen if you're just engaging you know, in the solo singular act of masturbation. So what we certainly know and I am not someone to take any advice on when it comes to anything relationship wise or sex wise. - That's a different episode of the podcast. - Yeah, yeah certainly. And that's not a podcast series that I'm going to be releasing anytime soon, it's going to be mostly about sleep. Although I will touch on, I'll release a podcast on sleep and sex. But that's the data that we have so far. We also know that it works both ways, though. And it's commonly the same way with sleep. You know, sleep and exercise, sleep and diet. How you eat can affect how you sleep, how you sleep can affect how you eat. Same with exercise. And it turns out, it's the same way with sexual behavior, too. So here, we're talking about whether sex can help with sleep. Can sleep help with your relationship and sex? And the answer is, yes, it can. Firstly, we know and we've spoken a little bit about this, that the reproductive hormones are under profound sleep regulation. - Both estrogen and testosterone, I understand. - Estrogen, testosterone, as I said. - Cause we hear so often about testosterone. But women who, or I should say anyone who's interested in having higher levels of estrogen or normal healthy levels of estrogen I presume the data show for estrogen what the data also show, similarly for testosterone. Which is if you get too little or poor quality of sleep both sex steroid hormones, as they're referred to testosterone and estrogen, which are present in both males and females and every variation thereof, are going to be diminished below normal healthy levels, correct? - Yes, estrogen, testosterone, FSH in women, a key hormone in the regulation for, key for conception, of course, all of these sex hormones seem to become significantly disrupted when sleep becomes of short quantity, or poor quality. We also know that in women, sleep disruption can usually lead to menstrual cycle disruption. We know this, particularly from evidence in shift working women where they are nighttime shift workers, they struggle with sleep during the day, often menstruation is disrupted or even becomes impaired. But we also know it works this way, not just for sex hormones, but for sex itself. For example, we found that for every one hour of sleep, extra sleep that a woman gets her interest in becoming sexually intimate with her partner increases by 14%, which is, you know, a non trivial amount. - Substantial. - And then the final part of I think this equation when it comes to sleep, and sex is your relationship itself. And there's some great work here from UC Berkeley by Professor Serena Chen. And what she found was that restless nights mean for far more brutal fights in your relationship. And they did this. - And vice versa. - A number of different elegant ways, and vice versa as well. - I mean, not that I've ever had conflict in relationships. [cross talking] - You know, just this is data I've read, I've never experienced that at all. So, they found reliably that sleep would predict higher likelihood of relationship conflict. Secondly, if you got into that conflict, the chances of you resolving it were significantly lower when the parties had not been sleeping well. Part of the reason is because when you are not well slept, your empathy goes down. So you're not, you're taking more of an abrasive stance with your partner, rather than a more agreeable stance with your partner. So at almost every dimension of a human loving relationship, sleep can have a dramatic impact. - I think these are really important things to underscore, one of the most common questions I get, because there seems to be community of people on the internet that are obsessed with this. I don't know who they are, because it's all, all this internet stuff is shouting into a tunnel and getting comments back in written form. It's a very bizarre conversation, so to speak. Is whether or not sexual behavior itself lowers or increases testosterone? And I went into the data, which spans many decades actually, both animal studies and human studies. And it seems just to underscore this as long as we're talking about this subject that it does seem that sexual activity, sex between two people does seem to increase testosterone in both. There is this question about orgasm or no orgasm ejaculation, no ejaculation and indeed, there do seem to be some effects of restricting ejaculation in males as a form of further increasing testosterone. So sex without ejaculation further increasing testosterone. But the data are not clean. Presumably because organizing these sorts of studies and getting truth in self reporting is probably hard to get from subjects. But everything sort of points in the direction that provided that the relationship is a healthy one, it's consensual, it's age appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate that sex between two individuals does seem to increase the sex steroid hormones testosterone and estrogen toward healthy ranges. And what I'm hearing now this sort of Gestalt of the discussion we just had is that that too can promote sleepiness, restful states, and quality sleep. And I think this is an important conversation that just hasn't been held enough. I mean, sooner or later, both in the US and elsewhere, we're going to have to acknowledge that we are biological organisms of some sort, and that we have choice in life, about all these things, from supplementation to sex, or no sex, et cetera, but that they have profound effects on our core biology. I mean, it's fascinating to me that the areas of the hypothalamus, the preoptic area, the super optic areas, those areas which the names might not mean anything to anybody, besides Matt and I sitting here, but those areas sit cheek to jowl with each other in the hypothalamus and control, sleep and sex. The trigger of orgasm, the appetite for food, the appetite for water for electrolytes. I mean, the hypothalamus is kind of a festival of neurons with different booths for different primitive behaviors. - It's such a small, small structure in the brain, but it's the orchestrator of a vast number of our behaviors disproportionate in terms of its size versus effect. - Yeah, I don't think you can go to this hypothalamic festival without at least seeing all the booths whether or not you decide to visit them or not. - I love that master analogy. - So I'm glad that we've broached that conversation. And I hope people will think that we've approached it with the appropriate level of sensitivity. It's an important one that we're going to hear more about one way or the other. People are certainly thinking about this, if not engaging in these sorts of behaviors or avoiding them. So the more we can understand about the biology, the better. And so thank you for bringing that topic up. Because for the record, Matt, tabled it for discussion. - We were just like chatting outside and I think we said something about sort of sex, and I said we can go there. There is so much interesting data. - Absolutely, I want to touch on just two remaining topics. One is are there any unconventional sleep tips or things about sleep that we've overlooked? If we've covered everything great, but you know, we hear to keep the room cool. We hear because of this temperature phenomenon, the light aspects, the considerations about alcohol, CBD marijuana, cognitive behavioral, tart cherry fruit, kiwi perhaps. - Please don't put me on the hook for tart cherries and kiwis, I was just offering what I know about the data. - And these are considerations and whether or not people batch these things, I won't even list them off now, because they're too many jokes that one could make. - And I have no affiliation with any of these products. [cross talking] - Well, I'm going to take out stock in a kiwi company. No I'm just kidding. But the question I have is about any unconventional or lesser known things, or maybe you do things or you think about things just in a purely exploratory way, as a scientist of that, you know, the what if kind of things that, yeah, what if it turns out that and I hear I just, I got a blank there for you to fill in. - I think, you know, beyond the standard, you know, fair that I've dished out plenty of times of sleep hygiene of you know, regularity, temperature, darkness, alcohol, caffeine, and we've spoken about all of those. What are some more unconventional tips, I guess? The first one, which is unconventional along the lines of naps. If you've had a bad night of sleep, let's say that you're starting to emerge with insomnia and you've had a bad night of sleep, the advice and I learned this from my wonderful colleague, Michael Perlis, do nothing. What I mean by that is, don't wake up any later, don't sleep in the following day to try and make up for it, don't nap during the day, don't consume extra caffeine to wake you up, to try to get you through the day, and don't go to bed any earlier to think that you're going to compensate. And I can explain all of those things. But if you wake up later, you're not going to be sleepy until late in the evening, so you're going to go to bed at your normal time and you won't be sleeping, you'll think well, I just came off a bad night of sleep. And now I still, I can't even get to sleep and it's my normal time. It's because you slept in later than you would otherwise, and you reduce the window of adenosine accumulation before your normal bedtime. So don't go, don't wake up any later. Don't use more caffeine for the reasons that are obvious, because that's only going to crank you and keep you awake the following night or decrease the probability of a good following night of recovery sleep. Third, I mentioned don't take naps, because once again, that will just take, you know, naps, particularly later in the afternoon, I almost liken them to snacking before a main meal, it just takes your appetite off the edge of that main meal of sleep, so don't do it. And then finally, don't go to bed any earlier, resist and resist and go to bed at your normal time. What I want to try and do is prevent you from thinking I had such a bad night last night and I normally go to bed at 10:30, I'm just going to get into bed at nine o'clock, because last night was just so bad. But that's not your natural bedtime, and it's not aligned with your natural chronotype because presumably you kind of know something about that, our morning time, evening time, you're trying to sleep in harmony, which is usually how you get best quality sleep. But you go to bed at nine, and my body is not ready to sleep at nine o'clock. But I'm worried because I had a bad night of sleep last night so I get into bed, and now I'm tossing and turning for the first hour and a half because it's not my natural sleep window, but I just thought it was a good idea. And if I didn't know anything about sleep, I would think all of these same things too. So I'm not finger wagging. But after if I have a bad night of sleep, and I am not immune, just because I know a little bit about sleep doesn't mean I don't have my bad nights, I do. Doesn't mean I haven't had bouts of insomnia in my life, I have. But after a bad night of sleep, I do nothing. I don't do any of those four things. I think the second tip I would offer in terms of unconventional is have a wind down routine. Many of us think of sleep as if it's like a light switch, that we just jump into bed, and when we turn the light out sleep should arrive in that same way. Just the binary you know it's on or it's off. Sleep is a physiological process, it's much more like landing a plane, it takes time to gradually descend down onto the terra firma of what we call good solid sleep at night. Find out whatever works for you and it could be light stretching, I usually meditate for about 10 or 15 minutes before bed. Some people like reading, try not to watch television in bed that's usually advised against. - Something that doesn't emit too much light to your eyes. - Too much light, too activating, you know, you can listen to relaxing podcasts, although we can speak about technology in the bedroom too. But have some kind of a wind down routine. It's you know, it's almost like you know, you wouldn't race into your garage and come to a screeching halt from 60 miles an hour, you typically down, shift your gears and you slow down as you come into the garage, that's the same thing with with sleep too. So that's the second thing, have some kind of a wind down routine, find what works for you. Maybe it's taking a hot bath or a warm shower, and then stick to it. Just we do this with kids all the time, we find out what their bedroom, sorry, their bedtime regiment is and then we just stick to it faithfully 'cause we humans are the same way too. The third thing is a myth, don't count sheep. There's a study done here at UC Berkeley, I didn't do this today, I wish I did, it's by my colleague, Professor Allison Harvey. And they found that counting sheep actually made it harder to fall asleep. It made matters worse. As a conter sorry counter measure to that what they did find was that taking yourself on some kind of a mental walk, so think about a nice walk that you take in nature or a walk on the beach, or even a walk around an urban environment. - Just visualizing that. - And visualizing that, that seemed to be beneficial. The other thing about sort of that idea of shifting focus away from your mind itself, get your mind off itself is a good piece of advice. Catharsis, you can try to write down all of the concerns that you have, and do this not right before bed, but usually an hour or two before bed. Some people call it a worry journal. And to me, it's a little bit like closing down all of the emotional tabs on my browser. Because if I shut the computer down and all of those tabs are still open, I'm going to come back in the morning, and the computer's red hot the fans going because it didn't go to sleep, because it couldn't because there were too many tabs active and open. I think it's the same way with sleep as well, so try to think about doing that. So just vomit out all of your concerns on the page. - I like that, cause my 3am waking is often associated with me writing down the list of things that I forgot to do that I need to do. And once I eventually wake up from the later night, second half of the night's sleep, that stuff seems much more tractable and reasonable, but it sure would be great to get that stuff out of the way before sleep. - Well, there's also something that I don't think people have spoken about a lot. And I'd like to research it, which is difficulty and anxiety at night in the dark, is not the same difficulty and anxiety in the light of day. And when we have those thoughts at night, it comes with a magnitude of rumination and catastrophization that is disproportionate to that which you would describe when you are awake. And I don't know what's going on about the brain, and thought and emotion at the time, I've got a bunch of theories as to why, and that's why I like the idea of closing up zipping up all of those different components, just get them out on the page. And it feel, and I at first thought this just sounds like who its it sounds very Berkeley, it's kind of Kumbaya, we all hold hands, and, you know, we all come at the end of the day. But then the data started coming out really good studies from good people. And they found that keeping one of those journals decreased the time it takes you to fall asleep by 50%, five, zero. - Amazing that's substantial. - That's well on par with any pharmaceutical agent. - I'm convinced that I've long thought that the worries and concerns and ideas I have at three, 4am I've learned to not place any stock in them. Because something, I'm glad that you might decide to eventually look at this in your laboratory because I feel like something is melted away or altered. I suspect it's in the regulation of the autonomic nervous system, that it makes sense why a concern at three, 4am ought to evoke more of a panic sense than a concern sense. And certainly, that's my experience, although not, fortunate to not suffer from full blown panic attacks. But everything seems worse at three, 4am provided you're awake. - And we need to sort of look into that because, you know, if you look at suicide rates, around the 24 hour clock face, disproportionately higher rates in those middle sort of night hours. So now, I don't know if that's causative or not, but something you know, it could just be that that's the time when we're mostly lonely, and we're by ourselves. And that's the reason. So it's got nothing to do with sleep or the night time, I don't know. So that's the third thing, I think the fourth sort of little tip I would give that's unconventional, is remove all clock faces from your bedroom. - Including your phone. - Including your phone, and resist checking it. Now I know and I can speak about the phone too that genie of technology is out the bottle. And it's not going back in anytime soon. So we've got to think a scientist and sleep scientist, you know, as to what we do with you know, phones in the bedroom. - Years ago, I was a counselor at a Summer camp I worked with at risk kids and there was a phrase that comes to mind here, it's be a channel, not a dam. Because when you try and dam certain kinds of behavior, physically dam certain kinds of behavior and not morally dam, that too, it just creeps over the edge, and you get a waterfall. So it has to be a channel. The phone and devices have to be worked with and negotiated not eliminated. - That's right and you know, think about those mindfully too but clock faces, remove all of those, because if you are having, you know, a tough night, knowing that it's 3:22 in the morning, or it's 4:48 in the morning, does not help you in the slightest. And it's only going to make matters worse than better. So try to remove all clock faces. And I think that's one of those other tips that some people have found helpful. But those would be sort of some slightly unconventional, I guess more than your stock fare of here are the five tips for sleep hygiene tonight, so. - Those are terrific sleep tips, and several of which, if not all of which I'm going to incorporate. Matt, this has been an amazing, deep dive on sleep and it's positive and negative regulators. - I hope it hasn't been too long. - No this has been great. - Please cut it down, shorten it to, you know, the five minutes of meaningful stuff that I offered. - Absolutely not, it is chock a block full of valuable takeaways. It's been tremendously fun for me to dissect out this incredible aspect of our lives that we call sleep with a fellow scientist and a fellow public educator. I want to say several things. First of all, we should say where people can find you although it shouldn't be that difficult these days. You're a very present on the internet. - [Matthew] Unfortunately. - For better or for worse. I think it's wonderful that you're out there. Look, it's a public health service that you're doing. No one requires you or any other scientist to get out and share this information. My sense of you knowing you a bit, and from following your work very closely both your scientific work in detail and your public facing educational work is that you very much want the best for people. And it's an interesting thing as a scientist or a clinician, to know that the that certain answers exist, that we don't have all the answers, but that there is a better path, there are better ways and people can benefit in a myriad of ways. So, for that, because I know that to be very genuine in you, you want the best for people and you're offering tremendous advice and considerations and people can take it or leave it that's the way I view it. I also want to thank you for taking the time out of your day to sit with me here and have this discussion. - Not at all, no at all, it's a privilege, it's a delight, you know, you and I, I think we're alike kind in lots of ways. And I take you as a shining example of how you can effectively connect with the public. And I know that we've had our conversations before we ever sat down to talk together about, you know, how to think about communicating with the public and the pros and cons of that. And I've just loved your opinions. I've been drinking it all in. And then I think the third thing I'd like to say is, thank you for being such an incredible sleep ambassador, the series that you've released on sleep, the way that you speak about sleep, the way that you moderate and have championed sleep. It is remarkable. So thank you for just being you know, a brother in arms in that way. - But we are and thanks for those those words. 99% of what I discussed there was the work of you and your colleagues in the sleep field. So proper acknowledgement, but thank you, where can people learn more about what you're doing currently? And what's coming next? You're on Twitter. - I am on Twitter I typically tweet. - As the sleep diplomat. - So, no it's just sleep diplomat - Sleep diplomat on Twitter. - Sleep diplomat on Twitter, sleepdiplomat.com website, if you want to learn more about the science that we do here, it's humansleepscience.com. It's the Center for Human Sleep Science. You can pick up a copy of the book, if you want. It's called "Why We Sleep?" if you're curious about sleep, that's one path to take and it's my view. - Is there another might someday in the future? - I think there may be, yeah. - Great, great, many, many millions of people will be very happy to hear that. - I think it's starting to take hold. And then as we discussed, I am more than kicking around the idea of a short form podcast rather than a long form, not long form, because I don't have the mental capacity or the interviewing, just capability that someone like you has. So it will probably just be monologue short form. So if there is some interest, I'll probably do that as well. So those are the ways that people can find me. But overall, if you're interested in sleep, just listen to Andrew. That's thing I can tell people. - All right, well now we're bating back and forth the vector of action so to speak, but I do hope you'll start a podcast however brief or lengthy these episodes turn out to be because I do believe that's a great venue to get information out into the world. And we don't just want to hear more from Matt Walker, I speak for many people, we need to, the work you're doing is both influential, but more importantly, it is important work. It has the impact that's needed, especially in this day and age where science and medicine, public health, and the issues of the world, etcetera, are really converging. So I know I speak on behalf of a tremendous number of people, when I just say thank you for doing the work you do and for being you. - [Matthew] Thank you. - And thanks for being a good friend. - Likewise, too and by the way, I'm just going to note that it was nice that the two of us both got the Johnny Cash memo about how to dress today. It seems as though we're both kind of we got that same memo, which will mean nothing to people who are listening, but if you're watching the video, you'll probably see what I mean. Andrew, thank you for taking this time. Thank you so much. - Thanks so much Matt. Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Matt Walker. Please also check out his podcast the Matt Walker podcast. A link to that podcast can be found in the show notes. If you're enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. On YouTube, you can also leave us comments and suggestions for future episodes and guests in the comment section. As well, please subscribe to us on Apple and on Spotify, and at Apple you can leave us up to a five star review. You can also support us by checking out our Patreon account. That's patreon.com/andrewhuberman and there you can support us at at any level that you like. Please also check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of this episode. Links to those sponsors can be found in the show notes. During this episode, and in many previous episodes, we discuss supplements. One issue in the supplement industry is that many supplements don't contain what's listed on the bottle. We therefore have partnered with Thorne, that's T H O R N E, Thorne supplements, because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the purity of the ingredients, and precision with respect to what's listed on the bottle is actually what's contained in those supplement bottles. If you'd like to see the supplements that I take for sleep, and for other things, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman and there you'll see all the supplements that I take and can get 20% off any of those supplements as well as any other supplements that Thorne happens to make. That's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 317 ---
Video ID: rW9QKc-iFoY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rW9QKc-iFoY
Title: How to Optimize Your Brain-Body Function & Health
Published: 2021-07-26 12:00:22 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe how the organs of the body influence the function and health of our brain and how our brain controls our bodily organs. The conscious awareness of this brain-body dialogue is called interoception. I describe how two factors- mechanical forces (e.g., pressure, pain, volume, etc.) and chemical factors (e.g., gut acidity, microbiome diversity, etc.) combine to influence our moods, control inflammation, immune system, recovery from injury and more. I explain how specific actions of our lungs, heart, spleen, and diaphragm, control our brain via the vagus nerve and other neural pathways. I describe 11 science-supported protocols for enhancing brain-body health and the logic behind them.

#HubermanLab #Brain #Health

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Sonnenburg, Cell Press Study - https://bit.ly/SonnenburgCellPress

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Your Sense of Self: Interoception
00:01:25 Protocol 1: Fermented Foods, Not Fiber, to Reduce Inflammation 
00:03:30 Attributions
00:08:22 Main Drivers of Feelings & Performance
00:11:45 Brain-Body: A Mechanical & Chemical Dialogue 
00:17:50 LDB (Lung-Diaphragm-Brain) Dialogue  
00:21:00 Protocols 2, 3, 4: Control Heart Rate With Breathing
00:29:08 Sensing Lung Pressure: Piezo Receptors
00:30:54 Carbon Dioxide, From Air to Blood
00:34:02 Protocol 5: Alert While Calm
00:40:50 Baroreceptors: Hering-Breuer Reflex
00:42:47 Gut Volume & The Desire to Open Your Mouth 
00:48:18 Protocol 6: Enhancing Gut-To-Brain Communication, Fasting 
00:51:50 Intestines, Fatty Acids, Amino Acids & Sugar
00:57:00 Protocol 7: Reducing Sugar Cravings with Specific Amino Acid Nutrients 
00:58:58 Gut Acidity (Is Good)
01:02:20 Improving Nasal Microbiome 
01:04:13 Inflammation & Microbiome: Fiber vs. Fermented 
01:11:15 Protocol 8: Reducing Inflammation & Enhancing Brain Function w/Fermented Foods
01:13:10 Leaking Guts, Auto-Immune function & Glutamine
01:15:50 Gut Acidity: HCl (hydrochloric acid), Pepsin
01:18:30 Probiotics & Brain Fog
01:21:45 Nausea: Happens in Your Brain; Area Postrema
01:28:25 Protocol 9: Reducing Nausea: Ginger, Peppermint, CBD, etc.
01:30:40 Fever: Triggers and Control Knobs: OVLT
01:37:00 Protocol 10: Cooling the Blood Properly
01:38:53 Sensing Feelings, Vagus Nerve, Stress
01:41:50 Mental Emotions Reflect Bodily Conditions
01:45:00 Sensing Other People’s Emotions via the Body
01:46:00 Protocol 11: Increasing Interoception, Sensing Heartbeat 
01:50:40 Conclusions & Resources

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we continue in our discussion about sensation or how we sense things. On previous episodes, we talked about sensing light and sound waves for things like vision and hearing. Today, we are going to talk about our sense of self or what's called interoception. Interoception is our sensing of our internal landscape, things like our heartbeat, our breathing, and our gut, how full our gut might happen to be, or how empty our gut might happen to be. But also our inner landscape with respect to chemistry, how acidic, or how good or bad we feel on the inside. This discussion about sense of self and interoception has many important, actionable items that relate to bodily health and brain health, and believe it or not, our ability to perform well or perform poorly in life. Indeed, it has profound influence on our rates of healing. So today we are going to talk about all the aspects of our inner landscape and how our brain and body communicate. And there will be many actionable protocols as we go along that discussion. Before we begin our discussion about sense of self, I want to highlight some very recently published research findings that I believe are immediately actionable and that everybody should be aware of. These are data that were published by my colleague, Justin Sonnenberg's laboratory at Stanford University School of Medicine, and the data were published in the Journal Cell, which is a very high stringency cell press journal. So phenomenal data. What this study showed was that individuals given a high fiber diet actually experienced less diversity of what's called the gut microbiome. The number of positive or health promoting bacteria in the gut was actually reduced by a high fiber diet, whereas individuals that ate just a couple of servings of fermented food each day, experience important and beneficial increases in anti-inflammatory markers. And that could be traced back to improvements in the gut microbiome diversity, the diversity of bugs, literally little bacteria that live in the gut, which might sound bad, but they are actually very health promoting. I'm going to get into all the details of this study later in the episode, but I just wanted to emphasize these findings because they are immediately actionable. I think for most people ingesting one or two servings of fermented food each day is reasonable and does not bring with it tremendous costs or tremendous inconvenience. And I think many people are ingesting high fiber diets thinking that that's the best way to improve their gut microbiome. So while these data may prove to be controversial among the folks out there in the nutrition community, that really high fiber diet, I want to just emphasize that these data were looked at in a very unbiased way. They were done with large scale screens of all sorts of inflammatory markers. There was no specific hypothesis going in. It was purely exploratory, but the data are very clear. It doesn't mean you shouldn't eat fiber doesn't mean that fiber is bad, but it really shows that eating fermented foods, just one or two servings a day, and maybe even ramping up to three or four servings per day can be very beneficial for many aspects of health. Before we go any further. I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford, it is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Rocha makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of the absolutely highest quality. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their sunglasses and eyeglasses is developed with performance in mind. I've spent my career working on the visual system and its various functionings within the brain and within the eye, Roka sunglasses and eyeglasses are so phenomenal because they allow the visual system to do what it does best, which is to adjust to changes in what we call luminance or brightness, with many sunglasses out there and with many eyeglasses as well, if the brightness in the room changes or you get cloud cover, or you walk into a shadow, you have to take the glasses on or off, you can't see as well. But the folks at Roka really understand how the visual system works. And so they've designed their sunglasses and eyeglasses such that you never experienced that shift. You can walk into a shadow. The amount of sunlight can change. You can go into a dark room, et cetera, provided there's enough light to see you're going to see everything crystal clear. In addition you see everything crystal clear because the lens quality is terrific and the sunglasses and eyeglasses are very lightweight. So you don't even notice that they're on your face. Also the sunglasses and eyeglasses are designed for performance. You can use them while running or while cycling. Even if you sweat, they won't slip off your face. And as I mentioned before, they're very lightweight. So everything about these glasses is terrific and they have a terrific aesthetic. They have a lot of different styles to select from. And unlike a lot of performance eyeglasses out there, they won't make you look like a cyborg. You could wear them to dinner or to somebody's home. And they look really nice. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to Roka that's ROKA.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order, that's Roka, ROKA.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better meet your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be assessed, can only be measured from a quality blood test. And now with the advent of quality DNA tests, you can get further insight into the status of your immediate and long term health. One of the problems with a lot of blood and DNA tests that are out there, however, is you get the numbers back, you get the levels of metabolic factors, hormones, et cetera, but you don't get any information about what to do with those numbers or how to actually shift them in the direction that you want to. With Inside Tracker, they have this very easy to use dashboard and that dashboard makes it very clear, not just what your levels of hormones, et cetera are, but what actions to take in terms of nutrition or exercise or other lifestyle factors to bring those numbers into the appropriate ranges for you. If you'd like to try inside tracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of Inside Trackers plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of Inside Trackers plans. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 peer reviewed published studies and has over 600,000 five-star reviews. I started meditating when I was in my teens, but for many years I found it hard to maintain a meditation practice, I don't think I'm alone with that. I think many people start meditating. They'll do it for a few weeks or a few months, or maybe even a year. And then they'll give up the meditation practice. And we know from so many peer reviewed studies that meditation has a number of very positive effects on our brain health, our ability to focus and our bodily health. So it's a great thing, we probably should all be doing it, but most of us, including myself, have found it hard to stick to a meditation practice. Then I started using the Headspace app and what I found is I could be very consistent with my meditation practice because they have meditations that are short, meditation that are medium length, and meditations that are a bit longer, all of which benefit me. The meditations that they have also are of different styles. You can try different forms of meditation. I particularly like having a guide for my meditation. It just helps me stay focused, helps me stay on track and I'm able to derive all those regular benefits of meditation and keep the practice up on a regular basis, if you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a one month totally free trial. And with that, you'll get all of Headspace's meditations, the full library of meditations. You just go to headspace.com/special offer, and you get all of their meditations for one free month and you get to try it, if you don't like it, you can stop. But I think you will enjoy it. I certainly enjoy meditation and we know that it's very beneficial for all of us. If you're somebody who cares about your immediate and long-term health, and if you're somebody who's interested in performance of any kind in work in relationships, et cetera, today's topic I believe is among the more important ones for you. Of all the topics I could cover, this thing that we call sense of self, which is also called interoception has perhaps the most foundational level of importance for all that. We feel all that we do and all that we are capable of doing. In fact I will go so far as to say that interoception or our ability to sense our inner real estate is right there next to sleep. And perhaps one other feature of our health and bodily function that primary early determine how good we feel in the now in the short term, and in the longterm, and sets the stage for everything we are capable of doing. And if we don't take care of this thing that we call interoception, just like if we don't take care of sleep, we cannot perform well and we will not remain healthy. Interoception and sense of self are essentially the same thing, I will use those terms interchangeably, at least for sake of today's discussion. And I promise that if you can learn a little bit about the mechanisms of self sensing, of understanding what's going on in your internal milieu, as we say your internal environment, you will position yourself to do some very simple things that can lead to outsize positive effects on everything from sleep to body composition, to mental focus, to mood, your ability to regulate stress, and indeed even your ability to heal and recovery from injuries of different kinds, brain injury and bodily injury. So sense of self is absolutely crucial. It's sometimes called our sixth sense, right alongside the other five senses like hearing vision, touch, taste, smell, et cetera, but sense of self is different. Sense of self is really about what's going on internally within the confines of our skin. And it involves two key features that if you can understand those features, and you understand what modulates or changes, our ability to sense those features, there are a lot of things that you can do in terms of how you structure your nutritional practices, how you relate to your exercise practices, perhaps even certain things that you take in terms of supplementation that can basically make you feel better, more alert, and more capable for everything. I don't think that's a hyperbolic statement, I, in fact, I know it's not a hyperbolic statement because we have a system in our body that connects our brain to all of our bodily organs and connects all of those bodily organs to our brain. And that communication between brain and body in both directions creates a situation where either we are positioned to do things well, or we are positioned to do things poorly. So I really want to dive in and dissect, what is this system of brain, body communication? What does it look like? What are the actual neurons and connections? And as I do that, I promise that I'm going to place protocols, tools that you can apply in order to make sure that those neurons and connections are working optimally. So let's begin by talking about what system communicates the brain to the body and the body back to the brain. The system that's most often associated with this is our 10th cranial nerve called the vagus nerve. The word vagus relates to the word vagabond, which to wander, and indeed the vagus nerve is a vast, enormous wandering set of nerves, so it's not one nerve. It's not like one fiber, one axon. As we say in the nervous system, we have these wires, we call axons that let neurons communicate. It's a bunch of neurons and a bunch of wires that go everywhere, so where do they go? Well they leave the brain, and the brain stem, the brain stem is kind of the back of your brain. If you touch the back of your neck, it's about three inches deep to where you're touching. The neurons that are there send information into the body to control your bodily organs, how fast your heart is, beating how fast you're breathing, how fast your digestion is occurring. Even things like whether or not you are going to secrete so-called killer cells, your immune cells from your spleen to go ward off bacteria. Now the neurons there don't know what to do unless they receive information about what's going on within the body and within the body, your heart, your lungs, your diaphragm, your gut, so everything from your intestines to your stomach, et cetera, and your spleen or sending information also up to the brain. So as I mentioned before, it's a two-way street. So the vagus nerve is a very important nerve, but just by saying vagus nerve, it sounds like a singular. It sounds like one thing, but actually what we're talking about is a series of super highways, it's like Google maps, it's got stuff going everywhere with alternate routes, communicating back and forth. There are two fundamental features of what's going on in your body that need to be communicated to your brain, these neurons in your brain stem in order for your brain and your body to work together correctly. And the two types of information are mechanical information. So things like pressure, things like lack of pressure and chemical information, whether or not your gut is acidic or whether or not it's not acidic, whether or not you have some sort of pathogen, you know, something that you ate or that got into your body somehow and is making you sick or whether or not you don't have a pathogen in your body. So you've got mechanical sensing and chemical sensing. So when you think about your sense of self and your ability to understand what's going on in your body, if you feel good, or if you feel bad, your sense of self is dependent on these mechanical phenomenon and these chemical phenomenon. And for every organ in your body, whether or not that's your heart or your lungs or your spleen, both the mechanical information about that organ for instance, is if your gut is full or empty, whether or not your heart is beating fast or beating slowly, that's mechanical, and chemical information, whether or not your gut feels nice, and whether, you know, when I say nice, I mean, whether or not it has a balance of acidity and alkalinity, that feels right to you or whether or not your gut feels off, it doesn't feel quite right. That's chemical information. If you are not getting enough oxygen and levels of carbon dioxide and other gas go up too high. So your lungs can register that and that chemical information is sent to your brain. And then your brain does certain things actually really encourages you to do certain things in order to adjust that chemistry. So the first principle that everyone should understand about their sense of self is that they are sensing mechanical and chemical information about every organ in their body, except for one, and that's the brain. Your brain actually doesn't have pain receptors. It doesn't even have touch receptors. The brain is a command center. It helps drive and govern changes in the organs of the body. But your brain doesn't move, at least not much. It can move a little bit fluid moves within it. But as long as you're healthy, it's not moving that much. Your brain has no sensation of its own, in fact, when they do brain surgery on people, they will the size or put some anesthesia on the scalp. They'll cut away the skin there so that people don't feel anything. They'll use some anesthesia they'll peel back the skin and then they'll use a, let's call it what it is, it's a bone saw. And they basically saw open a little window in the skull. I've actually done this before and seen this before. I've done this many times before, and once you're inside the brain, you can put electrodes in there and you can put various things in there, of course, all for therapeutic purposes. And you do that without any anesthesia to the actual brain tissue, because it has no receptors to sense anything. It doesn't have pain receptors. It doesn't have pressure receptors. None of that, when you have a headache in your head, feels like it's too much pressure, well that's because of here's that lie outside the brain. So your organs are different. They need to tell your brain what's going on. And there are ways that you can control the mechanical and the chemical state of your organs in ways that are very powerful, and this is crucial to do, because if you can properly regulate the mechanical and chemical environment of your body, your brain functions better. This is absolutely clear from data that if your gut is healthy, if you get the alkalinity right, the acidity, right, and if your spleen is healthy and happy, and if your lungs are working properly, not just breathing and pumping in and out air, but you're breathing at the right cadence for a particular activity, then your brain will function better. So let's talk about how you can adjust the mechanical and chemical environment of your organs in order to make your brain better and how your brain can make the mechanical and chemical environment within your organs function better. For instance we're going to talk about how you can change the chemistry of your gut in order for your brain to be able to focus better, think better, remember better and sleep better. And we're going to talk about how you can change the chemistry of other organs in your body, such that your immune system will function better than it would otherwise. And you can actually heal faster from small cuts and bruises, but also injuries of any kind, even major injuries. So as I mentioned before, we've got these organs, the heart, the lungs, the diaphragm, and I'll explain what that is, the gut and the spleen. And the spleen is this immune organ. Let's take one example of these and explain how mechanical and chemical information from this particular set of organs communicates to the brain and how that changes how our brain works. And the organ I'd like to focus on first are the lungs and the diaphragm. So we're all familiar with our lungs, these two big bags of air, but they're actually not two big bags of air. They actually have little tiny sacs within them, actually millions of little sacs called the alveoli of the lungs. The alveoli of the lungs are like little tiny balloons throughout our lungs, and the more of those balloons, we have, the more air that we can actually contain. So we are not too big bags of air in there, our lungs, we actually have millions and millions of little tiny bags of air within those lungs. Those little bags of air can fill up or they can deflate, right, just like your lungs overall can fill up or they can deflate. The diaphragm is a muscle, it's kind of shaped like a dome. So it's kind of a, you know, think about a basketball or a soccer ball that has most of the air pushed out of it. And so it's kind of crescent shape or dome shaped, and it sits below our lungs and the way the diaphragm and the lungs work together is very interesting. The diaphragm is actually skeletal muscles. So it's just like a bicep or a quadricep. And the fact that it is skeletal muscle is important because it has a unique property, which is that you can control it voluntarily. You can decide to take control of your diaphragm by just consciously deciding you want to breathe in a particular way, just like you can take conscious control over your legs. They will work just fine, if you're not thinking about them, as you walk as provide, you already know how to walk, but at any moment, you can decide to change the rate of your walking, your so-called cadence of walking. So the diaphragm as a skeletal muscle also has that property, the diaphragm moves up and down, depending on how you breathe, or rather, I should say how the diaphragm moves up and down determines how you breathe. How you breathe is also dependent on little muscles that are between your ribs, the intercostals and other muscles, if you're a martial arts fan that Bruce Lee was famous for having these very pronounced intercostals from doing all sorts of, you know, bridging exercise, et cetera. But those are the muscles. And we all have them, even if some of us, most of us don't have, intercostals like Bruce Lee. So when you breathe a couple things happen, but let's talk about the mechanical things first. And then let's talk about how those mechanical steps relate back to the brain and what that does for the brain. And I can promise you that if you develop an awareness of these mechanical changes, you do not have to go through extensive breathwork practice or do extensive breathwork. You will immediately believe it or not develop a sense of your breathing self of your lungs and diaphragm. It takes no practice, but once you do it, you will forever be changed in terms of your awareness of your breathing and your ability to leverage your breathing. Kind of like the steering wheel on a car in order to shift your brain in the direction that you want to go. So it's a very powerful system. And the way it works is the following. And this will also incorporate the heart, so, and by the heart, I don't mean it in the emotional sense. Although we don't rule out emotions here at the Huberman Lab podcast, we like emotions, but I'm talking about the heart as an organ, as a beating organ, that circulates blood. So when we inhale, these little sacs in our lungs fill up and our lungs expand. And when we do that, we take up space in our thoracic cavity and our diaphragm moves down, okay. When we exhale, the diaphragm moves up, the lungs get smaller, okay? So inhales, diaphragm moves down. Exhales, diaphragm moves up. This actually controls our heart rate, but it does it by changing the way that our brain works. And it works in the following way. So when we inhale, our lungs fill our diaphragm moves down. Our heart actually has a little more space because the diaphragm's moved down. So the heart gets a little bit bigger, physically bigger, not in the emotional sense, but physically bigger. And as a consequence, whatever blood is in the heart flows at a slower rate because it's a larger volume, so bigger volume heart, same amount of blood inside the heart means slower flow. Okay, sort of like expanding a pipe. The brain registers that because there are a set of neurons in the heart called the sinoatrial node. It sends that information to the brain. That information is registered by the brain and the brain sends a message back to the heart to speed the heart up. So every time you inhale because of these mechanical changes in the diaphragm and lungs, and because of the mechanical changes in the heart, your brain sends a signal to the heart to speed the heart up, so if you do long inhales or you inhale more vigorously, you actually are speeding your heart up. Now, of course you have to exhale as well. But for instance, if I were to inhale very long like [inhales heavily] the entire time my heart rate is increasing. And then if I did a quick exhale, [exhales quickly] something else will happen, but if I kept doing that, [inhales heavily, exhales quickly] my heart rate would increase. It's not going to increase linearly and forever, but it will increase with each inhale. Or I can simply make my inhales more vigorous. [inhales quickly] And my heart rate will speed up. This is an autonomic and automatic relationship between the diaphragm, the lungs, the brain, and the heart. Now, if inhale speed the heart up, what happens on exhales? When we exhale, the diaphragm moves up. It's a little counterintuitive, but you can kind of think about it as like pushing the plunge on a syringe, right? When you exhale, this thing moves up and as the diaphragm moves up, the heart has less space. Meaning it gets a little bit smaller, which means that whatever volume of blood is inside the heart moves faster, through that smaller volume, that information is sent to the brain via these collection of neurons called the sinoatrial node for you aficionados. The brain then sends information via the vagus nerve back to the heart, to slow the heart down. So while inhales speed up the heart, that's the net effect exhales, slow the heart down. And the reason they slow the heart down is because of a register in the change in mechanical pressure between the diaphragm, the lungs and the heart. So this is to me, the simplest and most straightforward example of how the brain is changing the way our organs work, our heart in this case, according to changes in mechanical interoception. Now, we're not always aware of this, some of us are aware of it, some of us aren't. If you do it right now, you will be aware of it, so you can try this. You can basically, this is an experiment or an example in interoception, in sensing one's self. So if you inhale, doesn't matter how long you inhale. I'll do it for a couple seconds [inhales quickly] and then exhale twice as long. [exhales slowly] Nose or mouth, doesn't matter, the entire time that you're exhaling, you're slowing your heart down. So just as a car has an accelerator and a brake, or you can slow a car by coming off the accelerator. When you exhale, you're effectively coming off the accelerator, or if you want to think about it differently, you're hitting the brake, you're slowing down your heart rate. Now, normally your heart rate stays in more or less the same range for a given activity because you're inhaling and exhaling. But this is just a simple way of showing that mechanical changes in your viscera can change the way that your brain works and then your brain changes the way that those viscera work. And it's a very concrete agreement, it's like a contract between the organs of your body and the brain. In fact, you can think about this contract in more detail, and you can leverage this in a very powerful way to set the conditions of your mind. If you want to be more calm, emphasize exhales, and the simplest way to do this. I've talked about this many times before, but if you haven't heard me say it, this will become immediately clear is to emphasize exhales through what's called a physiological sigh. Two inhales, could be through the nose of the mouth, but ideally through the nose, so [inhales quickly twice] so followed by a long exhale. [exhales slowly] Those double inhales are kind of important because what they do is they maximally fill all those little sacs in your lungs, and then when you breathe out, you're exhaling as much of the so-called carbon dioxide in your system as possible. We'll talk about carbon oxide in a second. So the fastest way to calm down is to emphasize exhales. When you make exhales longer, you're slowing your heart rate, you're calming down. You don't need any sophisticated training. You don't have to do this for minutes on end. You don't have to do anything. You don't even have to call it breathwork. It's just respiration, and in fact, you do this every night. When you go to sleep and carbon dioxide builds up too much in your bloodstream, or if you hold your breath or something, or you watch an animal or a small child that sleeping, they will occasionally do these double inhale long exhales it's way of slowing the heart down and eliminating carbon oxide. The opposite is also true. If you inhale deeply or vigorously and then exhale less long or less vigorously, you will increase your level of alertness through these purely mechanical aspects of your interoception. So for instance, if I were to take a big deep inhale [inhales deeply] and then a short exhale, [exhales quickly] and then another one, a big inhale, [inhales deeply] short exhale, [exhales quickly] It only takes two or three of those before you start to feel more alert. And that's because your heart rate is increasing. And actually if you keep doing that for 25 or 30 breaths of inhale deep short exhale, you will start to secrete a lot of adrenaline. This hormone that comes from your kidneys and from your brainstem make you feel really alert. You will actually feel as if you've had a cup of espresso. So you will immediately wake up. And there's an intermediate form of breathing, which is sometimes called box breathing, but it's really equal inhale and exhale duration. And these, it basically goes like this. You're you're going to inhale, so do this for maybe two, three seconds inhale, [inhales] then hold, okay, two, three seconds. Then exhale, two, three seconds. Then hold two, three seconds. Most often people forget to hold. So it's inhale, hold, exhale, hold for equal or more or less equal durations, could be one second, could be two seconds, could be three seconds. Most people find that when you get out past five seconds, they start to struggle to maintain the so-called box breathing. And most people can't consciously box breathe for too terribly long without having to think about it. But the point here is that through purely mechanical means changing the way that you breathe, emphasizing inhales or exhales, or keeping them the same will change the way that your brain works, how alert you are and how well you function in anything. And again, this doesn't mean that breathwork has no value. It's just simply to say that long extended protocols of breathwork are simply, they are truly simply just an exploration of this fundamental relationship between the mechanics of your internal organs and your brain and how your brain controls those internal organs. Now you might ask, well, how is this pressure known? How does the body actually know how full the lungs are, now? This is an answer that's more for the aficionados out there, but I've had a few requests, or I should say thousands of requests for more in-depth science, so if you're not interested more in depth science, just this will allow you to tune out now for maybe just 10 seconds, and if you are interested, pay careful attention, there is a set of receptors which are called piezo receptors, P-I-E-Z-O piezo receptors, piezo means pressure. And these were discovered a few years ago by a couple of different laboratories, but one of the main ones, one of the main laboratories that discovered these piezo receptors is the laboratory of Ardem Patapoutian. I love saying his name, even though I'm probably pronouncing it, he's a friend and a former colleague when my lab was down in San Diego, he's at the Scripps Institute, he's a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator, which basically means that he's a total stud of science and has made many important discoveries. The piezo receptors line many tissues, and inform the brain about pressure in those tissues. But the lungs have a particular category of piezo receptors called piezo two receptors. And as you fill your lungs and these little sacs of air, the alveoli fill, the piezo two receptors because of the way they react to that filling send information by way of a bunch of neurons, a bunch of wires up to the brain and tell you how full your lungs are, so that's the kind of mechanistic detail. If you want to learn more about that, you can look up our Ardem's lab at the Scripps and the beautiful work that they and other laboratories are doing on piezos, piezos are pretty cool. I think I also just like saying piezo, so that's why I brought that up as well. So mechanical sensing of the lungs, heart and diaphragm. And now let's talk about chemical sensing because there's carbon dioxide and there's oxygen. And this is really simple. You have oxygen and carbon dioxide and you need them both. I sometimes hear people talk about carbon dioxide is this bad thing and oxygen, it has a good thing. You need them both, and you need them in the appropriate balance. You have a collection of neurons in your brain that register when carbon dioxide levels get to a certain point in your bloodstream. When that point, that threshold is reached, these neurons fire, and they cause you to breathe sometimes called the gasp reflex, it just makes you want to inhale. And as a consequence, you bring in more oxygen. Okay, so we don't really breathe to get oxygen. That's a by-product of inhaling to eliminate carbon dioxide. You don't want carbon dioxide levels to go too high. In fact, if you want to freak somebody out and we do these in experiments, and I don't recommend you do this, you just increase the levels of carbon dioxide that they inhale, and the brain will go into an almost immediate panic response because the health of all our tissues depends on keeping a nice balance between carbon dioxide and oxygen. You don't want carbon dioxide levels to go too high. So the impulse to breathe, if you're under water, or if you hold your breath is triggered by these neurons and the triggering of those neurons comes from elevated carbon dioxide in the bloodstream. And for those of you that don't quite know how to conceptualize the relationship between bloodstream and breath, I do think it's important. And maybe you remember this from high school biology, but if you don't, I'll make it clear for you now, it's very easy. You inhale air and that air and the oxygen molecules in that air actually move from your lungs into the bloodstream because these little alveoli of the lungs, those little sacs of air are in there, they basically have a lot of little micro vessels and capillaries, little tiny, basically blood vessels, essentially, although they're mostly capillaries, micro capillaries are the little tiny ones, that line them, so there's actually an interface and opportunity for air and molecules within the air to pass into the blood and then they move in your bloodstream, and when you exhale, the opposite is true. So you can move things from the air, into your bloodstream or from your bloodstream into the air by way of the lungs, and there's a lot more detail to it. And I'm sure those of you that are experts out there. If you want to put some stuff in the comments, maybe a little bit of a kind of intermediate tutorial, you might even entitle it, intermediate tutorial. If you know a lot about this, just I'll check it, but make sure you get the details, right. Make sure you know the process. And I find that for people that are interested in understanding how breathing really works, it's really nice to think about the relationship between the heart and the vascular system, the blood and the air system, the respiration system, and breathing, because those two things are very, we say, they're interdigitated, they're interwoven with one another. So how does this work, well, carbon dioxide is too high, you breathe in, you inspire, you, inhale you off as a consequence, when you exhale, you offload carbon dioxide. There's a really cool way that you can explore this chemistry of your breathing and your bloodstream and the way that your brain works in ways that can really benefit your health. And it works the following way. You want to essentially sit or lie down. It doesn't really matter. You definitely don't want to be anywhere near water, not a bathtub, not a hot tub, not a, you know, not a cold dunk or something. In fact, don't even be in a puddle. And what you want to do in this case is you're going to breathe in deep. So that's going to increase your heart rate and then exhale passively by just letting air fall out of your mouth. So it will look something like this. [inhales vigorously, exhales passively] So it's you breathe in vigorously and then you let the air just fall out of your mouth. When you do that, what you're essentially doing is you're bringing in a lot of oxygen through that deep breath. And you're exhaling a little bit of that carbon dioxide. But if you were to repeat it 25 times, maybe 30 times, it doesn't matter if it's 25 or 30, somewhere in there, you would essentially start bringing in a lot of oxygen and blowing off or exhaling a lot of carbon dioxide. So you're actually going to change the chemistry of your internal landscape, and you can then sense it. You can interocept what that is like. And there are some really interesting reasons for wanting to do that, so I'm not going to do all 25 or 30 now, maybe do five or 10, so you can get a sense of what it looks like, so that it's clear. I'm going to essentially demonstrate now, so it's inhale, [inhales vigorously] exhale through the mouth,[exhales] I am inhaling the nose, [inhales vigorously, exhales passively multiple times] So it's essentially, excuse me, a two second or so inhale and then a one second or so exhale, and as I was doing that, I can kind of feel my face get flush and my body is heating up and my brain is heating up, what's happening there? Well that pattern of breathing is increasing levels of adrenaline in my brain and body, and I'm getting more alert. Then after 25 or 30 of those, you exhale all your air. [exhales deeply] You dump all your air. You can do that, your nose or your mouth. And then you hold your breath with your lungs empty for about 15 to 30 seconds. Now, for those of you that want to explore this, and please be careful as you explore this, don't do anything stupid, like do this while you're driving or something like that. You can exhale all your air and what you'll find then is you can hold your breath for a very long time. And the reason you can do that is because you've blown off all the carbon dioxide or most of the carbon dioxide in your bloodstream. So you shifted the chemistry of your blood by breathing in a particular way. And by doing that, you are no longer triggering these neurons that cause the gasp reflex or the reflex to breathe. Now, of course you have to breathe sooner or later but what you'll find is if normally your ability to hold your breath is a minute or so before you really feel that gasp reflex kick in, you might find that you can go 90 seconds or two minutes. And with some practice, people find that they can start holding their breath for three or four minutes or longer. This is actually how free divers do what they do. I do not want anyone free diving. If you're going to learn free diving, please learn it from an expert. Many people die trying to teach themselves out of free dive or trying to teach their friends at a free dive when they don't know what they're doing. This is not what this is about, don't again, don't do this anywhere near water, but it is a very interesting exploration of how you can shift the chemistry of your bloodstream by modulating your air by modulating the mechanics of your diaphragm and lungs and thereby shift the way your mind works, your brain. And in fact, what you'll notice is that even though during that 25 or 30 breaths, [inhales and exhales quickly] you'll feel very alert, when you exhale all your air and you're in the breath hold, you will feel very alert, but very calm. Now this is interesting because it's a state that we all sort of want to achieve alert, but calm, but have a hard time achieving. And so for those of you that have a hard time obtaining focus for sake of work or focus for sake of anything I should say, and when you are able to achieve focus, it's through the use of things like stimulants, or you feel like you have to have a cold shower or ice bath, or you have to have four espresso in order to be alert, but then you're too alert, you're jittery. You can't focus. This pattern of breathing can lend itself very well to entering states of alert, but calm for the fall, the 10 or even 20 minutes that follow that breathing. And then you could repeat it if you want. So it's a very useful practice to explore. Some of you may be familiar with this practice and so-called Wim Hof breathing. Wim Hof is a practitioner of what's called Tumo breathing. Tumo breathing has been around for centuries. And for those of you that are familiar with breathwork and yoga practices, I acknowledged that nothing I just described is new based on science, however, the science informs why those practices work. And just as a little mini editorial, I just want to emphasize as well. That one thing that this podcast is really about is trying to remove fancy nomenclature, whether or not it's yogic nomenclature or scientific nomenclature so that people can access protocols. Because the moment we start naming things after people or calling them Tumo et cetera, I have no problem with that, but it doesn't inform how the practices are done, nor does it inform the underlying mechanisms. So here I'm trying to teach you the mechanisms. And as a final point to that, the most powerful form of breathing is the one that takes into account the fundamental mechanisms that in increase heart rate, that exhales decrease heart rate, and that carbon dioxide and oxygen relate to the bloodstream and the brain in particular ways, once you understand those components, then you can create your own so-called breathwork practices. You can breathe in the ways that best serve you, as opposed to thinking that one protocol is the best or holy protocol for everything, because it's simply not. As a final final point, I want to say that as you shift the way that you breathe, whether or not you're showing off more carbon dioxide or bringing in more oxygen, you are fundamentally changing the chemistry of your internal milieu have your body, and that has been shown to have important effects on the way that your immune system functions and the way that you deal with inflammation and all sorts of different sort of things that can enter your body and cause problems or conditions of stress, et cetera. So I will explore that further as the episode goes on, but I want to move on to just touch on one other aspect of reading, that's purely mechanical, which I think is very interesting and important, which relates to a particular reflex that you're going to be very familiar with in a second. And that can serve you very well in times of extreme stress. The reflex I'm referring to is something called the Hering Breuer Reflex. I'm not going to go into details about how the Hering Breuer reflex works, but it has to do with particular classes of neurons and cells that are called a Baroreceptors. Those are basically pressure receptors, they sense pressure. And basically what the Hering Breuer reflex is about is that when your lung is inflated, your desire to breathe is reduced. So you can try that right now, you can inhale [inhales] huge big thing of air. And hold, okay? Your desire to breathe will kick in later than were are you to exhale all your air and hold your breath. When you exhale all your air and your breath, unless you've done the sort of protocol I described a few minutes ago of doing a bunch of inhales and exhales first in a very deliberate way, you will feel empty. Those Baroreceptors are going to be firing like crazy saying, there's no pressure in here, there's no pressure here, I got nothing in here. You need to breathe, you need to breathe in, the gasp reflex will kick in sooner. You can apply that in all sorts of situations related to exercise, related to modulating stress, et cetera. So the Hering Breuer reflex is a very powerful one. This is why you take a big deep breath before you go under water. [inhales heavily] All right, you're not going to exhale all your air and go under water. If you were to exhale all your air and go under water, you would absolutely feel the need to come up sooner for a breath of air than had you a full tank, so to speak a full of lungs full of air. And this is also the way that people teach themselves to feel comfortable under water. So when you learn how to swim, you learn how to swim both by having air in your lungs while you're underwater and no air in your lungs while you're underwater. In any event the Hering Breuer reflex is yet another dimension to the way that mechanical pressure influences your brain's decision-making, about what to do with your body, in this case, whether or not to breathe. So now I want to shift away from breathing and diaphragm and lungs and move toward another organ within our viscera, which is our gut. So this includes our stomach and our intestines, our esophagus and so forth. It's been said before, both by me and by others that we are, but a series of tubes, and indeed that's true. Believe it or not, every system in your body is a tube. Your brain is actually a tube that connects your spinal cord, which has also a tube. You started off as a tube, you were like a churro. You know, those churros I don't know if you're not familiar with churros, they're like donuts that are shaped like a tube. That's essentially what you look like early in development, not long after conception and the front end of that churro grew and grew and grew, but you always maintained a hollow through that tube. That's why you have what are called ventricles, gaps or a space in your brain and spinal cord that run the length of your brain and spinal cord and fluid, cerebral spinal fluid, and other things move through that space. We're going to return to the ventricles later, they are very important. They're just space filled with fluid, but they do a lot. Similarly your digestive system starts with the tube at your mouth and of course goes down through your throat. And then you've got all the elements of the stomach and the intestines, and then it comes out the other end. So you are, but a series of different tubes, your vascular system, a series of other tubes. So you're tubes. The way your digestive system works is to communicate to your brain about the status of the mechanical pressures along this tube, so within your stomach and your intestines, et cetera, and the chemical status of that tube at various portions within that tube to inform your brain about how your brain should control that tube. So let's start with the mechanical sensing of your gut. If you drink a lot of fluid, or if you eat a lot of food, your gut will fill up, your stomach will fill up with food. Now it gets digested there. It gets digested elsewhere along your digestive track too, of course but it starts getting digested there because along this tube, you have a series of what are called sphincters, which basically are like little draw pulls. Have you ever had a laundry bag, which has a drawstring on it? You pull it and then it cinches shut, and then you can open it again, that's what those are. Those are sphincter openings and you have them in your throat, you have them along your digestive tract, all the way to the end. Food will enter your gut. And if there's a lot of that food, pressure receptors, some of which are these piezo receptors will communicate to the areas of your brain that are involved in feeding, and we'll say, don't eat anymore. You don't need to consume anymore, now, some people bypass that these, I guess they have these like hotdog eating competitions. I'm always struck by how some of those people are like, seem to be rail thin, but they actually train for those competitions by ingesting large volumes of water, actually a very dangerous practice. You can actually kill yourself by drinking too much water, and you can kill yourself by ingesting too much of anything, really to expand your gut, not a good practice, not a big fan of those competitions. But even if you're one of those people or you're the world heavyweight champion of them, they are informative toward what I'm talking about now, which is that as you expand the gut, a signal is sent by neurons, literally nerve cells that are in the gut to the brain, stem up to the areas of the brain that are involved in feeding, I did a whole episode on feeding. You can find on "Feeding, Metabolism And Hunger." You're welcome to listen to that episode, if you like, and we'll shut down the neurons that drive the desire to put more stuff in your mouth. That thing that people say sometimes on well in this country frequently after Thanksgiving meal, I can't put another bite in my mouth. Literally they shut down some of the basic movements of the musculature to take another fork bite. I know it sounds crazy, but they can actually control your brain. So your gut is so full that it's controlling your brains, such that this action of spooning food towards your mouth is actually inhibited. It's made more difficult or less likely to occur. It's incredible. The converse is also true, when these piezo receptors signal to the brain, that the gut is empty independent of your need, your actual need for food. There's a signal that sent to your brain that says gut is empty and neurons get stimulated in areas like the arcuate nucleus and these areas of the hypothalamus and et cetera, that drive the desire to make this action, to open the mouth and to put stuff in it in particular food. So when you find yourself at the refrigerator or you find yourself almost, you know, manically trying to get food of different cons, you're not even thinking about what you're eating, because you're so hungry, in part that's because the lack of food in your gut has sent that information to your brain and is driving particular fixed action patterns that are associated with eating, in fact, one of the first things children learn how to do is open their mouth when something is presented to it. And then they learn how to move a spoon or a fork. They're not very good at it, at first, they get all over the place, but eventually they get good at, or at least most people get good at if you watch how people eat, you know, it's kind of very variable out there. In any event, this is a purely mechanical phenomenon. And this purely mechanical phenomenon is driving our brain to drive certain behavior. You can get better at registering sense of fullness or lack of fullness in a very particular way. Some people have a very keen sense of how full or empty their stomach is, so if you've eaten anything, even if it's a small volume of food in the last hour to three hours, it's actually a worthwhile practice to take a few moments, maybe 10, 20 seconds, and actually just try and concentrate on sensing the neurons in your gut and how full you are, like for instance, I ate a few hours ago and then I had a little snack about 30 minutes ago or so. And my gut feels neither terribly full nor terribly empty. It's kind of, I would put it kind of like 30, 40% okay. So by just taking conscious awareness of how full or empty our gut is at various times between meals, after a meal, before a meal, you can very quickly develop a sense of how full or empty you are. Now, what's the consequence of that? The consequence of that is actually rather interesting. It's been shown that the consequence of that is actually that you can better override the signals of these piezo receptors and gut fullness or emptiness. So for those of you that find that you eat kind of compulsively or non-consciously, or subconsciously, I should say, probably have to be conscious enough to be awake to eat, but subconsciously you just find yourself eating and here I'm describing myself, I'm like, I'm a drive by blueberry eater. If there's a bowl of blueberries, every time I walk past it, I sort of have to grab a handful of them and pop them in my mouth, but if you develop this sense of how much mecho-pressure, it's not really word, but how much mechano-sensation is in your gut, very quickly, you can learn to override that. You might ask, why would I want to be able to override whether or not my stomach is empty or my stomach is full? Well, there are many reasons to want to do that. Many people right now are interested in so-called intermittent fasting. They're doing fast of anywhere from 12 to 16 hours, every 24 hour cycle, that's actually what my practice is. I do that on a regular basis, sometimes the, I eat breakfast, but normally I pushed breakfast out to about 11 or noon, or sometimes a little later, some people are doing longer fast, and there are really wonderful data publishing excellent journals from my colleagues Satchin Panda at the Salk Institute Of Biological Studies. And of course from other laboratories showing that intermittent fasting can and will have some positive health effects on things like liver health and brain health and other aspects of health. Whether or not it's the best form of dieting for the sake of losing weight, that's very controversial, but it's clear that having a period of fasting every 24 hours or perhaps even longer from time to time can be beneficial because it stimulates what's called autophagy, the clearing away, or the body's ability to eat certain dead cells, so called senescent cells, and for many people, they struggle with fasting because they feel they have a very keen sense of their stomach being empty. And they feel as if they have to eat. And in a kind of counter-intuitive way, there's some data that indicate that being able to sense whether or not your gut is full or empty, and just the knowledge that that's communicating information to your brain about whether to not to eat or not just that awareness, that understanding allows them to override the signal. They think, oh, you know, I'm not actually in need of nutrients right now. It's just that my stomach is empty. And these piezo receptors, and some other ones that I'll tell you about in a moment are signaling to my brain that it's empty. I don't actually need food, it's just, it's just that my brain is reacting to the fact that my gut is deflated, so to speak or a smaller, doesn't have food in it. So there are other ways that our guts communicate with our brain, it's not just our stomach talking to our brain. It's also our intestines talk to our brain. The Liberles Lab the guy's name is Steven Liberles, he runs a lab at Harvard Medical School, it's a terrific lab, does excellent work on gut, brain communication and other aspects of viscera brain communication. They discovered a category of neurons called the GLP1R neurons, these are neurons that are basically in your neck, I mean, they're part of the nervous system, but they're, you can, they can be found near your neck. And those neurons send little wires down into the intestines and deep into the stomach, but mostly into the intestines and they sense stretch of your intestines. So this is pretty wild. These neurons sense how stretched out your intestines are and how fast things are moving through your intestines, slow or fast, or if there's nothing there. And then those neurons send another branch, they have a branch in one direction, senses what's going on in your intestines. And they have another branch that goes up from your neck in your brain to either trigger the desire to eat more or just stop eating. So these are really cool neurons and they're basically stretch receptors. They look a lot like the piezo receptors that we talked about before, so these GLP1R neurons are sensing stretch, so purely mechanical sensing. And in addition to that, the Liberles Lab discovered neurons that detect nutrients themselves. Now, the main reason why we need to eat is to bring nutrients into our body. And there is another set of neurons, those are called GPR65 neurons, if you want to know, but you don't have to remember that, do the same thing in terms of their connections. They send connections down into the intestines and into the gut, into the stomach, but mostly into the intestines. And then send that information back up to the brain as to whether or not there are certain kinds of nutrients in our digestive track. Now, these neurons are the ones to pay attention to if we're talking about chemical signaling and then in the next couple of minutes, I'm going to tell you about how you can understand hunger and had a modulate your hunger for the right foods, in fact, for healthy foods. The way this is done is by leveraging the activity of these GPR65 neurons, these neurons that sense nutrients, okay. They're telling your brain what's in your gut and intestines, and you have another set of neurons that were discovered by another guy he's out at Duke University, his name is Diego, excuse me, Diego Borges he's a wonderful scientist. He has a degree in nutrition, but also in neuroscience. And he found that there are neurons that line the gut, and those neurons in collaboration with these GPR65 neurons are sensing for three things, okay? So we say nutrients, which nutrients are they looking for? What are these neurons paying attention to? While these neurons are activated by the presence of fatty acids in particular, omega-3 fatty acids, sorts of things that come from fatty fish, oil, krill, certain kinds of animal protein, animal, and plant substances. You can look up what has a lot of omega-3s and those omega-3s make these neurons fire electrically like crazy up to the brain and make you want to eat more of those things, but it turns out in pretty appropriate levels. These neurons also respond to amino acids. So when you eat a food, it's broken down in the gut, actually the way it's broken down in the gut is kind of interesting. Your gut basically cinches off a sphincter up top, cinches off a sphincter below it when there's food there. And then you have a series of smooth muscles that tumble the food and literally physically break it down. And then of course, enzymes come in and start digesting the food. And we're going to talk about digestion and how that's communicated to the brain in a moment. And for those of you with any autoimmune issues or digestive issues, this is going to be very important conversation. But meanwhile there are these neurons in the gut and as these fatty acids float out of the digested food, so literally fat molecules, and as amino acids are coming from the proteins as they're digested in the gut. And as a third food item, sugars are coming from the foods that we eat. These neurons will fire a lot to the brain that says, Hey, whatever you're doing up there, do more of it, okay? Now the sugars are a little bit cryptic because when I say sugars or I say amino acids, or I say fatty acids, this has nothing to do with taste. In fact, beautiful experiments have been done by the Borges Lab and by other labs showing that even if you numb the mouth, even if you gavavge, which is a really, just a, it's a fancy word for basically tube feeding, you put a tube down into the gut, you just deliver the food to the gut. So you get no opportunity to taste, it sounds pretty awful. If you force feed by gavage, or you numb the mouth, these neurons don't care about the mouth. They only care about the nutrients coming from these foods. And then they signal to the brain, hey, do that thing, do that thing where you lift that object, we call a fork or a spoon, do that thing where you drink the milkshake, do that thing where you move your mouth like this, not talking, but do that thing where you swallow. So that's how the nutrients in our gut control us. And this is why for people that experience extreme sugar cravings, or even mild sugar cravings, replacing those foods with foods that have high levels of omega-3 or amino acids can produce sugar cravings. And I've talked about this on a previous episode, but if you didn't catch it, no big deal. I'll tell you right now that for many people, the solution to sugar cravings is to ingest a small amount, maybe a teaspoon or so of an amino acid called glutamine. And if you have really extreme sugar cravings, you can even mix that glutamine with a full-fat cream, which actually makes it taste pretty darn good. And you drink that anytime you have a sugar craving or just a sip or two of that. And we find is that the sugar cravings disappear, because you're basically giving fat and amino acids to those neurons in the gut and in the intestine, that signal to the brain that you want more. Now, this doesn't give you a kind of runaway hunger for full fat cream. Although it will say when I was in high school for various reasons, but mostly because I liked the way it tastes. I was using half and half in my cereal. And I was waking up in the middle of night and drinking half and half, and that stuff tastes pretty darn good once you get used to the high fat content. Not something I do now. But the point is these neurons don't really know taste, they only know nutrients. And so you can work with that system if you crave sugar, and I do believe that most if not all of us should be trying to limit, if not eliminate simple sugars, as much as possible most of the time, then things like glutamine, things like high omega-3 foods, et cetera, maybe even want to supplement with fish oil or something similar to get omega-3s, there are other reasons for wanting to do that too, can be very beneficial. And here's what we're talking about is interoception, it's your ability to sense your inner real estate, but in this case, by way of chemical signaling, not by way of mechanical signaling. So now I'd like to talk about another aspect of gut chemistry that has profound effects on the brain, as well as on the immune system. And for those of you with auto-immune conditions, or for those of you that know people with auto-immune conditions, this is going to be a very important discussion. Your gut needs to maintain a certain level of acidity or alkalinity, for those of you without any chemistry background, basically the low numbers on the pH scale, that means more acidic, the higher, the numbers, more alkaline, so more alkaline means more basic and acidic means acidic. And it has to do with whom hydrogen atoms and all this other stuff, but you don't need to worry about that right now. We're not going to pH your gut right now, but we are going to talk about the pH of your gut. Your gut needs to be more acidic than essentially all other tissues of your body in order to function properly, bacteria thrive in alkaline conditions. I think this is important for people to understand. People are always thinking, oh, you should be more alkaline being acidic, that almost sounds like being inflamed at well, you know, it's a complicated discussion, but I think the semantics can be confusing, sometimes you want your gut to be acidic. You may ask, well, why are people taking antacids? Well, those antacids are there for a particular purpose to essentially combat acid reflux, which is the sending up of stuff in the gut towards the esophagus. And it can cause heartburn and things of that sort. And the way the antacids work is they essentially cause the sphincters above the gut to sinch shut, but they really are only dealing with a symptom, not the cause. So rewind, and about 10, 20 years ago, the discussion about gut acidity was quite a bit different than it is now in the scientific and medical literature. In fact, for many years long before, I'm going to say it here, people have been saying that it's important to maintain proper acidity of the gut, but the science and medical professions sort of looked at that as kind of a scance like, you know, what's going on there, I don't, I don't know that there's any evidence that that's actually true, there are communities of people that were prescribing, or I should say recommending that people take hydrochloric acid HCL and adjusting gut acidity that way. And it was kind of frowned upon, now in looking over the peer reviewed literature, it's clear that this business of trying to make the gut a little more acidic is actually one way in which people treat or try and ameliorate acid reflux. So it's kind of counterintuitive increasing acidity in the gut to try and reduce acid reflux, thought you're supposed to take antacids, well, the field has shifted quite a bit. And so we're going to review what it is to maintain the chemistry of the gut at a slightly more acidic level or a more aesthetic level, I should say, because it turns out that there are a number of things that are in gut are just call it what it is, it's gastric juice, sounds kind of gross. But gastric juices are actually powerful modulators of brain state. Put differently, one of the best things that you can do to have a healthy brain, a well-functioning brain and a healthy and well-functioning body is to maintain proper gut chemistry. And that's basically accomplished by getting the right level of acidity and alkalinity in your gut. Now this is not quack pseudoscience. This is not based on cleanses or anything of that sort. Well, we're going to talk about now are peer reviewed data in very high quality journals, like the Journal Cell, which is one of the three apex science nature, so, and journals of that sort, that point to the gut microbiome and its relationship to acidity of the gut and how the gut microbiome can help enhance auto-immune function and various other aspects of brain and body health. So within all the mucosal lining tissues of our body, we have what are called microbiota, little micro organisms that we didn't make that actually come from our environment or our food and live inside us. And there are good microbiota and there are bad microbiota whether or not we have good microbiota or bad microbiota depends on one thing. And that one thing is how acid or alkaline the given mucosal tissue is. So we actually have a microbiome in our nose. And just as a very brief aside, because I'd be remiss if I didn't say this, if you emphasize nasal breathing most of the time, except when speaking or eating. And if you downplay mouth breathing, meaning you refrain from mouth breathing, especially in sleep, you improve the nasal microbiome. It gets better at fighting off infections. This was shown in a beautiful paper, published in Cell Reports last year. And that paper I should mention was performed in humans. So you've got a microbiome in your nose and my nasal breathing most of the time, not all the time. Cause there going to be times when you need to breathe through your mouth for whatever reason, hard exercise or eating or speaking, but by breathing through your nose, most of the time you are creating an additional layer of immune defense against particles that could get you sick. Whereas when you mouth breathe, you are taking down a layer of defense and you are putting yourself more at risk of infection. This is what this paper shows. You also have a gut microbiome that is in your throat, in your stomach and in your intestines. And that gut microbiome is extremely powerful in regulating your mood and your immune function. Now, this is not something that you can sense directly. You don't know when you have a bunch of good microbiota or a bunch of bad microbiota because you can feel them moving around in there, actually that would be pretty awful, that would be pretty creepy feeling. Rather that according to whether or not your gut is alkaline or acidic in the appropriate ways, you will populate your gut with the appropriate microbiota. So you want your stomach to be pretty acidic, but other elements of your digestive tract are going to be more pH. And basically there's a gradient, meaning there's a low to high pH gradient along the gut. You don't have to know what the pH should be at any one given point, because you're not going to go and put microbiota at one location and not another. What you essentially want to do is create an environment where the proper can thrive, because when you do that, you greatly decrease what are called inflammatory cytokines. So these are things that are secreted both by cells, within the body and cells within the brain to impact brain health and brain function and bodily health. They go by particular name, so there's something called TNF alpha, Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha. It is inflammatory. It's not a good thing to have at elevated levels. You have something called Interleukin Six, IL-6 also causes inflammation, causes damage to tissues, not a good thing to have elevated for long periods of time. And then you have anti-inflammatory cytokines, things like Interleukin 10, which reduce inflammation. And there are hundreds of these, if not thousands of these different cytokines, some of which promote inflammation, some of which reduce inflammation. The simple way to adjust these things in the proper ratios is to adjust your gut microbiome. The best way to adjust your microbiome is to ingest certain types of foods. So there is a beautiful literature on this now, but the most important literature is the one that I referred to at the beginning of this episode, which is what to ingest and what not to ingest in terms of foods in order to create the best conditions in your gut so that you can create the best conditions in your brain and body. There was a study done by my colleague, Justin Sonnenberg at Stanford School of Medicine. Justin's actually my upstairs neighbor in the building at Stanford where I work and they explored how different foods or different diets, I should say, impact the gut microbiome and inflammatory markers. And this is a beautiful study because it was done in hundreds of human patients. These actually weren't patients that were sick, I should say human subjects that were otherwise healthy from a huge variety of backgrounds, so you had men, you had women, you had people of different races, different ethnicities. You had a huge range of backgrounds and they tracked all of that. And what they did is they explored two types of diets. One is a high fiber diet. So dietary fibers are non-digestible are only partially digestible carbohydrates typically. And they compared that to diets that were unchanged, except for the inclusion of a few, to a few more servings of fermented foods, each day, things like sauerkraut, things like kimchi, they even explored, it sounds pretty disgusting to me, but who knows, I've never tried it, which is fermented cottage cheese. And what they found was that after initial period of a few weeks, where they had people either eat a lot of fiber or eat one or two servings of fermented foods, they had those people ramp up their ingestion of either fiber or fermented foods, so they kind of ease them into it. As they went baseline then ramp up to the point where they were ingesting, you know, four or five servings of fiber or of fermented foods per day, which sounds like a lot. But for fermented foods, that would be, you know, four or five tablespoons of sauerkraut or kimchi. It's not quite, it's not like huge platefuls of fermented foods. And then they looked at a number of things. They looked at the proteome, which is a kind of like looking at the genome, but a bunch of proteins that are made in the body. And they did this by fecal samples, by stool samples, and they did this by blood draw, which is great, it's a real power of this study. In fact, the most comprehensive study that I'm aware of. By looking at these different tissues across long periods of time, so many weeks, and then returning people to their, to the diet that they were on before they went into the study, they will were able to establish in a causal way, how ingesting fibers or fibrous foods versus ingesting these fermented foods on a daily basis could impact the gut microbiome and many inflammatory markers and many markers of immune function and auto immune function. And the takeaway message from this study is that the fermented foods far out performed the high fiber diet. In fact, the high fiber diet in some people was beneficial and in other people caused issues with inflammation. This is very different than what I was taught growing up and what many of us were taught. Interestingly they also observed that people that ate the high fiber diet had increases in certain enzymes that lend themselves to better digestion of carbohydrates. And I think there's an important insight to come from this. Nowadays we kind of live in the age of extremes where people seem to either want to be carnivore or like never ingest a vegetable, I hear they don't even like allow pepper, but they're not even allowed, you know, sauerkraut or something like very extreme or pure plant based, pure vegan or pure. So essentially pure carbohydrate or pure animal protein, very extreme. I'm an omnivore, I like to eat a mixture of different things at different times of days, but very extreme, but this is interesting because what this, what these data show is that perhaps ingesting a high carbohydrate high fiber diet, which is really what these, the high-fiber condition really was actually makes people better at digesting carbohydrates. This may explain why people who are used to a, kind of a more paleo type or carnivore type diet might eat carbohydrates and say, oh, that doesn't work for me, I don't feel good. It might also explain why people who predominantly eat plant-based foods and carbohydrate foods will try eating meat as an experiment, or because they lost a bet or whatever it is and they'll do or desperation, or they'll do that. And then they'll say, oh, I don't feel good when I eat meat. How good you feel, it seems how well you can utilize that food, and how much of that food you crave may be determined in fact, it appears is determined by your food eating history, the types of food you eat. And I think this might explain some of the divide and hopefully might bridge some of the chasm between these different groups that are saying it should be one way, or it should be another. But at the core of the study was the bigger message. The bigger message is that all of us should be ingesting on a regular basis, daily basis, two to four servings of fermented foods of different kinds. And why I say that is because the inflammatory markers went down, the markers of auto-immune disruption went down, and the chemistry of the gut therefore was adjusted in the appropriate ways. Now it's not to say that high fiber is bad or that fiber is bad, I don't want people to confuse this, but even though this is a discussion about interoception, about sensing the self. This is a subconscious mechanism by which the gut communicates to many organs, including the brain. And it's been shown in other studies also in quality peer review journals that when the correct gut microbiota are present and these inflammatory markers are reduced, cognition improves so ability to focus, ability to sleep ability to ward off infection and wound healing all enhanced, in fact, even in autism spectrum disorder, in people that struggle with various mental conditions or disorders of the mind improving the gut microbiome seems to have powerful effects on improving brain symptoms. Along the lines of auto-immunity, there are a number of conditions that we call auto-immune conditions, and we will do entire episodes about these going forward. But for people with so-called irritable bowel syndrome, for people with Crohn's disease, for people with leaky gut, Hashimoto's, which is a kind of an immune system self-attack on one's thyroid gland and things like eczema, skin conditions, adjusting the gut microbiome has been shown to be useful in positively adjusting the symptoms of all of those, will it fix those conditions entirely? Probably not. But can it have a significant positive impact on them? Probably, yes. There is one thing that's worth mentioning in that list, which is leaky gut, what is leaky gut. Here, we're talking about the guts, what is it to have a leaky gut, it sounds awful. It sounds like something sort of like leaking out the end of the tube, and it maybe that too, I don't know. But leaky gut is actually because, your gut is not a tube that's continuous, one cell it's actually made up of many cells and those cells form a barrier and they form what are called tight junctions. If you have two cells and you want to create a fence out of those cells, you bind them together. The way that the body does this is to bind them together with what are called tight junctions, these are, they go by names like claudins and things like that, if you want to look them up. These tight junctions form a nice barrier, like a cyclone fence, that things can't get past, but like a cyclone fence only molecules of a certain size can go through those holes. So you're not going to pass a soccer ball through an intact cyclone fence, but you could pass for instance, a feather through that fence. So leaky gut is when the conditions in the gut are too alkaline or the gut microbiota are off in the gut, meaning microbiota that like alkaline guts are living there. And those tight junctions can't function at that particular pH and you create little holes in that fence. And then what happens is when you ingest foods, some of those foods literally leak out of the gut and into the extracellular space and into the bloodstream. And because foods include proteins and antibodies react to proteins, what ends up happening in leaky gut, and the reason we talk about in auto-immune conditions is that you start developing antibodies to particular food proteins. And then people start feeling like they have food allergies and they do, they actually create particular food allergies. Now, one way to prevent leaky gut is to get the rest of the gut situation happy by ingesting the proper foods that we talked about before, ingesting fermented foods on a regular basis. The other is our old friend glutamine, again. There are some data and I should say it's a limited number of studies showing that ingesting glutamine anywhere from one to three, excuse me, teaspoons per day, can help alleviate leaky gut. Now, the mechanism for that still isn't clear whether or not it's adjusting pH or whether or not it's creating more favorable environment for the microbiota, but it is clear that supplementing with glutamine can, in some people enhance where I should say improve conditions of leaky gut, so that might be useful as well. And then the final thing about this, I want to talk about is we're talking about chemical sensing in the gut and how that impacts wellbeing is about gut acidity, and this I confess is a little bit controversial. Some people are on board, this other people are not. And so I'd love your feedback on this, if you, if you agree, please tell me if you disagree, please tell me, but please tell me why you disagree in particular, experience or data, although it's always better if you can point me towards peer reviewed studies. There is a practice that some people embrace. I'm not recommending people necessarily do this. And you would definitely want to talk to your doctor, but where people have food allergies or they're having mood or auto-immune issues, and they treat this, some people recommend treating this through the ingestion of HCL, hydrochloric acid tablets. Now hydrochloric acid can burn you, right? Acids can burn you, they literally can melt away skin. You want to be very careful with acids of all kinds, truly, but hydrochloric acid is sold as in supplement form in capsule or pill form. And there is a practice of starting to ingest one or two hydrochloric acid tablets midway through a meal and then what people will generally do is examine to see whether or not that improves their symptoms of indigestion, how it relates to mood, how it relates to well-being, how it relates to their sensation of their gut viscera. By changing the acidity, you also changed the way that the gut communicates with the brain through the mechanisms we talked about before. And there are a growing number of people embracing these practices of taking HCL. It's often combined with other things, it's usually combined with an enzyme and that enzyme is pepsin. So most of these supplements come in the form betaine HCL pepsin and while they're not a cure-all, and certainly don't want to suggest that they're a cure-all, many people that have a hard time adjusting the pH of their gut and have a hard time adjusting the microbiota of their gut in the appropriate ways have benefited from taking these betaine HCL pepsin tablets or capsules during meals. And the general instruction is to start slow, to start with one or two, and then to find a level that you're comfortable with that doesn't create an excessive feeling of warmth in the stomach, it doesn't throw off your digestion. So it takes a little bit of experimentation, again, definitely talk to your healthcare provider before exploring this, but this has become a very common practice for people with auto-immune disorders and accessing the gut because it is accessible by taking things has also become way in which people with various mental conditions are trying to adjust their mood and adjust their wellbeing. Along these lines, I do want to mention that there are studies that show that people that supplement with a lot of probiotics or even prebiotics can sometimes experience brain fog. This isn't discussed a lot and the data are a little all over the place, but it is that we're thinking about. The goal here is not to create as many microbiota as possible, what you want is microbiota diversity. And I should mention this again in reference to the Sonnenberg study, which was what the high fiber diet does is it increases certain microbiota, but it limits their diversity and what the fermented food diet does, or I should say the diet that includes regular ingestion of fermented foods a few servings a day is it increases microbiota diversity. Now, lack of microbiota diversity has a name in the medical profession. It's called dysbiosis and dysbiosis is bad. Dysbiosis is what you see when people are spending long periods of time on bedrest or when they've been chronically ill, and so here again, we're talking about creating a positive environment in the gut, either by adjusting acidity, maybe you explore the betaine HCL pepsin thing. I think if you have healthy digestion, if you feel like you have a good relationship to your gut, and it has a good relationship to you, sort of a silly phrase, because it is you and you are it, then I don't think there's any need to pursue this, but if you don't, that might be one avenue to pursue. However I think primary in all of this is the fermented food findings, and it's not just one study, it's many many findings that now bring us to a place where a huge center of massive data are pointing us in the direction of saying ingest fermented foods on a regular basis. I should also mention that conditions like sarcopenia, which is the loss of muscle tissue as we age, has been shown to be offset by improving the gut microbiota. So while today is about interoception, we're talking about sensing, we're also talking about subconscious sensing. What are we talking about, subconscious sensing, we're talking about subconscious sensing of the milieu of the body. When the milieu of the gut and the body is right, than the brain and the immune system function very well. And so this isn't something where you can sit back and say, oh, you know, I feel all those good microbiota in my gut, or, oh, no, those are bad microbiota. You can't do that unless you're going to take fecal samples and blood samples and analyze them in the, with the extreme exhaustive nature that the Sonnenberg and other labs do, you're not going to get that kind of information. I know there are companies out there that do this, and I don't want to knock on any of them, but I do want to emphasize that to do this right, to really analyze which cytokines you're making, which ones you're not, you really need to look at a huge number of them. And that requires large-scale proteomic and genomic and inflammatory markers screens. It's just not the kind of thing that most commercial enterprises can really provide to people in a way that they can interpret, rather, this is a case where you can simply go to the effector, to the thing that can actually move the needle in the right direction for you. It's very clear that's fermented foods and that's keeping the stomach slightly more acid than one might think you would want to. So let's talk about barfing first. Barfing, AKA vomiting, is when the contents of your guts run in reverse, meaning when they go up from your stomach. Sometimes even up from the intestines, even though that sounds horrible, it sometimes happens up, out the esophagus and mouth and onto whatever surface happens to be in front of you. It's a terrible thing, nobody likes to do it, but it's a very interesting aspect of our biology because it reveals a beautiful and absolutely fundamental relationship between our chemistry and our brain. So your brain is actually locked behind a gate and that gate is not your skull. That gate is the so-called blood-brain barrier. So just like your gut has these epithelial tight junctions, the things I talked about before that provide a fence, so things can't get through and get through in leaky gut, your brain has tight junctions that are very tight. It's absolutely fundamental that only certain molecules get across the blood brain barrier and that others don't. And the reason for that is that most all 99.99999% of your neurons do not regenerate, I don't care what you've read, especially in the news recently about how psychedelics cause neurogenesis, because they don't, it's absolutely wrong. Psychedelics have effects on brain plasticity, but they have nothing to do with neurogenesis, at least no data to support it, but because you can't make new neurons, you also can't damage the ones you've got, or you shouldn't as much as possible. And that's why you have a blood brain barrier or a BBB. So the BBB as it's called prevents substances from getting to the brain, however, like any fence, it is not always uniform along its length. And there are little spots within that fence where chemicals can sneak across to the brain and through a beautiful design, I don't know anything about the design. As I always say, I wasn't consulted the design phase. I'm not talking about any kind of intelligent design or anything that is not the topic of this podcast. This is not a philosophy podcast, nor is it a religion podcast, it's a science podcast, but through a beautiful design of some sort, there are little holes in that fence. And they're little neurons that sit right behind those holes and those neurons sense what the chemistry of the blood is. So I'm guessing you probably didn't imagine that today's discussion about sensing the self would be sensing your own blood, but you do. There's a little area of your brain, that's little indeed, but is very important called area postrema P-O-S-T-R-E-M-A. And area postrema is an area of the brainstem that sits right next to another brain area called the chemo receptor trigger zone. And when the contents in your bloodstream are of a particular kind, meaning when there are pathogens or it's too acidic, the neurons and area postrema the neurons in the chemo receptor trigger zone, the CTZ as it's called, trigger a bunch of motor reflexes in the abdominal wall that make you barf. Okay, the feeling that you need to throw up is triggered by these neurons in the brain stem. And those neurons in the brainstem are triggered by the presence of certain chemicals. And the reason why you don't have any blood brain barrier at that location is because post-trauma has to be there like a crossing guard, making sure that everything that's coming through the blood is okay, and if it even senses just the tiniest bit, that things are off, it's going to trigger that reflex. Now, the really interesting thing is that the neurons and area postrema respond to the chemistry of the blood, but they also will respond to our consciousness, to things that we think and things that we believe and even particular memories. This is why when certain people see vomit or see someone else vomit, or even somebody else heaving, as if they're going to vomit, they themselves feel as if they're going to vomit. I'm guessing they're probably even a few of you right now that feel like you might vomit. You might feel salivation in your throat, which is always a precursor to vomiting. Some people, the memory of, or the thought of something like blood or vomit or, use your imagination, can actually trigger the vomit reflex. And that's because these neurons in area are very sensitive to prior experience of interactions with negative things. So and actually, as I'm saying this, I feel my gut kind of cramping up again, I'm not, I don't vomit very easily, I'm not one of those, nor am I somebody who's never vomited. And here we are talking about my vomit history, but I think it's appropriate in this, in this context, the neurons of area, or they're basically to keep your whole system safe and thank goodness they are, because for instance, some people, unfortunately, they drink so much alcohol that they throw up. Have you ever wondered why that is? Well it's because alcohol fundamentally is a poison. I'm not saying for, you know, age appropriate folks that ingesting alcohol is bad. This isn't a judgment call, but alcohol itself at excessive levels in the bloodstream triggers post-trauma to cause vomiting. So this is an example, whereby memories, context, but also just the chemistry of our internal state is triggering behaviors that are very hardwired. They're very reflux driven. And why would it be that some people get more nauseous than others at a given level, well, they'll have to do with alcohol tolerance. Some people have what's called a, you know, we refer to as a stronger stomach or a stomach of steel. Other people they throw out very easily if they don't feel well, or if they ingest anything that's just a little bit off. From a purely adaptive standpoint, it's probably better to vomit up things that aren't good for you rather than to have them pass through your system. Especially if those things are contained in lipids. For instance if you ingest something that's in liquid form because cells, literally every cell in your body is surrounded by a little thin layer of fatty tissue, we call the bilayer membrane, it's a little membrane. Fat can move through fat very easily. And so any bad stuff you ingest can get stuck in your system. So let's talk for a second about how to reduce nausea, because nausea is that salivation, that feeling that you're going to vomit, can be very beneficial in an, in an adaptive circumstance. Like you've ingested something bad, but some people experience nausea, for other reasons, there are good ways to regulate nausea and the ways they regulate nausea, very interesting. They actually adjust the activity of these neurons in area postrema or they change the chemistry of the blood directly. And many of you have heard this before, perhaps, but it turns out that there are good data, 11 research studies where the ones that I could find peer reviewed research studies with no bias, so independent studies showing that ginger can cause a notable reduction in nausea, how much ginger, one to three grams, what's one to three grams where you have to measure it out on a scale, unless you're taking it in pill or capsule form. It doesn't seem to matter if you take it in pill or capsule form, so this thing that you've heard before that ginger can reduce nausea, indeed is true. Peppermint, apparently can also do that. And some of you will not be surprised to learn that cannabis can reduce nausea, not surprise because cannabis, which has different legality in different places, and I understand that, so please take that into consideration. But cannabis, THC and, or it turns out CBD can reduce nausea, that's been shown in at least one study. And it probably does that, not by changing the chemistry of your blood, but by changing the threshold for firing of these neurons in area post-trauma. And there are conditions such as in chemotherapy and radiation therapy and others where people are feeling very nauseous, I'm not recommending people go use cannabis, unless they've decided with their selves and their family and their doctor that they should. But what's interesting is this thing about CBD and we'll do a whole episode on THC and CBD doesn't have, or isn't supposed to have these psychoactive properties that THC does. Although CBD can have a mild to major anxiolytic anxiety-reducing effect, but it does appear that the data are what the data support. I should say, the anecdotal reports, which are that cannabis can reduce nausea. So to barf less, ginger, peppermint, and if appropriate and legal for you, possibly cannabis. Now let's talk about fever. In previous episodes, and in future episodes, we deal with thermal regulation, which is the body's ability to regulate its temperature. Talk about cold and heat and saunas and ice baths and physical performance. We're not going to deal with all that right now, but I promise we will going forward. Today, I only want to talk about fever because fever directly relates to interoception. What do I mean by that? Well, a fever is simply an increase in body temperature, that increase in body temperature is triggered by neurons in the brain. And those neurons in the brain are triggered by the presence of particular things in the bloodstream. What sorts of things? Well, toxins, bacteria, viruses, when something bad gets in our system, the body doesn't know it's bad, it just knows it's foreign, and it hasn't seen it before. Or that it's in the wrong compartment of the body. So earlier we were talking about proteins that leak out of the gut and get elsewhere, you know, you don't want a piece of steak sitting in your bicep. That would be bad, you would actually develop antibodies, you would have a horrible infection. But your body has this intelligence, and that intelligence is to know, Hmm, these proteins are normally not seen in this region and then your body or the cells there, I should say, we'll release something that then will travel to the brain and will trigger an increase in body temperature so that your body cooks the bad thing or the cause of the bad thing. It's really a beautiful adaptive mechanism. We always think fever is so terrible, but fever is there to cook the bad thing that's inside you, or that has left the correct compartment inside you and is in the wrong compartment inside you. So what's beautiful about the fever mechanism is that it looks a lot like the barfing mechanism. Basically you have a set of neurons that sit near the ventricles, remember the ventrals is hole in the tube, that is you, the tube that is, you are a tube, a series of tubes. And your brain has a hole down the middle. And it extends down to the bottom of your spinal cord, at the front, it's called the ventricles, they start with what are called the lateral ventricles and the excuse me, starts with the third and the lateral ventricles, and then it goes to the fourth ventricle and then to what's called the central canal. But basically is just a big space in the middle of your nervous system in the middle of your brain. And you have one ventricle that I already mentioned called the third ventricle. And it's shaped kind of like a thin oval up upright, if you're listening to this, just think an I, the shape of an I, but it's kind of rotated 90 degrees. So it's up and down as opposed to across. And along that third ventricle, there's there a little neurons that can sense what's in the cerebral spinal fluid that fills the ventricle. So in other words, you have neurons that are sensing the chemistry of your cerebral spinal fluid, and that have access therefore to the chemistry of your body. Because that cerebral spinal fluid is going up and down the brain and spinal cord. But into that cerebral spinal fluid are signals about the various chemicals within the body. So this is not a mechanical system. This is a chemical system. Remember we're talking about mechanical information and chemical information accessing the brain. So if you have something bad in your system, you've ingested a, you breathe in a virus or you inhaled some bacteria, or you got a cut on your leg and some bacteria are growing there. Of course, locally, there will be effects, little things called the mast cell. This M-A-S-T little packets of histamine literally will go there and explode [poofs] and cause inflammation, which is actually a good inflammation. And we'll release little things called macrophages to gobble up the infection. The other day, it was in Texas, it was some mean little mosquitoes in Texas, and a lot of them, and I would stand outside and I'd get bitten, I didn't feel a thing, but then later that night, they started swelling up and itching and then I'd itch them, and then they'd swell even more. That was because of the release of mass cells, of histamines inside those mass cells that would literally causing inflammation of the tissue. It wasn't the poison from the mosquito itself. It was the immune response to those. Well, you also have this systemic or body-wide attempt to kill stuff, and that's the fever. So the neurons that these ventricles with cerebral spinal fluid go by a particular name, they're called circumventricular organs, meaning near circum, ventricular near the ventricles. And you have these organs and there are a set of neurons, has a really cool name called the OVLT. I don't know why I like that, but I just like it, it's the organum vasculosum of the lateral terminalis organum vasculosum of the lateral terminalis, OVLT are the neurons that respond to toxins and bad stuff in your bloodstream, however minor or major. And they release things like ILK-1, which are inflammatory cytokines inflammatory in this case is good, you want inflammation at the site of an infection. It's a good thing. It's going to help with healing. And it's going to change the conditions in your body, what's going to happen is when those OVLT neurons are activated, because you have something bad in your body or something bad is happening in your body, they communicate with an area of the brain called the preoptic area of your hypothalamus and the preoptic area cranks up your temperature and tries to cook that bad thing. Now it's worth talking about fever for a moment and talking about thermal regulation, because I think this actually could save some lives. So if you are overheated to a point where, you know, you're getting up past 102 or 103, it's going to vary depending on person to person and certainly age, you know, kids, some people think can tolerate higher levels of fever than adults, but look, you always want to be cautious about heating up the brain too much, because once those neurons are gone, they do not come back and neurons do not do well in very high temperatures. Once your body temperature starts getting up to 102, 103, certainly 104, you are starting to enter serious danger zone. This can happen through exercise in hot environments or an inability to escape heat because you don't have covering or adequate ventilation or cooling. It can also be because of excessive fever, for whatever reason. A lot of people think the way to deal with this is to put a cool compress on the back of the neck or to cool the torso. In discussing this with my colleague, Craig Heller who's at Stanford School of Medicine, and he's on the undergraduate side of the campus as well, runs a biology lab. He's a world expert in thermal regulation. It's very clear that that's the wrong response to try and cool off the body. If you put a cold towel or you put an ice pack on the back of the neck, what you effectively do is cool the blood that's going to the brain. And if you do that, then your brain will react by turning up the crank in so to speak on the neurons in the pre optic area, and will heat you up further and can cook your brain and organs further. So what you want to do is, as I've talked about before, you want to cool the bottoms of the feet, the palms of the hands and the upper part of the face. And I'm not going to go into all the details as to why you want to do that right now, but those are the locations you want to cool. Now you can also cool the rest of the body, but it's not okay to just stay under the covers and just cool, you know, the neck or something like that. You really want to try and create a systemic or whole body cooling, if the goal is to bring fever down, but in many cases, fever is adaptive. And so taking a non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs like Advil and Tylenol sometimes can be good, if that's recommended, but other times, because it reduces your fever, it's allowing that pathogen, that pyrogen, it's sometimes called, a pyrogen is a substance that causes fever, think pyro, think fire, think pyromaniacs, think pyro, those pyrogens can survive at moderate to low temperatures, and they can't survive at high temperatures. So the fever is an adaptive mechanism and the OVLT, and the sensing of your chemistry is how the OVLT, organum vasculosum of the lateral terminalis does that. So we've talked about sensing lung volume, speed of our heartbeat, we talked about sensing the gut volume, the intestinal volume, or the absence of volume. We talked about chemistry of the gut and the gut microbiota and auto immune functions. And we've now talked about vomiting, and we've talked about fever, lots of aspects of sensing our internal self. Now I want to turn our attention to interoception as it relates to feelings, the way that interoception is most commonly described. And I want to highlight a term that many of you have probably heard, which is the vagus nerve. We talked about vagus a little bit earlier, but the vagus nerve, this vagabonding wandering nerve is involved in everything I've talked about up until now. And the reason I saved it till now, rather than mentioning all along is to highlight a specific point, which is that whenever we hear about the vagus in popular culture, it's like the vagus calms you down, you want to stimulate the vagus by rubbing in front of the ear, and it's a parasympathetic nerve, and it will calm you down, he'll mellow you out. Actually, most of the time, the vagus is stimulatory. When you ingest foods with amino acids, sugars, or fatty acids, the vagus nerve gets activated and triggers the release of dopamine, it makes you more alert and go seek more of those foods or what led to those conditions. When you feel nauseous it's rarely calming, when you feel like you have a fever, it's rarely calming. So you're starting to get the picture that even though the vagus nerve is in the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system. And if that doesn't mean anything to you, because you're not in aficionado, don't worry about it. But it's not a calming system, it's a communication system, and it's a motor system. It communicates brain to body and body to brain, and it changes the function of different organs, now, one thing that's important to highlight is that stress itself will alter the chemistry of your gut because of the ways that it down the vagus nerve and quiets the neurons that communicate from gut to brain. I want to say that again, stress will disrupt your gut and make you feel not good, poor digestion, and just lousy, because of the way that it shuts down the vagus nerve and the neurons of your gut. So what stress does is it blocks the communication between gut and brain, it doesn't mess up your gut. It just doesn't let your gut get the signals up to your brain, and it also then throws off the chemistry. And then there's a whole cascade of effects. If you want to learn more about stress, I did a whole episode called "Master Stress," or I think maybe it was called "Conquer Stress" and it was "Master Stress," either one. The whole point of that episode is to give you tools and practices to deal with short term, acute stress, moderate term stress, and long-term chronic stress through behavioral mechanisms, nutrition, supplementation, and many other things as well. It's chockablock full of protocols and tools for stress. The vagus nerve, however, is responsible for emotion and the way it does that is to pool, to aggregate the conditions of your gut, the conditions of your heart and the conditions of your breathing, which includes your diaphragm and lungs and takes that kind of as a collection of information and sends it to the brain and controls what we call your emotions. Now that might seem obvious to some people, but to other people that might seem totally crazy. You thought your emotions were because the market was down and you had invested, or because something that you thought was going to happen is not going to happen, or because you thought that school was open and then it's not, or maybe thought it wasn't, and it is whatever it is that bothers you, you think of generally as a purely cognitive event. But the brain doesn't really know what to do with that information. It doesn't act directly on that information to create moods. Moods are created through the heart's response to reading that headline, to the change in your breathing, that's caused by someone that you love telling you that actually they're not interested in spending time with you anymore, or that you screwed up or that they're interested in spending a lot of time with you and you like that, right? Emotions can be good or bad or neutral. So this thing that we call interoception, the sense of self I've been building up from very fundamental layers, gut chemistry, spleens, immune systems, auto-immune and you might've been thinking, wait, I thought this was going to be about a sense of self, a noticing or a feeling. And indeed all of those things are plugging in like a series of ingredients in a recipe that gives rise to your mood and how you feel, and that mood and how you feel is shown in one location in your body that other people can see. And that's in your facial expressions. And indeed there are now beautiful data showing that your face, including the size of your pupils, the tonality of your face, how flushed you are, or how pale you are, even the degree to which you're frowning or smiling relative to other periods of time, that is all an aggregate of, or a reflection rather of your gut, your heart and your breathing and the chemistry of your body. And so this is why I sort of backed into this conversation about interoception I kind of Trojan horse this on you on purpose which is that when we talk about the vagus and you hear, oh, you know, you can get vagal tone by breathing or rubbing on the front of the or short that's probably true, but another fundamental layer is the acidity of your gut, how fast your breathing are you inhale-emphasized, or exhale-emphasized breathing. When we are relaxed our pupils tend to constrict. When we are very alert, our pupils tend to be dilated, whether or not that alertness has to do with being happy or being sad. And what's remarkable, and this is where interoception really takes a leap into the incredible is that there are beautiful studies that show that for instance, when we know somebody pretty well and they are going through some sort of experience of any kind, our heart rate actually starts to mimic their heart rate. Our breathing starts to mimic their breathing, even if we aren't conscious of their breathing. It's not like we see their chest heaving, and we think, oh my goodness, and then we breathe that way. There's a mirroring and no it's not carried out through mirror neurons. Mirror neurons are more of a myth and a reality, sorry to burst people's bubbles. But that bubble around mirror neurons is definitely made of myths and a topic for another time, but we start to mirror. Somehow human beings are able to register the internal state of other beings, and I think probably for animals too, but certainly for other humans, even at a distance. And these studies are many now, and they're really wonderful studies. And so your sense of your internal landscape is linked to others. Now you can enhance this interoceptive capacity for how you feel and how others feel, in other words, you can start getting a better readout of your internal state by doing a simple exercise, what is really a tool. And that is to learn to sense your heartbeats. So some people are very good at this, other people are not, some people can do this more easily when they have all their air exhaled and some people can do it better when they are holding a breath hold. But one thing that's kind of cool about this whole interoceptive capacity is that you can enhance it very quickly. You can learn or teach yourself to have heightened levels of interoception in a way that you can't really just give yourself heightened levels of vision by snapping your fingers, in one of one tool or exercise, there are things you can do to improve vision. That's the topic of a previous episode. I encourage you to look it up. There are things you can do to improve your hearing and your taste and your smell, we talked about all those, but with interoception you can get very good at this very fast. And I think this is one of the reasons why meditation is powerful. Think there are a lot of reasons why meditation is powerful, but one of the reasons is when you stop taking in exteroceptive information from the outside world, by closing your eyes and focusing inward, as they say, you start paying attention to your breathing cadence, you start directing your mind's attention to your heart rate, and if you can start to perceive your heart beating. You actually are very quickly strengthen the vagal connections between the body and the brain. And so there's no real practice here. There's no breathe this way or do this thing except to direct your awareness toward your heartbeat. And some people can get very good at this very fast. Most people find that just by doing this for a minute or so, every once in a while, they start to tap into this sixth sense. They start to notice when they don't feel quite right about something or somebody or some situation, or they start to notice when they feel quite right about somebody or something or some situation. So this interoceptive awareness can be tuned up. It used to be called vagal tone, but I think that term doesn't take into account all the other things that are going on with the vagus. So I don't really like that term. It's more of an interoceptive awareness. And again, there are many studies now showing that for sake of bettering one's mood overall, for sake of moving through a challenging phase in life, for sake of just enhancing one's experience of life overall, whether or not it's the taste of foods, interactions with other people, enjoyment, focus, pleasure, tuning up one's interoceptive awareness is both easy again by just taking a minute or two and trying to count heartbeats. And then this works best, of course, if you have some independent readout of heartbeats and you can compare, you can see how accurate you are, but even if you don't use a device or have a device to do that, without taking your pulse, using your thumb on your wrist or something, or your fingers on your neck, as you typically would for taking your pulse, trying to sit still for a minute or two every once in a while, maybe once a week, maybe twice a week, maybe while you're meditating, maybe while breathwork, maybe during the breath holds of breathwork, you don't really have to do this in any kind of extended way, you can very quickly increase your interoceptive tone. And that has a huge and outsized effect on the brain, body relationship and your brain's ability to tap into both the subconscious and the conscious aspects of this chemical and mechanical signaling that's happening all the time. And it can have real and out-sized positive effects on your ability to engage with other people and your ability to focus at work and your ability to notice, ah, I'm finding myself kind of feeling like I'm losing focus, but really it was my heart rate was just increasing. Maybe I just exhale a little bit and bring my heart rate down. So whatever effectually tried to do today is to give you a window into this incredible relationship between your viscera and your brain and your brain and your viscera, all these organs of your body, and what I hope is that you'll appreciate that it's a system, that you aren't just a system of tubes. I said that in a sort of in jest, I mean, you have a lot of tubes and you are a system of tubes, but that system of tubes is linked through the nervous system, and those links work in very specific ways. So whether or not you remember about pesos and all the GLPRs and all that stuff, it doesn't really matter. What I encourage you to do is start sort of pushing and pulling on the various leavers within this beautiful system that we call the interoceptive system, this sense of self. If you're learning from this podcast and or if you're enjoying it, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That really helps us. Also on the YouTube channel, please leave us comments and feedback, including feedback of topics you'd like to see in future episodes or guests, you'd like to see on future episodes. We do read all the comments. In addition, please subscribe on Apple and Spotify and follow us on Instagram @hubermanlab. If you want to leave us a five-star review on Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us a five-star review. You can also leave us comments and feedback on Apple. During the course of today's episode, and on previous episodes, I mentioned supplements. I realized supplements aren't for everybody, but for those of you that are interested in supplements, it is important that the supplements that you take have a high level of stringency with respect to the amounts of the contents that are listed on the bottle matching what's actually in the bottle, in the capsules and tablets, and that the quality of those ingredients be extremely high. For that reason we partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorne supplements have the highest levels of stringency for both the content and the amount of content in those bottles and supplements. If you want to try Thorne supplements, and you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/U/Huberman. And you can see all the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those. And if you enter the Thorne site through that portal, you can get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. In addition we have a Patreon account, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support the podcast at any level that you like. Please also visit us at hubermanlab.com and sign up for our free newsletter, our newsletter starts in August 2021, and you'll be receiving protocols and excerpts from podcasts, some condensed information that we think will really be a value to you, it's totally zero cost. Again, just go to hubermanlab.com and sign up for what we call our Neural Network Newsletter. And most of all, thank you for your time and attention. And thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 318 ---
Video ID: VRvn3Oj5r3E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VRvn3Oj5r3E
Title: Dr. Lex Fridman: Machines, Creativity & Love
Published: 2021-07-19 12:00:11 UTC
Description:
Lex Fridman PhD, is a research scientist at MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), working on robotics, artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles and human-robot interactions. He is also the host of the Lex Fridman Podcast where he holds conversations with academics, entrepreneurs, athletes and creatives. Here we discuss humans, robots, and the capacity they hold for friendship and love. Dr. Fridman also shares with us his unique dream for a world where robots guide humans to be the best versions of themselves, and his efforts to make that dream a reality. 

#HubermanLab #LexFridman #Engineering

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Connect with Dr. Lex Fridman:
Instagram - https://instagram.com/lexfridman/
Twitter - https://twitter.com/lexfridman
Podcast - https://lexfridman.com/podcast/ 

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Hedgehog and the Fog - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ThmaGMgWRlY

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction: Lex Fridman
00:07:35 What is Artificial Intelligence?
00:26:46 Machine & Human Learning
00:32:21 Curiosity
00:36:55 Story Telling Robots
00:40:48 What Defines a Robot?
00:44:30 Magic & Surprise
00:47:37 How Robots Change Us
00:49:35 Relationships Defined
01:02:29 Lex’s Dream for Humanity
01:11:33 Improving Social Media
01:16:57 Challenges of Creativity
01:21:49 Suits & Dresses 
01:22:22 Loneliness
01:30:09 Empathy
01:35:12 Power Dynamics In Relationships
01:39:11 Robot Rights 
01:40:20 Dogs: Homer & Costello
01:52:41 Friendship
01:59:47 Russians & Suffering
02:05:38 Public vs. Private Life
02:14:04 How To Treat a Robot
02:17:12 The Value of Friendship
02:20:33 Martial Arts
02:31:34 Body-Mind Interactions
02:33:22 Romantic Love
02:42:51 The Lex Fridman Podcast
02:55:54 The Hedgehog
03:01:17 Concluding Statements 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
[bright music] - Welcome to the "Huberman Lab Podcast," where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Lex Fridman as our guest on the "Huberman Lab Podcast." Dr. Fridman is a researcher at MIT specializing in machine learning, artificial intelligence and human robot interactions. I must say that the conversation with Lex was without question, one of the most fascinating conversations that I've ever had, not just in my career, but in my lifetime. I knew that Lex worked on these topics. And I think many of you are probably familiar with Lex and his interest in these topics from his incredible podcast, the "Lex Fridman Podcast." If you're not already watching that podcast, please subscribe to it. It is absolutely fantastic. But in holding this conversation with Lex, I realized something far more important. He revealed to us a bit of his dream. His dream about humans and robots, about humans and machines, and about how those interactions can change the way that we perceive ourselves and that we interact with the world. We discuss relationships of all kinds, relationships with animals, relationships with friends, relationships with family and romantic relationships. And we discuss relationships with the machines. Machines that move and machines that don't move, and machines that come to understand us in ways that we could never understand for ourselves, and how those machines can educate us about ourselves. Before this conversation, I had no concept of the ways in which machines could inform me or anyone about themselves. By the end, I was absolutely taken with the idea, and I'm still taken with the idea that interactions with machines have a very particular kind, a kind that Lex understands and wants to bring to the world, can not only transform the self, but may very well transform humanity. So whether or not you're familiar with Dr. Lex Fridman or not, I'm certain you're going to learn a tremendous amount from him during the course of our discussion, and that it will transform the way that you think about yourself and about the world. Before we begin, I want to mention that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that are of absolutely phenomenal quality. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about the sunglasses and eyeglasses they've designed had performance in mind. I've spent a career working on the visual system. And one of the fundamental issues that your visual system has to deal with is how to adjust what you see when it gets darker or brighter in your environment. With ROKA Sunglasses and Eyeglasses, whether or not it's dim in the room or outside, or not there's cloud cover, or whether or not you walk into a shadow, you can always see the world with absolute clarity. And that just tells me that they really understand the way that the visual system works. Processes like habituation and attenuation. All these things that work at a real mechanistic level have been built into these glasses. In addition, the glasses are very lightweight. You don't even notice really that they're on your face. And the quality of the lenses is terrific. Now, the glasses were also designed so that you could use them, not just while working or at dinner, et cetera, but while exercising. They don't fall off your face or slip off your face if you're sweating. And as I mentioned, they're extremely lightweight. So you can use them while running, you can use them while cycling and so forth. Also the aesthetic of ROKA glasses is terrific. Unlike a lot of performance glasses out there, which frankly make people look like cyborgs, these glasses look great. You can wear them out to dinner, you can wear them for essentially any occasion. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to roka.com. That's R-O-K-A .com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's ROKA, R-O-K-A .com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term health can only be assessed from a quality blood test. And now with the advent of quality DNA tests, we can also get insight into some of our genetic underpinnings of our current and long-term health. The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there, however, is you get the data back and you don't know what to do with those data. You see that certain things are high or certain things are low, but you really don't know what the actionable items are, what to do with all that information. With InsideTracker, they make it very easy to act in the appropriate ways on the information that you get back from those blood and DNA tests. And that's through the use of their online platform. They have a really easy to use dashboard that tells you what sorts of things can bring the numbers for your metabolic factors, endocrine factors, et cetera, into the ranges that you want and need for immediate and long-term health. In fact, I know one individual just by way of example, that was feeling good, but decided to go with an InsideTracker test and discovered that they had high levels of what's called C-reactive protein. They would have never detected that otherwise. C-reactive protein is associated with a number of deleterious health conditions, some heart issues, eye issues, et cetera. And so they were able to take immediate action to try and resolve those CRP levels. And so with InsideTracker, you get that sort of insight. And as I mentioned before, without a blood or DNA test, there's no way you're going to get that sort of insight until symptoms start to show up. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. You just use the code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Today's podcast is brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take Athletic Greens is that it covers all of my vitamin mineral probiotic basis. In fact, when people ask me, what should I take? I always suggest that the first supplement people take is Athletic Greens, for the simple reason, is that the things that contains covers your bases for metabolic health, endocrine health, and all sorts of other systems in the body. And the inclusion of probiotics are essential for a healthy gut microbiome. There are now tons of data showing that we have neurons in our gut, and keeping those neurons healthy requires that they are exposed to what are called the correct microbiota, little microorganisms that live in our gut and keep us healthy. And those neurons in turn help keep our brain healthy. They influence things like mood, our ability to focus, and many, many other factors related to health. With Athletic Greens, it's terrific, because it also tastes really good. I drink it once or twice a day. I mix mine with water and I add a little lemon juice, or sometimes a little bit of lime juice. If you want to try athletic greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim their special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs, little packs that make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 and K2. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. And now, my conversation with Dr. Lex Fridman. - We meet again. - We meet again. Thanks so much for sitting down with me. I have a question that I think is on a lot of people's minds or ought to be on a lot of people's minds, because we hear these terms a lot these days, but I think most people, including most scientists and including me don't know really what is artificial intelligence, and how is it different from things like machine learning and robotics? So, if you would be so kind as to explain to us, what is artificial intelligence, and what is machine learning? - Well, I think that question is as complicated and as fascinating as the question of, what is intelligence? So, I think of artificial intelligence, first, as a big philosophical thing. Pamela McCormick said AI was the ancient wish to forge the gods, or was born as an ancient wish to forge the gods. So I think at the big philosophical level, it's our longing to create other intelligence systems. Perhaps systems more powerful than us. At the more narrow level, I think it's also set of tools that are computational mathematical tools to automate different tasks. And then also it's our attempt to understand our own mind. So, build systems that exhibit some intelligent behavior in order to understand what is intelligence in our own selves. So all of those things are true. Of course, what AI really means as a community, as a set of researchers and engineers, it's a set of tools, a set of computational techniques that allow you to solve various problems. There's a long history that approaches the problem from different perspectives. What's always been throughout one of the threads, one of the communities goes under the flag of machine learning, which is emphasizing in the AI space, the task of learning. How do you make a machine that knows very little in the beginning, follow some kind of process and learns to become better and better at a particular task? What's been most very effective in the recent about 15 years is a set of techniques that fall under the flag of deep learning that utilize neural networks. When your networks are these fascinating things inspired by the structure of the human brain, very loosely, but they have a, it's a network of these little basic computational units called neurons, artificial neurons. And they have, these architectures have an input and output. They know nothing in the beginning, and their task with learning something interesting. What that's something interesting is, usually involves a particular task. There's a lot of ways to talk about this and break this down. Like one of them is how much human supervision is required to teach this thing. So supervised learning is broad category, is the neural network knows nothing in the beginning and then it's given a bunch of examples in computer vision that will be examples of cats, dogs, cars, traffic signs, and then you're given the image and you're given the ground truth of what's in that image. And when you get a large database of such image examples where you know the truth, the neural network is able to learn by example, that's called supervised learning. There's a lot of fascinating questions within that, which is, how do you provide the truth? When you given an image of a cat, how do you provide to the computer that this image contains a cat? Do you just say the entire image is a picture of a cat? Do you do what's very commonly been done, which is a bounding box, you have a very crude box around the cat's face saying, this is a cat? Do you do semantic segmentation? Mind you, this is a 2D image of a cat. So it's not, the computer knows nothing about our three-dimensional world, is just looking at a set of pixels. So, semantic segmentation is drawing a nice, very crisp outline around the cat and saying, that's a cat. That's really difficult to provide that truth. And one of the fundamental open questions in computer vision is, is that even a good representation of the truth? Now, there's another contrasting set of ideas that our attention they're overlapping is, well, it's used to be called unsupervised learning. What's commonly now called self-supervised learning. Which is trying to get less and less and less human supervision into the task. So self-supervised learning is more, it's been very successful in the domain of language model, natural English processing, and now more and more as being successful in computer vision task. And the idea there is, let the machine without any ground-truth annotation just look at pictures on the internet, or look at texts on the internet and try to learn something generalizable about the ideas that are at the core of language or at the core of vision. And based on that, we humans at its best like to call that common sense. So with this, we have this giant base of knowledge on top of which we build more sophisticated knowledge. We have this kind of commonsense knowledge. And so the idea with self-supervised learning is to build this commonsense knowledge about, what are the fundamental visual ideas that make up a cat and a dog and all those kinds of things without ever having human supervision? The dream there is the, you just let an AI system that's self supervised run around the internet for awhile, watch YouTube videos for millions and millions of hours, and without any supervision be primed and ready to actually learn with very few examples once the human is able to show up. We think of children in this way, human children, is your parents only give one or two examples to teach a concept. The dream with self-supervised learning is that will be the same with machines. That they would watch millions of hours of YouTube videos, and then come to a human and be able to understand when the human shows them, this is a cat. Like, remember this' a cat. They will understand that a cat is not just the thing with pointy ears, or a cat is a thing that's orange, or is furry, they'll see something more fundamental that we humans might not actually be able to introspect and understand. Like, if I asked you, what makes a cat versus a dog, you wouldn't probably not be able to answer that, but if I showed you, brought to you a cat and a dog, you'll be able to tell the difference. What are the ideas that your brain uses to make that difference? That's the whole dream with self-supervised learning, is it would be able to learn that on its own. That set of commonsense knowledge, that's able to tell the difference. And then there's like a lot of incredible uses of self-supervised learning, very weirdly called self-play mechanism. That's the mechanism behind the reinforcement learning successes of the systems that won at Go, at, AlphaZero that won a chess. - Oh, I see. That play games? - [Lex] That play games. - Got it. - So the idea of self-play is probably, applies to other domains than just games. Is a system that just plays against itself. And this is fascinating in all kinds of domains, but it knows nothing in the beginning. And the whole idea is it creates a bunch of mutations of itself and plays against those versions of itself. And the fascinating thing is when you play against systems that are a little bit better than you, you start to get better yourself. Like learning, that's how learning happens. That's true for martial arts. It's true in a lot of cases. Where you want to be interacting with systems that are just a little better than you. And then through this process of interacting with systems just a little better than you, you start following this process where everybody starts getting better and better and better and better until you are several orders of magnitude better than the world champion in chess, for example. And it's fascinating because it's like a runaway system. One of the most terrifying and exciting things that David Silver, the creator of AlphaGo and AlphaZero, one of the leaders of the team said, to me is a, they haven't found the ceiling for AlphaZero. Meaning it could just arbitrarily keep improving. Now, in the realm of chess, that doesn't matter to us. That it's like, it just ran away with the game of chess. Like it's like just so much better than humans. But the question is what, if you can create that in the realm that does have a bigger, deeper effect on human beings and societies, that can be a terrifying process. To me, it's an exciting process if you supervise it correctly, if you inject, if what's called value alignment, you make sure that the goals that the AI is optimizing is aligned with human beings and human societies. There's a lot of fascinating things to talk about within the specifics of neural networks and all the problems that people are working on. But I would say the really big, exciting one is self-supervised learning. We're trying to get less and less human supervision, less and less human supervision of neural networks. And also just a comment and I'll shut up. - No, please keep going. I'm learning. I have questions, but I'm learning. So please keep going. - So, to me what's exciting is not the theory, it's always the application. One of the most exciting applications of artificial intelligence, specifically neural networks and machine learning is Tesla Autopilot. So these are systems that are working in the real world. This isn't an academic exercise. This is human lives at stake. This is safety-critical. - These are automated vehicles. Autonomous vehicles. - Semi-autonomous. We want to be. - Okay. - We've gone through wars on these topics, - Semi-autonomous vehicles. - Semi-autonomous. So, even though it's called a FSD, Full Self-Driving, it is currently not fully autonomous, meaning human supervision is required. So, human is tasked with overseeing the systems. In fact, liability-wise, the human is always responsible. This is a human factor psychology question, which is fascinating. I'm fascinated by the whole space, which is a whole 'nother space of human robot interaction when AI systems and humans work together to accomplish tasks. That dance to me is one of the smaller communities, but I think it will be one of the most important open problems once they're solved, is how the humans and robots dance together. To me, semi-autonomous driving is one of those spaces. So for Elon, for example, he doesn't see it that way, he sees semi-autonomous driving as a stepping stone towards fully autonomous driving. Like, humans and robots can't dance well together. Like, humans and humans dance and robots and robots dance. Like, we need to, this is an engineering problem, we need to design a perfect robot that solves this problem. To me forever, maybe this is not the case with driving, but the world is going to be full of problems with always humans and robots have to interact, because I think robots will always be flawed, just like humans are going to be flawed, are flawed. And that's what makes life beautiful, that they're flawed. That's where learning happens at the edge of your capabilities. So you always have to figure out, how can flawed robots and flawed humans interact together such that they, like the sum is bigger than the whole, as opposed to focusing on just building the perfect robot? - Mm-hmm. - So that's one of the most exciting applications I would say of artificial intelligence to me is autonomous driving, the semi-autonomous driving. And that's a really good example of machine learning because those systems are constantly learning. And there's a process there that maybe I can comment on, the, Andrej Karpathy who's the head of autopilot calls it the data engine. And this process applies for a lot of machine learning, which is you build a system that's pretty good at doing stuff, you send it out into the real world, it starts doing the stuff and then it runs into what are called edge cases, like failure cases, where it screws up. We do this as kids. That you have- - You do this as adults. - We do this as adults. Exactly. But we learn really quickly. But the whole point, and this is the fascinating thing about driving, is you realize there's millions of edge cases. There's just like weird situations that you did not expect. And so the data engine process is you collect those edge cases, and then you go back to the drawing board and learn from them. And so you have to create this data pipeline where all these cars, hundreds of thousands of cars are driving around and something weird happens. And so whenever this weird detector fires, it's another important concept, that piece of data goes back to the mothership for the training, for the retraining of the system. And through this data engine process, it keeps improving and getting better and better and better and better. So basically you send out a pretty clever AI systems out into the world and let it find the edge cases, let it screw up just enough to figure out where the edge cases are, and then go back and learn from them, and then send out that new version and keep updating that version. - Is the updating done by humans? - The annotation is done by humans. The, so you have to, the weird examples come back, the edge cases, and you have to label what actually happened in there. There's also some mechanisms for automatically labeling, but mostly, I think you always have to rely on humans to improve, to understand what's happening in the weird cases. And then there's a lot of debate. And this, the other thing, what is artificial intelligence? Which is a bunch of smart people having very different opinions about what is intelligence. So AI is basically a community of people who don't agree on anything. - And it seems to be the case. First of all, this is a beautiful description of terms that I've heard many times among my colleagues at Stanford, at meetings in the outside world. And there are so many fascinating things. I have so many questions, but I do want to ask one question about the culture of AI, because it does seem to be a community where at least as an outsider, where it seems like there's very little consensus about what the terms and the operational definitions even mean. And there seems to be a lot of splitting happening now of not just supervised and unsupervised learning, but these sort of intermediate conditions where machines are autonomous, but then go back for more instruction like kids go home from college during the summer and get a little, moms still feeds them then eventually they leave the nest kind of thing. Is there something in particular about engineers, or about people in this realm of engineering that you think lends itself to disagreement? - Yeah, I think, so, first of all, the more specific you get, the less disagreement there is. So there's lot of disagreement about what is artificial intelligence, but there's less disagreement about what is machine learning and even less when you talk about active learning or machine teaching or self-supervised learning. And then when you get into like NLP language models or transformers, when you get into specific neural network architectures, there's less and less and less disagreement about those terms. So you might be hearing the disagreement from the high-level terms, and that has to do with the fact that engineering, especially when you're talking about intelligence systems is a little bit of an art and a science. So the art part is the thing that creates disagreements, because then you start having disagreements about how easy or difficult the particular problem is. For example, a lot of people disagree with Elon how difficult the problem of autonomous driving is. And so, but nobody knows. So there's a lot of disagreement about, what are the limits of these techniques? And through that, the terminology also contains within it the disagreements. But overall, I think it's also a young science that also has to do with that. So like it's not just engineering, it's that artificial intelligence truly is a large-scale discipline, where it's thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people working on it, huge amounts of money being made as a very recent thing. So we're trying to figure out those terms. And, of course, there's egos and personalities and a lot of fame to be made. Like the term deep learning, for example, neural networks have been around for many, many decades since the '60s, you can argue since the '40s. So there was a rebranding of neural networks into the word, deep learning, term, deep learning, that was part of the re-invigoration of the field, but it's really the same exact thing. - I didn't know that. I mean, I grew up in the age of neuroscience when neural networks were discussed, computational neuroscience and theoretical neuroscience, they had their own journals. It wasn't actually taken terribly seriously by experimentalists until a few years ago. I would say about five to seven years ago. Excellent theoretical neuroscientist like Larry Abbott and other colleagues, certainly at Stanford as well that people started paying attention to computational methods. But these terms, neural networks, computational methods, I actually didn't know that neural network works in deep learning where those have now become kind of synonymous. - No, they're always the same thing. - Interesting. It was, so. - I'm a neuroscientist and I didn't know that. - So, well, because neural networks probably means something else and neural science not something else, but a little different flavor depending on the field. And that's fascinating too, because neuroscience and AI people have started working together and dancing a lot more in the recent, I would say probably decade. - Oh, machines are going into the brain. I have a couple of questions, but one thing that I'm sort of fixated on that I find incredibly interesting is this example you gave of playing a game with a mutated version of yourself as a competitor. - Yeah. - I find that incredibly interesting as a kind of a parallel or a mirror for what happens when we try and learn as humans, which is we generate repetitions of whatever it is we're trying to learn, and we make errors. Occasionally we succeed. In a simple example, for instance, of trying to throw bulls eyes on a dartboard. - Yeah. - I'm going to have errors, errors, errors. I'll probably miss the dartboard. And maybe occasionally, hit a bullseye. And I don't know exactly what I just did, right? But then let's say I was playing darts against a version of myself where I was wearing a visual prism, like my visual, I had a visual defect, you learn certain things in that mode as well. You're saying that a machine can sort of mutate itself, does the mutation always cause a deficiency that it needs to overcome? Because of mutations in biology sometimes give us super powers, right? Occasionally, you'll get somebody who has better than 2020 vision, and they can see better than 99.9% of people out there. So, when you talk about a machine playing a game against a mutated version of itself, is the mutation always say what we call a negative mutation, or an adaptive or a maladaptive mutation? - No, you don't know until you get, so, you mutate first and then figure out and they compete against each other. - So, you're evolving, the machine gets to evolve itself in real time. - Yeah. And I think of it, which would be exciting if you could actually do with humans. It's not just. So, usually you freeze a version of the system. So, really you take on Andrew of yesterday and you make 10 clones of them. And then maybe you mutate, maybe not. And then you do a bunch of competitions of the Andrew of today, like you fight to the death, and who wins last. So, I love that idea of like creating a bunch of clones of myself from like from each of the day for the past year, and just seeing who's going to be better at like podcasting or science, or picking up chicks at a bar or I don't know, or competing in Jujitsu. That's the one way to do it, I mean, a lot of Lexes would have to die for that process, but that's essentially what happens, is in reinforcement learning through the self-play mechanisms, it's a graveyard of systems that didn't do that well. And the surviving, the good ones survive. - Do you think that, I mean, Darwin's Theory of Evolution might have worked in some sense in this way, but at the population level. I mean, you get a bunch of birds with different shaped beaks and some birds have the shaped beak that allows them to get the seeds. I mean, is a trivially simple example of Darwinian in evolution, but I think it's correct even though it's not exhaustive. Is what you're referring to? You essentially that normally this is done between members of a different species, lots of different members of species have different traits and some get selected for, but you could actually create multiple versions of yourself with different traits. - So, with, I should probably have said this, but perhaps it's implied with machine learning, with reinforcement learning through these processes. One of the big requirements, is to have an objective function, a loss function, a utility function, those are all different terms for the same thing, is there's a like any equation that says what's good, and then you're trying to optimize that equation. So, there's a clear goal for these systems. - Because it's a game, like with chess, there's a goal. - But for anything. Anything you want machine learning to solve, there needs to be an objective function. In machine learning, it's usually called Loss Function, that you're optimizing. The interesting thing about evolution, it's complicated of course, but the goal also seems to be evolving. Like it's a, I guess, adaptation to the environment, is the goal, but it's unclear that you can convert that always. It's like survival of the fittest. It's unclear what the fittest is. In machine learning, the starting point, and this is like what human ingenuity provides, is that fitness function of what's good and what's bad, which it lets you know which of the systems is going to win. So, you need to have a equation like that. One of the fascinating things about humans, is we figure out objective functions for ourselves. Like it's the meaning of life, like why the hell are we here? And a machine currently has to have a hard-coded statement about why. - It has to have a meaning of- - Yeah. - Artificial intelligence-based life. - Right. It can't. So, like there's a lot of interesting explorations about that function being more about curiosity, about learning new things and all that kind of stuff, but it's still hard coded. If you want a machine to be able to be good at stuff, it has to be given very clear statements of what good at stuff means. That's one of the challenges of artificial intelligence, is you have to formalize the, in order to solve a problem, you have to formalize it and you have to provide both like the full sensory information, you have to be very clear about what is the data that's being collected, and you have to also be clear about the objective function. What is the goal that you're trying to reach? And that's a very difficult thing for artificial intelligence. - I love that you mentioned curiosity, I am sure this definition falls short in many ways, but I define curiosity as a strong interest in knowing something, but without an attachment to the outcome. It's sort of a, it could be a random search, but there's not really an emotional attachment, it's really just a desire to discover and unveil what's there without hoping it's a gold coin under a rock, you're just looking under rocks. Is that more or less how the, within machine learning, it sounds like there are elements of reward prediction and rewards. The machine has to know when it's done the right thing. So, can you make machines that are curious, or are the sorts of machines that you are describing, curious by design? - Yeah, curiosity is a kind of a symptom, not the goal. So, what happens, is one of the big trade-offs in reinforcement learning, is this exploration versus exploitation. So, when you know very little, it pays off to explore a lot, even suboptimal, like even trajectories that seem like they're not going to lead anywhere, that's called exploration. The smarter and smarter and smarter you get, the more emphasis you put on exploitation, meaning you take the best solution, you take the best path. Now, through that process, the exploration can look like curiosity by us humans, but it's really just trying to get out of the local optimal, the thing it's already discovered. From an AI perspective, it's always looking to optimize the objective function, it derives, and we can talk about the slot more, but in terms of the tools of machine learning today, it derives no pleasure from just the curiosity of like, I don't know, discovery. - So, there's no dopamine for machine learning. - There's no dopamine. - There's no reward, system chemical, or I guess electronic-reward system. - That said, if you look at machine learning literature and reinforcement learning literature, that will use, like deep mind, we use terms like dopamine, we're constantly trying to use the human brain to inspire totally new solutions to these problems. So, they'll think like, how does dopamine function in the human brain, and how can it lead to more interesting ways to discover optimal solutions? But ultimately currently, there has to be a formal objective function. Now, you could argue the humans also has a set of objective functions we try and optimize, we're just not able to introspect them. - Yeah, we don't actually know what we're looking for and seeking and doing. - Well, like Lisa Feldman Barrett who we spoken with at least on Instagram, I hope you- - I met her through you, yeah. - Yeah, I hope you actually have are on this podcast. - Yes, she's terrific. - So, she has a very, it has to do with homeostasis like that. Basically, there's a very dumb objective function that the brain is trying to optimize, like to keep like body temperature the same. Like there's a very dom kind of optimization function happening. And then what we humans do with our fancy consciousness and cognitive abilities, is we tell stories to ourselves so we can have nice podcasts, but really it's the brain trying to maintain a, just like healthy state, I guess. That's fascinating. I also see the human brain, and I hope artificial intelligence systems, as not just systems that solve problems, or optimize a goal, but are also storytellers. I think there's a power to telling stories. We tell stories to each other, that's what communication is. Like when you're alone, that's when you solve problems, that's when it makes sense to talk about solving problems. But when you're a community, the capability to communicate, tell stories, share ideas in such a way that those ideas are stable over a long period of time, that's like, that's being a charismatic storyteller. And I think both humans are very good at this. Arguably, I would argue that's why we are who we are, is we're great storytellers. And then AI I hope will also become that. So, it's not just about being able to solve problems with a clear objective function, it's afterwards, be able to tell like a way better, like make up a way better story about why you did something, or why you failed. - So, you think that robots or, and/or machines of some sort are going to start telling human stories? - Well, definitely. So, the technical field for that is called Explainable AI, Explainable Artificial Intelligence, is trying to figure out how you get the AI system to explain to us humans why the hell it failed, or why it succeeded, or there's a lot of different sort of versions of this, or to visualize how it understands the world. That's a really difficult problem, especially with neural networks that are famously opaque, that we don't understand in many cases, why a particular neural network does what it does so well, and to try to figure out where it's going to fail, that requires the AI to explain itself. There's a huge amount of money, like there's a huge amount of money in this, especially from government funding and so on. Because if you want to deploy AI systems in the real world, we humans at least, want to ask it a question like, why the hell did you do that? Like in a dark way, why did you just kill that person, right? Like if a car ran over a person, we want to understand why that happened. And now again, we're sometimes very unfair to AI systems because we humans can often not explain why very well. But that's the field of Explainable AI that people are very interested in because the more and more we rely on AI systems, like the Twitter recommender system, that AI algorithm that's, I would say impacting elections, perhaps starting wars, or at least military conflict, that algorithm, we want to ask that algorithm, first of all, do you know what the hell you're doing? Do you understand the society-level effects you're having? And can you explain the possible other trajectories? Like we would have that kind of conversation with a human, we want to be able to do that with an AI. And in my own personal level, I think it would be nice to talk to AI systems for stupid stuff, like robots when they fail to- - Why'd you fall down the stairs? - Yeah. But not an engineering question, but almost like an endearing question, like I'm looking for, if I fell and you and I were hanging out, I don't think you need an explanation exactly what were the dynamics, like what was the under actuated system problem here? Like what was the texture of the floor? Or so on. Or like, what was the- - No, I want to know what you're thinking. - That, or you might joke about like, you're drunk again, go home, or something, like there could be humor in it, that's an opportunity. Like storytelling, isn't just explanation of what happened, it's something that makes people laugh, it makes people fall in love, it makes people dream, and understand things in a way that poetry makes people understand things as opposed to a rigorous log of where every sensor was, where every actuator was. - I mean, I find this incredible because one of the hallmarks of severe autism spectrum disorders is, a report of experience from the autistic person that is very much a catalog of action steps. It's like, how do you feel today? And they'll say, well, I got up and I did this, and then I did this, and I did this. And it's not at all the way that a person who doesn't have autism spectrum disorder would respond. And the way you describe these machines has so much humanism, or so much of a human and biological element, but I realized that we were talking about machines. I want to make sure that I understand if there's a distinction between a machine that learns, a machine with artificial intelligence and a robot. Like at what point does a machine become a robot? So, if I have a ballpoint pen, I'm assuming I wouldn't call that a robot, but if my ballpoint pen can come to me when I moved to the opposite side of the table, if it moves by whatever mechanism, at that point, does it become a robot? - Okay, there's 1 million ways to explore this question. It's a fascinating one. So, first of all, there's a question of what is life? Like how do you know something as a living form and not? And it's to the question of when does sort of a, maybe a cold computational system becomes a, or already loading these words with a lot of meaning, robot and machine, So, one, I think movement is important, but that's a kind of a boring idea that a robot is just a machine that's able to act in the world. So, one artificial intelligence could be both just the thinking thing, which I think is what machine learning is, and also the acting thing, which is what we usually think about robots. So, robots are the things that have a perception system that's able to take in the world however you define the world, is able to think and learn and do whatever the hell it does inside, and then act on the world. So, that's the difference between maybe an AI system learning machine and a robot, it's something that's able, a robot is something that's able to perceive the world and act in the world. - So, it could be through language or sound, or it could be through movement or both. - Yeah. And I think it could also be in the digital space as long as there's a aspect of entity that's inside the machine and a world that's outside the machine. And there's a sense in which the machine is sensing that world and acting in it. - So, we could, for instance, there could be a version of a robot, according to the definition that I think you're providing, where the robot, where I go to sleep at night and this robot goes and forges for information that it thinks I want to see loaded onto my desktop in the morning. There was no movement of that machine, there was no language, but it essentially, has movement in cyberspace. - Yeah, there's a distinction that I think is important in that there's an element of it being an entity, whether it's in the digital or the physical space. So, when you have something like Alexa in your home, most of the speech recognition, most of what Alexa is doing, is constantly being sent back to the mothership. When Alexa is there on its own, that's to me, a robot, when it's there interacting with the world. When it's simply a finger of the main mothership, then the Alexa is not a robot, then it's just an interaction device, then may be the main Amazon Alexa AI, big, big system is the robot. So, that's important because there's some element, to us humans, I think, where we want there to be an entity, whether in the digital or the physical space, that's where ideas of consciousness come in and all those kinds of things that we project our understanding of what it means to be a being. And so, to take that further, when does a machine become a robot, I think there's a special moment. There's a special moment in a person's life and in a robot's life where it surprises you. I think surprise is a really powerful thing, where you know how the thing works and yet it surprises you, that's a magical moment for us humans. So, whether it's a chess-playing program that does something that you haven't seen before, that makes people smile like, huh, those moments happen with AlphaZero for the first time in chess playing, where grand masters were really surprised by a move. They didn't understand the move and then they studied and studied and then they understood it. But that moment of surprise, that's for grandmasters in chess. I find that moment of surprise really powerful, really magical in just everyday life. - Because it supersedes the human brain in that moment? - So, it's not supersedes, like outperforms, but surprises you in a positive sense. Like I didn't think he could do that, I didn't think that you had that in you. And I think that moment is a big transition for a robot from a moment of being a servant that accomplishes a particular task with some level of accuracy, with some rate of failure, to an entity, a being that's struggling just like you are in this world. And that's a really important moment that I think you're not going to find many people in the AI community that talk like I just did. I'm not speaking like some philosopher or some hippie, I'm speaking from purely engineering perspective. I think it's really important for robots to become entities and explore that as a real engineering problem, as opposed to everybody treats robots in the robotics community, they don't even call them or he or she, they don't give them, try to avoid giving them names, they've really want to see like a system, like a servant. They see it as a servant that's trying to accomplish a task. To me, and don't think I'm just romanticizing the notion, I think it's a being, it's a currently perhaps a dumb being, but in the long arc of history, humans are pretty dumb beings too, so- - I would agree with that statement. [Andrew laughing] - So, I tend to really want to explore this treating robots really as entities, yeah. So, like anthropomorphization, which is the sort of the act of looking at a inanimate object and projecting onto it life-like features, I think robotics generally sees that as a negative, I see it as a superpower. Like that, we need to use that. - Well, I'm struck by how that really grabs onto the relationship between human and machine, or human and robot. So, I guess the simple question is, and I think you've already told us the answer, but does interacting with a robot change you? In other words, do we develop relationships to robots? - Yeah, I definitely think so. I think the moment you see a robot or AI systems as more than just servants but entities, they begin to change you, in just like good friends do, just like relationships just to other humans. I think for that, you have to have certain aspects of that interaction. Like the robot's ability to say no, to have its own sense of identity, to have its own set of goals, that's not constantly serving you, but instead, trying to understand the world and do that dance of understanding through communication with you. So, I definitely think there's a, I mean, I have a lot of thoughts about this as you may know, and that's at the core of my life-long dream actually of what I want to do, which is I believe that most people have a notion of loneliness in them that we haven't discovered, that we haven't explored, I should say. And I see AI systems as helping us explore that so that we can become better humans, better people towards each other. So, I think that connection between human and AI, human and robot, is not only possible, but will help us understand ourselves in ways that are like several orders of magnitude deeper than we ever could have imagined. I tend to believe that [sighing] well, I have very wild levels of belief in terms of how impactful that will be, right? - So, when I think about human relationships, I don't always break them down into variables, but we could explore a few of those variables and see how they map to human-robot relationships. One is just time, right? If you spend zero time with another person at all in cyberspace or on the phone or in person, you essentially have no relationship to them. If you spend a lot of time, you have a relationship, this is obvious. But I guess one variable would be time, how much time you spend with the other entity, robot or human. The other would be wins and successes. You enjoy successes together. I'll give a absolutely trivial example this in a moment, but the other would be failures. When you struggle with somebody, whether or not you struggle between one another, you disagree, like I was really struck by the fact that you said that robot saying no, I've never thought about a robot saying no to me, but there it is. - I look forward to you being one of the first people I send this robots to. - So do I. So, there's struggle. When you struggle with somebody, you grow closer. Sometimes the struggles are imposed between those two people, so called trauma bonding, they call it in the whole psychology literature and pop psychology literature. But in any case, I can imagine. So, time successes together, struggle together, and then just peaceful time, hanging out at home, watching movies, waking up near one another, here, we're breaking down the elements of relationships of any kind. So, do you think that these elements apply to robot-human relationships? And if so, then I could see how, if the robot has its own entity and has some autonomy in terms of how it reacts you, it's not just there just to serve you, it's not just a servant, it actually has opinions, and can tell you when maybe your thinking is flawed, or your actions are flawed. - It can also leave. - It could also leave. So, I've never conceptualized robot-human interactions this way. So, tell me more about how this might look. Are we thinking about a human-appearing robot? I know you and I have both had intense relationships to our, we have separate dogs obviously, but to animals, it sounds a lot like human-animal interaction. So, what is the ideal human-robot relationship? - So, there's a lot to be said here, but you actually pinpointed one of the big, big first steps, which is this idea of time. And it's a huge limitation in machine-learning community currently. Now we're back to like the actual details. Life-long learning is a problem space that focuses on how AI systems can learn over a long period of time. What's currently most machine learning systems are not able to do, is to all of the things you've listed under time, the successes, the failures, or just chilling together watching movies, AI systems are not able to do that, which is all the beautiful, magical moments that I believe are the days filled with, they're not able to keep track of those together with you. - 'Cause they can't move with you and be with you. - No, no, like literally we don't have the techniques to do the learning, the actual learning of containing those moments. Current machine-learning systems are really focused on understanding the world in the following way, it's more like the perception system, like looking around, understand like what's in the scene. That there's a bunch of people sitting down, that there is cameras and microphones, that there's a table, understand that. But the fact that we shared this moment of talking today, and still remember that for like next time you're doing something, remember that this moment happened. We don't know how to do that technique-wise. This is what I'm hoping to innovate on as I think it's a very, very important component of what it means to create a deeper relationship, that sharing of moments together. - Could you post a photo of you in the robot, like selfie with robot and the robot sees that image and recognizes that was time spent, there were smiles, or there were tears- - Yeah. - And create some sort of metric of emotional depth in the relationship and update its behavior? - So. - Could it... It texts you in the middle of the night and say, why haven't you texted me back? - Well, yes, all of those things, but we can dig into that. But I think that time element, forget everything else, just sharing moments together, that changes everything. I believe that changes everything. Now, there's specific things that are more in terms of systems that I can explain you. It's more technical and probably a little bit offline, 'cause I have kind of wild ideas how that can revolutionize social networks and operating systems. But the point is that element alone, forget all the other things we're talking about like emotions, saying no, all that, just remembering sharing moments together would change everything. We don't currently have systems that share moments together. Like even just you and your fridge, just all those times, you went late at night and ate thing you shouldn't have eaten, that was a secret moment you have with your refrigerator. You shared that moment, that darkness or that beautiful moment where you were just like heartbroken for some reason, you're eating that ice cream or whatever, that's a special moment. And that refrigerator was there for you, and the fact that it missed the opportunity to remember that is tragic. And once it does remember that, I think you're going to be very attached to the refrigerator. You're going to go through some hell with that refrigerator. Most of us have, like in the developed world, have weird relationships with food, right? So, you can go through some deep moments of trauma and triumph with food, and at the core of that, is the refrigerator. So, a smart refrigerator, I believe would change society. Not just the refrigerator, but these ideas in the systems all around us. So, I just want to comment on how powerful that idea of time is. And then there's a bunch of elements of actual interaction of allowing you as a human to feel like you're being heard. Truly heard, truly understood, that we human, like deep friendship is like that, I think, but there's still an element of selfishness, there's still an element of not really being able to understand another human. And a lot of the times when you're going through trauma together, through difficult times and through successes, you actually starting to get that inkling of understanding of each other, but I think that could be done more aggressively, more efficiently. Like if you think of a great therapist, I think I've never actually been to a therapist, but I'm a believer I used to want to be a psychiatrist. - Do Russians go to therapists? - No, they don't. They don't. And if they do, the therapist don't live to tell the story. I do believe in talk therapy, which friendship is to me, is it's talk therapy, or like you don't even necessarily need to talk [laughing] it's like just connecting through in the space of ideas and the space of experiences. And I think there's a lot of ideas of how to make AI systems to be able to ask the right questions and truly hear another human. This is what we try to do with podcasting, right? I think there's ways to do that with AI. But above all else, just remembering the collection of moments that make up the day, the week, the months, I think you maybe have some of this as well. Some of my closest friends still are the friends from high school. That's time, we've been through a bunch of together, and that like we're very different people. But just the fact that we've been through that, and we remember those moments, and those moments somehow create a depth of connection like nothing else, like you and your refrigerator. - I love that because my graduate advisor, she unfortunately, she passed away, but when she passed away, somebody said at her at her memorial all these amazing things she had done, et cetera. And then her kids got up there, and she had young children and that I knew as when she was pregnant with them. And so, it was really, you're even now I can feel like your heart gets heavy, thinking about this, they're going to grow up without their mother. And it was really amazing, very strong young girls, and now the young women. And what they said was incredible, they said what they really appreciated most about their mother, who was an amazing person, is all the unstructured time they spent together. - Mm-hmm. - So, it wasn't the trips to the zoo, it wasn't she woke up at five in the morning and drove us to school. She did all those things too. She had two hour commute in each direction, it was incredible, ran a lab, et cetera, but it was the unstructured time. So, on the passing of their mother, that's what they remembered was that the biggest give and what bonded them to her, was all the time where they just kind of hung out. And the way you describe the relationship to a refrigerator is so, I want to say human-like, but I'm almost reluctant to say that. Because what I'm realizing as we're talking, is that what we think of as human-like might actually be the lower form of relationship. There may be relationships that are far better than the sorts of relationships that we can conceive in our minds right now based on what these machine relationship interactions could teach us. Do I have that right? - Yeah, I think so. I think there's no reason to see machines as somehow incapable of teaching us something that's deeply human. I don't think humans have a monopoly on that. I think we understand ourselves very poorly and we need to have the kind of prompting from a machine. And definitely part of that, is just remembering the moments. I think the unstructured time together, I wonder if it's quite so unstructured. That's like calling this podcast on structured time. - Maybe what they meant, was it wasn't a big outing, there was no specific goal, but a goal was created through the lack of a goal. Like we would just hang out and then you start playing, thumb war, and you end up playing thumb war for an hour. So, it's the structure emerges from lack of structure. - No, but the thing is the moments, there's something about those times that creates special moments, and I think those could be optimized for. I think we think of like a big outing as, I don't know, going to Six Flags or something, or some big, the Grand Canyon, or go into some, I don't know, I think we would need to, we don't quite yet understand, as humans, what creates magical moments. I think it's possible to optimize a lot of those things. And perhaps like podcasting is helping people discover that, like maybe the thing we want to optimize for isn't necessarily like some sexy, like quick clips, maybe what we want, is long-form authenticity. - Depth. - Depth. So, we were trying to figure that out, certainly from a deep connection between humans and humans and NAS systems, I think long conversations, or long periods of communication over a series of moments like my new, perhaps, seemingly insignificant to the big ones, the big successes, the big failures, those are all just stitching those together and talking throughout. I think that's the formula for a really, really deep connection. That from like a very specific engineering perspective, is I think a fascinating open problem that has been really worked on very much. And for me, from a, if I have the guts and, I mean there's a lot of things to say, but one of it is guts, is I'll build a startup around it. - So, let's talk about this startup and let's talk about the dream. You mentioned this dream before in our previous conversations, always as little hints dropped here and there. Just for anyone listening, there's never been an offline conversation about this dream, I'm not privy to anything, except what Lex says now. And I realized that there's no way to capture the full essence of a dream in any kind of verbal statement in a way that captures all of it. But what is this dream that you've referred to now several times when we've sat down together and talked on the phone? Maybe it's this company, maybe it's something distinct. If you feel comfortable, it'd be great if you could share a little bit about what that is. - Sure. So, the way people express long-term vision, I've noticed is quite different. Like Elon is an example of somebody who can very crisply say exactly what the goal is. Also has to do with the fact that problems he's solving have nothing to do with humans. So, my long-term vision is a little bit more difficult to express in words, I've noticed, as I've tried, it could be my brain's failure, but there's a way to sneak up to it. So, let me just say a few things. Early on in life and also in the recent years, I've interacted with a few robots where I understood there's magic there. And that magic could be shared by millions if it's brought to light. When I first met Spot from Boston Dynamics, I realized there's magic there that nobody else is seeing. - Is the dog. - The dog, sorry. The Spot is the four-legged robot from Boston Dynamics. Some people might have seen it, it's this yellow dog. And sometimes in life, you just notice something that just grabs you. And I believe that this is something that this magic is something that could be in every single device in the world. The way that I think maybe Steve Jobs thought about the personal computer, laws didn't think about the personal computer this way, but Steve did. Which is like, he thought that the personal computer should be as thin as a sheet of paper and everybody should have one, and this idea, I think it is heartbreaking that we're getting, the world is being filled up with machines that are soulless. And I think every one of them can have that same magic. One of the things that also inspired me in terms of a startup, is that magic can engineered much easier than I thought. That's my intuition with everything I've ever built and worked on. So, the dream is to add a bit of that magic in every single computing system in the world. So, the way that Windows Operating System for a long time was the primary operating system everybody interacted with, they built apps on top of it. I think this is something that should be as a layer, it's almost as an operating system in every device that humans interacted with in the world. Now, what that actually looks like, the actual dream when I was officially a kid, it didn't have this concrete form of a business, it had more of a dream of exploring your own loneliness by interacting with machines, robots. This deep connection between humans and robots was always a dream. And so, for me, I'd love to see a world where there's every home as a robot, and not a robot that washes the dishes, or a sex robot, or I don't know, think of any kind of activity the robot can do, but more like a companion. - A family member. - A family member, the way a dog is. - Mm-hmm. - But a dog that's able to speak your language too. So, not just connect the way a dog does by looking at you and looking away and almost like smiling with its soul in that kind of way, but also to actually understand what the hell, like, why are you so excited about the successes? Like understand the details, understand the traumas. And that, I just think [sighing] that has always filled me with excitement that I could, with artificial intelligence, bring joy to a lot of people. More recently, I've been more and more heartbroken to see the kind of division, derision, even hate that's boiling up on the internet through social networks. And I thought this kind of mechanism is exactly applicable in the context of social networks as well. So, it's an operating system that serves as your guide on the internet. One of the biggest problems with YouTube and social networks currently, is they're optimizing for engagement. I think if you create AI systems that know each individual person, you're able to optimize for long-term growth for a long-term happiness. - Of the individual, or- - Of the individual, of the individual. And there's a lot of other things to say, which is in order for AI systems to learn everything about you, they need to collect, they need to just like you and I when we talk offline, we're collecting data about each others secrets about each other, the same way AI has to do that. And that allows you to, and that requires you to rethink ideas of ownership of data. I think each individual should own all of their data and very easily be able to leave just like AI systems can leave, humans can disappear and delete all of their data in a moment's notice. Which is actually better than we humans can do, is once we load the data into each other, it's there. I think it's very important to be both, give people complete control over their data in order to establish trust that they can trust you. And the second part of trust is transparency. Whenever the data is used to make it very clear what is being used for. And not clear in a lawyerly legal sense, but clear in a way that people really understand what it's used for. I believe when people have the ability to delete all their data and walk away and know how the data is being used, I think they'll stay. - The possibility of a clean breakup, is actually what will keep people together. - Yeah, I think so. I think, exactly. I think a happy marriage acquires the ability to divorce easily without the divorce industrial complex or whatever. Things currently going on and then there's so much money to be made from lawyers and divorce. But yeah, the ability to leave is what enables love, I think. - It's interesting. I've heard the phrase from a semi-cynical friend, that marriage is the leading cause of divorce, but now we've heard that divorce, or the possibility of divorce could be the leading cause of marriage. - Of a happy marriage. - Good point. - Of a happy marriage. So, yeah. So, there's a lot of details there, but the big dream is that connection between AI system and a human. And I haven't. There's so much fear about artificial intelligence systems and about robots that I haven't quite found the right words to express that vision because the vision I have, it's not like some naive, delusional vision of like technology is going to save everybody, it's I really do just have a positive view of ways AI systems can help humans explore themselves. - I love that positivity and I agree that the stance everything is doomed is equally bad to say that everything's going to turn out all right, there has to be a dedicated effort. And clearly, you're thinking about what that dedicated effort would look like. You mentioned two aspects to this dream [clears throat] and I want to make sure that I understand where they connect if they do, or if they are independent streams. One was this hypothetical robot family member, or some other form of robot that would allow people to experience the kind of delight that you experienced many times, and that you would like the world to be able to have, and it's such a beautiful idea of this give. And the other is social media or social network platforms that really serve individuals and their best selves and their happiness and their growth. Is there crossover between those, or are these two parallel dreams? - It's 100% of the same thing. It's difficult to kind of explain without going through details, but maybe one easy way to explain the way I think about social networks, is to create an AI system that's yours. It's not like Amazon Alexa that's centralized, you own the data, it's like your little friend that becomes your representative on Twitter that helps you find things that will make you feel good, that will also challenge your thinking to make you grow, but not get to that, not let you get lost in the negative spiral of dopamine, that gets you to be angry, or most just get you to be not open to learning. And so, that little representative is optimizing your long-term health. And I believe that that is not only good for human beings, it's also good for business. I think longterm, you can make a lot of money by challenging this idea that the only way to make money, is maximizing engagement. And one of the things that people disagree with me on, is they think Twitter's always going to win. Like maximizing engagement is always going to win, I don't think so. I think people have woken up now to understanding that, like they don't always feel good, the ones who are on Twitter a lot, that they don't always feel good at the end of the week. - I would love feedback from whatever this creature, whatever, I don't know what to call it, as to maybe at the end of the week, it would automatically unfollow some of the people that I follow because it realized through some really smart data about how I was feeling inside, or how I was sleeping, or something that, I don't know, that just wasn't good for me. But it might also put things and people in front of me that I ought to see, is that kind of a sliver of what this look like? - The whole point, because of the interaction, because of sharing the moments and learning a lot about you, you're now able to understand what interactions led you to become a better version of yourself. Like the person you yourself are happy with. This isn't, if you're into flat earth and you feel very good about it, that you believe that earth is flat, like the idea that you should sensor that is ridiculous. If it makes you feel good and you becoming the best version of yourself, I think you should be getting as much flat earth as possible. Now, it's also good to challenge your ideas, but not because the centralized committee decided, but because you tell to the system that you like challenging your ideas, I think all of us do. And then, which actually YouTube doesn't do that well, once you go down the flat-earth rabbit hole, that's all you're going to see. It's nice to get some really powerful communicators to argue against flat earth. And it's nice to see that for you, and potentially, at least long-term to expand your horizons, maybe the earth is not flat. But if you continue to live your whole life thinking the earth is flat, I think, and you're being a good father or son or daughter, and like you're being the best version of yourself and you're happy with yourself, I think the earth is flat. So, like I think this kind of idea, and I'm just using that kind of silly, ridiculous example because I don't like the idea of centralized forces controlling what you can and can't see, but I also don't like this idea of like not censoring anything. Because that's always the biggest problem with that, is this there's a central decider, I think you yourself can decide what you want to see and not, and it's good to have a companion that reminds you that you felt last time you did this, or you felt good last time you did this. - Man, I feel like in every good story, there's a guide or a companion that flies out, or forges a little bit further, a little bit differently and brings back information that helps us, or at least tries to steer us in the right direction. - So, yeah, that's exactly what I'm thinking and what I've been working on. I should mention as a bunch of difficulties here, you see me up and down a little bit recently. So, there's technically a lot of challenges here. Just like with a lot of technologies, and the reason I'm talking about it on a podcast comfortably as opposed to working in secret, is it's really hard and maybe it's time has not come. And that's something you have to constantly struggle with in terms of like entrepreneurially as a startup, like I've also mentioned to you, maybe offline, I really don't care about money, I don't care about business success, all those kinds of things. So, it's a difficult decision to make, how much of your time do you want to go all in here and give everything to this? It's a big roll the dice. Because I've also realized that's working on some of these problems, both with the robotics and the technical side in terms of the machine-learning system that I'm describing, it's lonely, it's really lonely. Because both on a personal level and a technical level. So, on the technical level, I'm surrounded by people that kind of doubt me, which I think all entrepreneurs go through. And they doubt you in the following sense, they know how difficult it is. Like the people that the colleagues of mine, they know how difficult life-long learning is, they also know how difficult it is to build a system like this, to build the competitive social network. And in general, there's a kind of a loneliness to just working on something on your own for long periods of time. And you start to doubt whether, given that you don't have a track record of success, like that's a big one. But when you look in the mirror, especially when you're young, but I still have that, I'm most things, you look in the mirror, it's like, and you have these big dreams, how do you know you're actually as smart as you think you are? Like how do you know you're going to be able to accomplish this dream? You have this ambition. - You sort of don't, but you're kind of pulling on a string hoping that there's a bigger ball of yarn. - Yeah. [Andrew laughing] But you have this kind of intuition. I think I pride myself in knowing what I'm good at, because the reason I have that intuition, is 'cause I think I'm very good at knowing all the things I suck at, which is basically everything. So, like whenever I notice like, wait a minute, I'm kind of good at this, which is very rare for me. I think like that, that might be a ball of yarn worth pulling at. And the thing with in terms of engineering systems that are able to interact with humans, I think I'm very good at that. And because we talk about podcasting and so on, I don't know if I'm very good at podcasts. - You're very good at podcasting, right? - But I certainly don't, I think maybe it is compelling for people to watch a kindhearted idiot struggle with this form, maybe that's what's compelling. But in terms of like actual being a good engineer of human-robot interaction systems, I think I'm good. But it's hard to know until you do it, and then the world keeps telling you you're not, and it's full of doll, it's really hard. And I've been struggling with that recently, it's kind of a fascinating struggle. But then that's where the Goggins thing comes in, is like, aside from the state-hard motherfucker, is the, like whenever you're struggling, that's a good sign that if you keep going, that you're going to be alone in the success, right? - Well, in your case, however, I agree. And actually David had a post recently that I thought was among his many brilliant posts, was one of the more brilliant about how he talked about this myth of the light at the end of the tunnel. And instead, what he replaced that myth with, was a concept that eventually, your eyes adapt to the dark. That the tunnel, it's not about a light at the end, that it's really about adapting to the dark of the tunnel. It's very Goggins- - I love him so much. - Yeah. You got share a lot in common knowing you both a bit, share a lot in common. But in this loneliness and the pursuit of this dream, it seems to me, it has a certain component to it that is extremely valuable, which is that the loneliness itself could serve as a driver to build the companion for the journey. - Well, I'm very deeply aware of that. So, like some people can make, 'cause I talk about love a lot, I really love everything in this world, but I also love humans, friendship and romantic, like even the cheesy stuff, just- - You like romantic movies? - Yeah, not those, not necessarily. So, well, I got so much from Rogan about like, was it the Tango scene from "Scent of a Woman," but I find like there's nothing better than a woman in a red dress, just like the classy- - You should move to Argentina my friend. My father's Argentine, and you know what he said when I went on your podcast for the first time? He said, he dresses well. Because in Argentina, the men go to a wedding or a party or something, in the U.S., by halfway through the night, 10 minutes in the night, all the jackets are off. - Yeah. - It looks like everyone's undressing for the party they just got dressed up for. And he said, you know, I liked the way he dresses. And then when I started, he was talking about you. And then when I started my podcast, he said, why don't you wear a real suit like your friend Lex? [laughing] - I remember that. - No, you can't. But let's talk about this pursuit just a bit more, because I think what you're talking about, is building a, not just a solution for loneliness, but you've alluded to the loneliness as itself, an important thing. And I think you're right. I think within people, there is like caverns of faults and shame, but also just the desire to have resonance, to be seen and heard. And I don't even know that it's seen and heard through language. But these reservoirs of loneliness, I think, well, they're interesting, maybe you could comment a little bit about it. Because just as often as you talk about love, I haven't quantified it, but it seems that you talk about this loneliness, and maybe you just if you're willing, you'll share a little bit more about that, and what that feels like now in the pursuit of building this robot-human relationship. And you've been, let me be direct, you've been spending a lot of time on building a robot-human relationship, where's that at? - Oh, in terms of business, in terms of systems? - No, I'm talking about a specific robot. - Oh [laughing] so, okay, I should mention a few things. So, one, is there's a startup with an idea where I hope millions of people can use. And then there's my own personal like almost like Frankenstein explorations with particular robots. So, I'm very fascinated with the legged robots in my own, private sounds like dark, but like in of one experiments to see if I can recreate the magic. And that's been, I have a lot of really good already perception systems and control systems that are able to communicate affection in a dog-like fashion. So, I'm in a really good place there. The stumbling blocks, which also have been part of my sadness recently, is that I also have to work with robotics companies that I gave so much of my heart, soul and love and appreciation towards Boston Dynamics, but Boston Dynamics has also, as a company, it has to make a lot of money and they have marketing teams. And they're like looking at this silly Russian kid in a suit and tie, it's like, what's he trying to do with all this love and robot interaction and dancing and so on? So, there was a, I think let's say for now, it's like, when you break up with a girlfriend or something, right now, we decided to part ways on this particular thing. They're huge supporters of mine, they're huge fans, but on this particular thing, Boston Dynamics is not focusing on, or interested in human-robot interaction. In fact, their whole business currently, is keep the robot as far away from humans as possible because it's an in the industrial setting where it's doing monitoring in dangerous environments. It's almost like a remote security camera, essentially is its application. To me, I thought it's still, even in those applications, exceptionally useful for the robot to be able to perceive humans, like see humans and to be able to, in a big map, localize where those humans are and have human intention. For example, like this, I did this a lot of work with pedestrians, for a robot to be able to anticipate what the how the human is doing, like where it's walking. The humans are not ballistics object, just because you're walking this way one moment, it doesn't mean you'll keep walking that direction, you have to infer a lot of signals, especially with the head movement and the eye movement. And so, I thought that's super interesting to explore, but they didn't feel that. So, I'll be working with a few other robotics companies that are much more open to that kind of stuff, and they're super excited and fans of mine. And hopefully, Boston Dynamics, my first love, like getting back with an ex-girlfriend, will come around. But so, the algorithmically, it's basically a done there. The rest, is actually getting some of these companies to work with. And then there's, for people who'd worked with robots know that one thing is to write software that works, and the other is to have a real machine that actually works. And it breaks down all kinds of different ways that are fascinating. And so, there's a big challenge there. But that's almost, it may sound a little bit confusing in the context of our previous discussion because the previous discussion was more about the big dream, how I hoped to have millions of people enjoy this moment of magic. This current discussion about a robot, is something I personally really enjoy, just brings me happiness, I really try to do now everything that just brings me joy, I maximize that 'cause robots are awesome. But two, given my like little bit growing platform, I want to use the opportunity to educate people. Like robots are cool. And if I think they're cool, I hope be able to communicate why they're cool to others. So, this little robot experiment is a little bit of research project too, there's a couple of publications with MIT folks around that. But the other is just to make some cool videos and explain to people how they actually work. And as opposed to people being scared of robots, they could still be scared, but also excited, like see the dark side, the beautiful side, the magic of what it means to bring, for a machine to become a robot. I want to inspire people with that. But that's less, it's interesting because I think the big impact in terms of the dream does not have to do with embodied AI. So, it does not need to have a body. I think the refrigerator's enough, that for an AI system just to have a voice and to hear you, that's enough for loneliness. The embodiment is just- - By embodiment, you mean the physical structure. - Physical instantiation of intelligence. So, it's a legged robot, or even just a thing. I have a few other of humanoid robot, a little humanoid robot maybe I'll keep them on the table, is like walks around, or even just like a mobile platform they can just like, turn around and look at you, it's like we mentioned with the pen. Something that moves and can look at you, it's like that Butter Robot that asks, what is my purpose? That is really, it's almost like art. There's something about a physical entity that moves around, that's able to look at you and interact with you, that makes you wonder what it means to be human. It like challenges you to think, if that thing looks like he has consciousness, what the hell am I? And I like that feeling, I think that's really useful for us, it's humbling for us humans. But that's less about research, it certainly less about business and more about exploring our own selves, and challenging others to think like, to think about what makes them human. - I love this desire to share the delight of an interaction with a robot. And as you describe it, I actually find myself starting to crave that because we all have those elements from childhood where, or from adulthood, where we experience something, we want other people to feel that. And I think that you're right, I think a lot of people are scared of AI, I think a lot of people are scared of robots. My only experience, and of a robotic-like thing is my Roomba Vacuum, where it goes about, actually, it was pretty good at picking up Costello's hair when he was shed and I was grateful for it. But then when I was on a call or something, and it would get caught on a wire or something, I would find myself getting upset with the Roomba in that moment, I'm like, what are you doing? And obviously it's just doing what it does. But that's a kind of mostly positive, but slightly negative interaction. But what you're describing, it has so much more richness and layers of detail that I can only imagine what those relationships are like. - Well, there's a few, just a quick comment. So, I've had, they're currently in Boston and I have a bunch of Roombas from iRobot. And I did this experiment- - Wait, how many Roombas? [Lex laughing] It sounds like a fleet of Roombas. - Yeah. So, it's probably seven or eight, yeah. - Well, it's a lot of Roombas. This place is very clean. - Well, so, this, I'm kind of waiting, this is the place we're currently in Austin, is way larger than I need. But I basically got it to make sure I have room for robots. - So, you have these seven or so Roombas, you deploy all seven at once? - Oh, no, I do different experience with them, different experiments with them. So, one of the things I want to mention, is this is a, I think there was a YouTube video that inspired me to try this, is I got them to scream in pain and moan in pain whenever they were kicked or contacted. And I did that experiment to see how I would feel. I meant to do like a YouTube video on it, but then it just seemed very cruel. - Did any Roomba rights activists come at you? - Like I think if I released that video, I think it's going to make me look insane, which I know people know I'm already insane- - Now, you have to release the video. [Lex laughing] - Sure. Well, I think maybe if I contextualize it by showing other robots like to show why this is fascinating, because ultimately, I felt like there were human almost immediately. And that display of pain was what did that. - Giving them a voice. - Giving them a voice, especially a voice of dislike, of pain. - I have to connect you to my friend Eddie Chang, he studied speech and language, he's a neurosurgeon, and we're life-long friends. He studied speech and language, but he describes some of these more primitive, visceral vocalizations, cries, groans, moans of delight, other sounds as well, use your imagination, as such powerful rudders for the other, for the emotions of other people. And so, I find it fascinating, I can't wait to see this video. So, is the video available online? - No, I haven't recorded it, I just hit a bunch of Roombas that are able to scream in pain in my Boston place. [Andrew laughing] So, like people already- - Next podcast episode with Lex, maybe we'll have that one, who knows? - So, the thing is like people, I've noticed because I talk so much about love and it's really who I am, I think they want to, to a lot of people, seems like there's there got to be a dark person in there somewhere. And I thought if I release videos of Roombas screaming and they're like, yep, yep, that guy's definitely insane. - What about like shouts of glee and delight, you could do that too, right? - Well, I don't know how to, to me, delight is quiet, right? - You're a Russian. Americans are much louder than Russians. - Yeah. - Yeah. - Yeah. But like I don't, unless you're talking about like, I don't know how you would have sexual relationships with the Roomba. - Well, I wasn't necessarily saying a sexual delight, but- - Trust me, I tried. I'm just kidding, that's a joke, internet. Okay [giggles] but I was fascinated in the psychology of how little it took. 'Cause you mentioned you had a negative relationship with a Roomba. - Well, I'd find that mostly, I took it for granted. - Yeah. - It just served me, it collected Costello's hair. And then when it would do something I didn't like, I would get upset with it. So, that's not a good relationship, it was taken for granted and I would get upset and then I'd park it again, and I just like you're in the corner. - Yeah. - But there's a way to frame it being quite dumb as almost cute. You're almost connecting with it for its dumbness. And I think that's artificial intelligence problem. - [Andrew] It's interesting. - I think flaws should be feature, not a bug. - So, along the lines of this, the different sorts of relationships that one could have with robots, and the fear, but also some of the positive relationships that one could have, there's so much dimensionality, there's so much to explore. But power dynamics in relationships are very interesting, because the obvious ones, the unsophisticated view of this, is one, there's a master and a servant, right? But there's also manipulation, there's benevolent manipulation, children do this with parents, puppies do this. Puppies turn their head and look cute and maybe give out a little noise, kids coup and parents always think that they're doing this because they love the parent, but in many ways, studies show that those coups are ways to extract the sorts of behaviors and expressions from the parent that they want. The child doesn't know it's doing this, it's completely subconscious, but it's benevolent manipulation. So, there's one version of fear of robots that I hear a lot about that I think most people can relate to where the robots take over and they become the masters and we become the servants. But there could be another version that in certain communities that I'm certainly not a part of, but they call topping from the bottom, where the robot is actually manipulating you into doing things, but you are under the belief that you are in charge, but actually they're in charge. And so, I think that's one that if we could explore that for a second, you could imagine it wouldn't necessarily be bad, although it could lead to bad things. The reason I want to explore this, is I think people always default to the extreme, like the robots take over and we're in little jail cells and they're out having fun and ruling the universe. What sorts of manipulation can a robot potentially carry out, good or bad? - Yeah. Just so, there's a lot of good and bad manipulation between humans, right? Just like you said. [Lex sighing] To me [sighing] especially like you said [giggles] topping from the bottom, is that the term? - I think someone from MIT told me that term. [Lex laughing] It wasn't Lex. - I think. So, first of all, there's power dynamics in bed, and power dynamics in relationships, and power dynamics on the street, and in the work environment, those are all very different. I think power dynamics can make human relationships, especially romantic relationships fascinating and rich and fulfilling and exciting and all those kinds of things. So, I don't think in themselves they're bad, and the same goes with robots. I really love the idea that a robot will be at top or a bottom in terms of like power dynamics. And I think everybody should be aware of that. And the manipulation is not so much manipulation, but a dance of like pulling away, a push and pull, and all those kinds of things. In terms of control, I think we're very, very, very far away from AI systems that are able to lock us up. To lock us up in, like to have so much control that we basically cannot live our lives in the way that we want. I think there's a, in terms of dangers of AI systems, there's much more dangers that have to do with autonomous weapon systems and all those kinds of things. So, the power dynamics as exercised in the struggle between nations and war and all those kinds of things. But in terms of personal relationships, I think power dynamics are a beautiful thing. Now, there's of course, going to be all those kinds of discussions about consent and rights and all those kinds of things. - Well, here, we're talking about, I always say in any discussion around this, if we need to define a really the context, it always should be consensual, age-appropriate, context-appropriate, species-appropriate, but now we're talking about human-robot interactions. And so, I guess that- - No, I actually was trying to make a different point, which is I do believe that robots will have rights down the line. And I think in order for us to have deep, meaningful relationships with robots, we would have to consider them as entities in themselves that deserve respect. And that's a really interesting concept that I think people are starting to talk about a little bit more, but it's very difficult for us to understand how entities that are other than human. I mean, the same as with dogs and other animals can have rights on a level as humans. - Well, yeah. We can't and nor should we do whatever we want with animals, we have a USDA, we have Department of Agriculture that deal with animal care and use committees for research, for farming and ranching and all that. So, when you first said it, I thought, wait, why would, there'll be a bill of robotic rights, but it absolutely makes sense in the context of everything we've been talking about up until now. If you're willing, I'd love to talk about dogs, because you've mentioned dogs a couple of times, a robot dog, you had a biological dog. Yeah. - Yeah. I had a Newfoundland named Homer for many years growing up. - In Russia or in the U.S.? - In the United States. And he was about, he's over 200 pounds, that's a big dog. - That's a big dog. - People know Newfoundland. So, he's this black dog that's a really a long hair and just a kind soul. I think perhaps that's true for a lot of large, but he thought he was a small dog. So, he moved like that, and- - Was he your dog? - Yeah, yeah. - So, you had him since he was fairly young? - Since the very, very beginning, till the very, very end. And one of the things, I mean, he had this kind of a, we mentioned like the Roombas, he had kind-hearted dumbness about him that was just overwhelming, it's part of the reason I named him Homer, because it's after Homer Simpson, in case people are wondering which Homer I'm referring to. [Andrew laughing] And so, there's a. Yeah, exactly. There's a clumsiness that was just something that immediately led to a deep love for each other. And one of the, I mean, he was always, it's the shared moments, he was always there for so many a nights together, that's a powerful thing about a dog that he was there through all the loneliness, through all the tough times, through the successes and all those kinds of things. And I remember, I mean, that was a really moving moment for me, I still miss him to this day. - How long ago did he die? - Maybe 15 years ago. So, it's been awhile. But it was the first time I've really experienced like the feeling of death. So, what happened, is he got a cancer. And so, he was dying slowly. And then there's a certain point he couldn't get up anymore. Now, there's a lot of things that could say here that I struggle with. Maybe he suffered much longer than he needed to, that's something I really think about a lot. But I remember when I had to take him to the hospital and the nurses couldn't carry him, right? So, you're talking about a 200 pound dog and I was really into power lifting at the time. And I remember they tried to figure out all these kinds of ways to. So, in order to put them to sleep, they had to take them into a room. And so, I had to carry him everywhere. And here's this dying friend of mine that I just had to, first of all, that was really difficult to carry, somebody that heavy when they're not helping you out. And, yeah. So, I remember it was the first time seeing a friend laying there and seeing life drain from his body. And that realization that we're here for a short time was made so real, that here is friend that was there for me the week before, the day before, and now he's gone. And that was, I don't know, that spoke to the fact that he could be deeply connected with the dog. Also spoke to the fact that the shared moments together that led to that deep friendship will make life so amazing, but it also spoke to the fact that death is a motherfucker. So, I know you've lost Costello recently. - Yeah. - And you can- - And as you're saying this, I'm definitely fighting back the tears. I thank you for sharing that. That I guess we're about to both cry over, I don't want to say dogs [laughing] that it was bound to happen just given when this is happening. Yeah, it's- - How long did you know that Costello was not doing well? - We'll, let's see, a year ago during the start of, about six months into the pandemic, he started getting abscesses and he was not, his behavior change and something really changed. And then I put him on testosterone which helped a lot of things. It certainly didn't cure everything, but it helped a lot of things, he was dealing with joint pain, sleep issues, and then it just became a very slow decline to the point where two, three weeks ago, he had a closet full of medication. I mean, this dog was, it was like a pharmacy. It's amazing to me when I looked at it the other day, I still haven't cleaned up and removed all those things, 'cause I can't quite bring myself to do it, but- - Do you think he was suffering? - Well, so, what happened, was about a week ago, it was really just about a week ago, it's amazing. He was going up the stairs, I saw him slip. And he was a big guy, he wasn't 200 pounds, but he was about 90 pounds, he's a bulldog, he was pretty big and he was fit. And then I noticed that he wasn't carrying a foot in the back like it was injured, it had no feeling at all. He never liked me to touch his hind paws, and I could do, that thing was just flopping there. And then the vet found some spinal degeneration and I was told that the next one would go. Did he suffer? Sure, hope not, but something changed in his eyes. - Yeah. - Yeah, it's the eyes again, I know you and I spend long hours on the phone and tell you about like the eyes and what they convey and what they mean about internal states and for sake of robots and biology of other kinds, but- - You think something about him was gone in his eyes? - I think he was real, here, I am anthropomorphizing, I think he was realizing that one of his great joys in life, which was to walk and sniff and pee on things. [Lex laughing] This dog. - The fundamental. - Loved to pee on things, it was amazing. I've wondered where he put it, he was like a reservoir of urine, it was incredible. I think, oh, that's Eddie, he'd put like one drop on the 50 millionth plant. And then we get to the 50 millionth in one plant, and he just have, leave a puddle. And here I am talking about Costello peeing. He was losing that ability to stand up and do that, he was falling down while he was doing that. And I do think he started to realize. And the passage was easy and peaceful, but I'll say this, I'm not ashamed to say it, I mean, I wake up every morning since then just, I don't even make the conscious decision to allow my self to cry, I wake up crying. And I'm unfortunately able to make it through the day, thanks to the great support of my friends and you and my family, but I miss him, man. - You miss him? - Yeah, I miss him. And I feel like, Homer, Costello, the relationship to one's dog is so specific part. - So, that part of you is gone? - That's the hard thing. What I think is different, is that I made the mistake, I think. Moreover, I hope it was a good decision, but sometimes I think I made the mistake of I brought Costello a little bit to the world through the podcast or posting about him, I anthropomorphized about him in public. Let's be honest, I have no idea what his mental life was, or his relationship to me. And I'm just exploring all this for the first time 'cause he was my first dog, but I raised him since he was seven weeks. - Yeah, you got hold it together, I noticed the episode you released on Monday, you mentioned Costello. Like you brought them back to life for me for that brief moment. - Yeah. But he's gone. - That's the, he's going to be gone for a lot of people too. - Well, this is what I'm struggling with. I think that maybe you're pretty good at this. Like, have you done this before? [Andrew laughing] This is the challenge. Is that actually part of me. I know how to take care of myself pretty well. - Yeah. - Not perfectly, but pretty well. And I have good support. I do worry a little bit about how it's going to land and how people will feel. I'm concerned about their internalization. So that's something I'm still iterating on. - And you have to watch you struggle, which is fascinating. - Right. And I've mostly been shielding them from this, but what would make me happiest is if people would internalize some of Costello's best traits. And his best traits were that he was incredibly tough. I mean, he was a, 22-inch-neck bulldog, the whole thing. He was just born that way. What was so beautiful is that his toughness has never what he rolled forward. It was just how sweet and kind he was. And so if people can take that, then there's a win in there someplace, so. - I think there's some ways in which she should probably live on in your podcast too. You should, I mean, it's such a, one of the things I loved about his role in your podcast is that he brought so much joy to you. We mentioned the robots. - Mm-hmm. - Right? I think that's such a powerful thing to bring that joy into, like, allowing yourself to experience that joy, to bring that joy to others, to share it with others. That's really powerful. And I mean, not to, this is like the Russian thing, is [chuckles] it touched me when Lucy Kay had that moment that I keep thinking about in this show "Louie," or like an old man was criticizing Louis for whining about breaking up with his girlfriend, and he was saying like the most beautiful thing about love, they made a song that's catchy now that's now making me feel horrible saying it, but like, is the loss. The loss really also is making you realize how much that person, that dog meant to you. And like allowing yourself to feel that loss and not run away from that loss is really powerful. And in some ways that's also sweet, just like the love was the loss is also sweet because you know that you felt a lot for that through your friend. So I, and like continue to bring that joy. I think it would be amazing to the podcast. I hope to do the same with [laughing] robots, or whatever else is the source of joy, right? And maybe, do you think about one day getting another dog? - Yeah, in time. You're hitting on all the key buttons here. I want that to, we're thinking about ways to kind of immortalize Costello in a way that's real, not just creating some little logo or something silly. Costello much like David Goggins is a person, but Goggins also has grown into kind of a verb. You're going to Goggins this or you're going to, and there's an adjective. Like that's extreme. Like it, I think that for me, Costello was all those things. He was a being, he was his own being, he was a noun, a verb and an adjective. So, and he had this amazing super power that I wish I could get, which is this ability to get everyone else to do things for you without doing a thing. [Lex laughing] The Costello effect, as I call it. - So is an idea I hope he lives on. - Yes. Thank you for that. This actually has been very therapeutic for me, which actually brings me to a question, we're friends, we're not just co-scientists, colleagues working on a project together and in the world, that's somewhat similar. - Just two dogs. - Just two dogs basically. But let's talk about friendship, because I think that I certainly know as a scientist that there are elements that are very lonely of the scientific pursuit. There are elements of many pursuits that are lonely. Music, Math always seem to me like they're like the loneliest people. Who knows if that's true or not. Also people work in teams. And sometimes people are surrounded by people interacting with people and they feel very lonely. But for me, and I think as well for you, friendship is an incredibly strong force in making one feel like certain things are possible or worth reaching for, maybe even making us compulsively reach for them. So, when you were growing up, you grew up in Russia until what age? - 13. - Okay. And then you moved directly to Philadelphia? - To Chicago. - [Andrew] Chicago. - And then Philadelphia, and San Francisco and Boston and so on. But really to Chicago, that's where I went to high school. - Do you have siblings? - Older brother. - But most people don't know that. [Lex laughing] - Yeah, he is a very different person. But somebody I definitely look up to. So he's a wild man. He's extrovert, he was into, I mean, so he's also scientists, a bio engineer, but he's, when we were growing up, he was the person who did, drank and did every drug. And, but also as the life of the party. And I just thought he was the, when your older brother, five years older, he was the coolest person that I was wanting to be him. So for that, he definitely had a big influence. But I think for me in terms of friendship, growing up, I had one really close friend. And then when I came here I had another close friend, but I'm very, I believe, I don't know if I believe, but I draw a lot of strength from deep connections with other people, and just the small number of people. Just a really small number of people. That's when I moved to this country, I was really surprised how, like, there were these large groups of friends, quote, unquote. But the depth of connection was not there at all from my sort of perspective. Now, I moved to the suburb of Chicago, was Naperville. It's more like a middle class, maybe upper middle class. So it's like people that cared more about material possessions than deep human connection. So that added to the thing. But I drove more meaning than almost anything else was from friendship. Early on I had a best friend. His name was, his name is Yura. I don't know how to say it in English. - How do you say in Russian? - Yura. What's his last name? Do you remember if was... [Lex chuckles] - Mikolov. Yura Mikolov. So we just spent all our time together. There's also a group of friends. Like, I dunno, it's like eight guys. In Russia growing up, it's like parents didn't care if you're coming back at certain hour. So we'll spent all day, all night just playing soccer, usually called football, and just talking about life and all those kinds of things, even at that young age. I think people in Russia and Soviet Union grew up much quicker. [Lex chuckles] I think the education system at the university level is world-class in the United States in terms of like, really creating really big, powerful minds. At least they used to be, but I think that they aspire to that. But the education system for like, for younger kids in the Soviet Union was incredible. Like they did not treat us as kids. The level of literature, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky. - When you were a small child? - Yeah. - Amazing. Amazing. - And like the level of mathematics, and you're made to feel like shit if you're not good at mathematics. Like we, I think in this country, there's more like, especially young kids 'cause they're so cute. Like they're being babied. We only start to really push adults later in life. Like, so if you want to be the best in the world at this, then you get to be pushed. But we were pushed at a young age. Everybody was pushed. And that brought out the best in people. I think it really forced people to discover, like discover themselves in the Goggin style, but also discover what they're actually passionate about, what they're not. - Is this true for boys and girls? Were they pushed equally there? - Yeah. They were pushed. Yeah, they were pushed equally, I would say. There was a, obviously there was more, not obviously, but at least from my memories, more of a, what's the right way to put it? But there was like gender roles, but not in a negative connotation. It was the red dress versus the suit and tie kind of connotation, which is like, there's a, like guys like lifting heavy things and girls like creating beautiful art, and, like there's- - A more traditional view of gender, more 1950, '60s. - But we didn't think in terms of, at least at that age, in terms of like roles and then like a homemaker or something like that or not, it was more about what people care about. Like girls cared about this set of things, and guys cared about the set of things. I think mathematics and engineering was something that guys cared about and sort of, at least my perception of that time. And then girls cared about beauty. So like guys want to create machines, girls want to create beautiful stuff. [Lex laughing] And now, of course, that I don't take that forward in some kind of philosophy of life, but it's just the way I grew up and the way I remember it. But all, everyone worked hard. The value of hard work was instilled in everybody. And through that, I think it's a little bit of hardship. Of course also economically everybody was poor, especially with the collapse of the Soviet Union. There's poverty everywhere. You didn't notice it as much, but there was a, because there's not much material possessions, there was a huge value placed on human connection. Just meeting with neighbors, everybody knew each other. We lived in an apartment building very different than you have in the United States these days. Everybody knew each other. You would get together, drink vodka, smoke cigarettes, and play guitar and sing sad songs about life. - What's with the sad songs in the Russian thing? I mean, Russians do I express joy from time to time. - Yeah, they do. - Certainly you do. But what do you think that's about? Is it 'cause it's cold there? But it's called other places too, right? - I think, let's just, first of all the Soviet Union, the echoes of World War II and the millions and millions and millions of people that, civilians that were slaughtered, and also starvation is there, right? So like the echoes of that, of the ideas, the literature, the art is there. Like that's a grandparents, that's parents, that's all there. So that contributes to it, that life can be absurdly unexplainably cruel. At any moment everything can change. So that's in there. Then I think there's an empowering aspect to finding beauty in suffering that then everything else is beautiful too. It's like, if you just linger or it's like, why you meditate on death? Is like, if you just think about the worst possible case and find beauty in that, then everything else is beautiful too. And so you write songs about the dark stuff. And that's somehow helps you deal with whatever comes. There's a hopelessness to the Soviet Union that, like, inflation, all those kinds of things where people were sold dreams and never delivered. And so like, there's a, if you don't sing songs about sad things, you're going to become cynical about this world. - Mm-hmm. Interesting. - So they don't want to give in to cynicism. Now, a lot of people did, one of the, but that is the battle against cynicism. One of the things that may be common in Russia is a kind of cynicism about, like, if I told you the thing I said earlier about dreaming about robots, it's very common for people to dismiss that dream, of saying, no, that's not, that's too wild. Like, who else do you know that did that? Or you want to start a podcast? Like who else? Like nobody's making money on podcasts. Like, why do you want to start a podcast? That kind of mindset I think is quite common, which is why I would say entrepreneurship in Russia is still not very good. Which to be a business, like, to be an entrepreneur you have to dream big, and you have to have others around you, like friends and support group that make you dream big. But if you don't give in to cynicism and appreciate the beauty in the unfairness of life, the absurd unfairness of life, then I think it just makes you appreciative of everything. It's like a, it's a prerequisite for gratitude. And so, yeah, I think that instilled in me ability to appreciate everything, just like everything. Everything's amazing. And then also there is a culture of like romanticizing everything. Like, it's almost like romantic relationships were very like soap opera, like is very like over the top dramatic. And I think that it was instilled in me too, not only do I appreciate everything about life, but I get like emotional about it. In a sense, like, I get like a visceral feeling of joy for everything. And the same with friends or people of the opposite sex. Like, there's a deep, like emotional connection there that like [laughing] that's like way too dramatic too. Like, I guess relative to what the actual moment is. But I derive so much deep, like dramatic joy from so many things in life. And I think I would attributed that to the upbringing in Russia. But the thing that sticks most of all is the friendship. And have now since then had one other friend like that in the United States, he lives in Chicago. His name is Matt. And slowly here and there accumulating really fascinating people, but I'm very selective with that. Funny enough, the few times, it's not few it's a lot of times now interacting with Joe Rogan [chuckles] it's sounds surreal to say, but there was a kindred spirit there. Like I've connected with him. And there's been people like that also in the grappling sports that are really connected with. I've actually struggled, which is why I'm so glad to be your friend, is I've struggled to connect with scientists. - They can be a little bit wooden sometimes. - [Lex] Yeah. - Even the biologist. I mean, one thing that I, well, I'm so struck by the fact that you work with robots, you're an engineer, AI, science technology, and that all sounds like hardware, right? But what you're describing and I know is true about you is this deep emotional life and this resonance and it's really wonderful. I actually think it's one of the reasons why so many people, scientists and otherwise have gravitated towards you and your podcast is because you hold both elements. In the Hermann Hesse's book, I don't know if you, "Narcissus and Goldmund," right? It's about these elements of the logical rational mind and the emotional mind and how those are woven together. And if people haven't read it, they should, and you embody the full picture. And I think that's so much of what draws people to you. - I've read every Hermann Hesse book by the way. - As usual [chuckles] as usual I've done about 9% of what life is. No, it's true. You mentioned Joe, who is a phenomenal human being, not just for his amazing accomplishments, but for how he shows up to the world one on one. I think I heard him say the other day on an interview, he said, there is no public or private version of him. And he's like, this is me. He said that it was beautiful. He said, I'm like the fish that got through the net. And there is no onstage offstage version. And you're absolutely right. And I. - Fish. [Lex laughing] - So, but, well, you guys, I have a question actually about- - But that's a really good point about public and private life. He was a huge, if I could just comment real quick. Like that, he was a, I've been a fan of Joe for a long time, but he's been an inspiration to not have any difference between public and private life. I actually had a conversation with Naval about this, and he said that you can't have a rich life, like exciting life if you're the same person publicly and privately. And I think I understand that idea, but I don't agree with it. I think that's really fulfilling and exciting to be the same person privately and publicly with very few exceptions. Now that said, I don't have any really strange sex kinks. So like, I feel like it can be open with basically everything. I don't have anything I'm ashamed of. There's some things that could be perceived poorly, like the screaming Roombas, but I'm not ashamed of them. I just have to present them in the right context. But there's a freedom to being the same person in private as in public. And that Joe made me realize that you can be that. And also to be kind to others. It sounds kind of absurd, but I really always enjoyed like being good to others. Like just being kind towards others. But I always felt like the world didn't want me to be. Like, there's so much negativity when I was growing up, like just around people. If you actually just notice how people talk, they, from like, complaining about the weather, this could be just like the big cities that I've visited. But there's a general negativity, and positivity is kind of suppressed. You're not, one, you're not seen as very intelligent, and two, there's a kind of, you're seen as like a little bit of a weirdo. And so I always felt like I had to hide that. And what Joe made me realize, one, I could be fully just the same person private and public, and two, I can embrace being kind, in just, in the way that I like, in the way I know how to do. And sort of for me on like, on Twitter or like publicly, whenever I say stuff, that means saying stuff simply almost to the point of cliche. And like, I have the strength now to say it, even if I'm being mocked. [Lex laughing] You know what I mean? Like, just it's okay. If everything's going to be okay. Okay, some people will think you're dumb. They're probably right. The point is, like, just enjoy being yourself. And that Joe, more than almost anybody else, because he's so successful at it, inspired me to do that. Be kind and be the same person, private and public. - I love it. And I love the idea that authenticity doesn't have to be oversharing, right? That it doesn't mean you reveal every detail of your life. It's a way of being true to an essence of oneself. - Right. There's never a feeling when you deeply think and introspect that you're hiding something from the world or you're being dishonest in some fundamental way. So, yeah, that's truly liberating. It allows you to think, it allows you to like think freely, to speak freely, to just to be freely. That said, it's not like there's not still a responsibility to be the best version of yourself. So, I'm very careful with the way I say something. So, the whole point, it's not so simple to express the spirit that's inside you with words. I mean, some people are much better than others. I struggle. Like oftentimes when I say something and I hear myself say it, it sounds really dumb and not at all what I meant. So that's the responsibility you have. It's not just like being the same person publicly and privately means you can just say whatever the hell. It means there's still responsibility to try to be, to express who you truly are. And that's hard. [Lex chuckles] - It hard. And I think that, we have this pressure, all people, when I say we, I mean all humans, and maybe robots too, feel this pressure to be able to express ourselves in that one moment in that one form. And it is beautiful when somebody, for instance, can capture some essence of love or sadness or anger or something in a song or in a poem or in a short quote, but perhaps it's also possible to do it in aggregate, all the things how you show up. For instance, one of the things that initially drew me to want to get to know you as a human being and a scientist and eventually we became friends, was the level of respect that you brought to your podcast listeners by wearing a suit. - Yeah. - I'm being serious here. I was raised thinking that if you overdress a little bit, overdressed by American, certainly by American standards, you're overdressed for a podcast, but it's genuine. You're not doing it for any reason, except I have to assume, and I assumed at the time, that it was because you have a respect for your audience, you respect them enough to show up a certain way for them. It's for you also, but it's for them. - Yeah. - And I think between that and your commitment to your friendship, just the way that you talk about friendships and love and the way you hold up these higher ideals, I think at least as a consumer of your content and as your friend, what I find, is that in aggregate, you're communicating who you are, it doesn't have to be one quote or something. And I think that we're sort of obsessed by like the one Einstein quote, or the one line of poetry or something, but I think you so embody the way that, and Joe as well, it's about how you live your life and how you show up as a collection of things and said and done. - Yeah, that that's, and so, the aggregate is the goal, the tricky thing, and Jordan Peterson talks about this because he's under attack way more than you and I will ever be, but- - Right now? - For now, right? This is very true for now. That the people who attack on the internet, this is one of the problems with Twitter, is they don't consider the aggregate, they take a single statements. And so, one of the defense mechanisms, like again why Joe has been an inspiration, is that when you in aggregate, a good person, a lot of people will know that. And so, that makes you much more immune to the attacks of people that bring out an individual statement that might be a misstatement of some kind, or doesn't express who you are. And so, that, I like that idea is the aggregate. And the power of the podcast, is you have hundreds of hours out there, and being yourself and people get to know who you are. And once they do, and you post pictures of screaming Roombas as you kick them, they will understand that you don't mean well. By the way, as a side comment, I don't know if I want to release this because it's not just the Roombas- - You have a whole dungeon of robots. - Okay. So, this is a problem, the Boston Dynamics came up against this problem. But, let me work this out like workshop this out with you, and maybe because we'll post this, people will let me know. So, there's legged robots, they look like a dog, I'm trying to create a very real human-robot connection, but like they're also incredible because you can throw them like off of a building and they'll land fine. And this beautiful. - That's amazing. I've seen the Instagram videos of like cats jumping off of like fifth story buildings and then walking away. But no one should throw their cat out of a window of a building. - Well, this is the problem I'm experiencing, all certainly kicking the robots, its really fascinating how they recover from those kicks. But like just seeing myself do it and also seeing others do it, it just does not look good, and I don't know what to do with that. 'Cause it's such a- - Ill 'do it. [Lex laughing] - See. But you don't, 'cause you are- - A robot, no, I'm kidding. What's interesting? - Yeah. - Before today's conversation, I probably could do it, and I'm thinking about robots, bills of rights and things. Not to satisfy you or to satisfy anything, except that if they have some sentience aspect to their being, then I would load to kick it. - I don't think we'd be able to kick it, you might be able to kick the first time, but not the second, this is the problem of experience. One of the cool things, is one of the robots I'm working with, you can pick it up by one leg and is dangling, and you can throw it in any kind of way and it'll land correctly. So, it's really- - I had a friend who had a cat like that. [Lex laughing] - Oh man, we look forward to the letters on the cat- - Oh no, I'm not suggesting anyone did that, but he had this cat, and the cat, he would just throw it onto the bed from across the room, and then it would run back for more, or somehow that was the nature of the relationship. I think no one should do that to an animal, but this cat seemed to return for whatever reason. - But a robot is a robot, and it's fascinating to me how hard it is for me to do that. So, it's unfortunate, but I don't think I can do that to a robot. Like I struggle with that. So, for me to be able to do that with a robot, I have to almost get like into the state that I imagine like doctors get into when they're doing surgery, like I have to do what robotics colleagues of mine do, which is like start seeing it as an object. - Dissociate. - Like dissociate. So, it was just fascinating that I have to do that in to do that with a robot. I just want to take that little bit of a tangent. - No, I think it's an important thing. I mean, I'm not shy about the fact that for many years I've worked on experimental animals, and that's been a very challenging aspect of being a biologist. Mostly mice, but in the past no longer, thank goodness 'cause I just don't like doing it, larger animals as well. And now I work on humans, which I can give consent, verbal consent. So, I think that it's extremely important to have an understanding of what the guidelines are and where one's own boundaries are around this. It's not just an important question, it might be the most important question before any work can progress. - So, you asked me about friendship. I know you have a lot of thoughts about friendship, what do you think is the value of friendship in life? - Well, for me personally, just because of my life trajectory and arc friendship, and I should say, I do have some female friends that are just friends, they're completely platonic relationships, but it's been mostly male friendship to me, has been- - It has been all male friendships to me actually, yeah. - Interesting. - Yeah. - It's been an absolute lifeline. They are my family, I have a biological family and I have great respect and love for them and an appreciation for them, but it's provided me the, I won't even say confidence because there's always an anxiety in taking any good risk, or any risk worth taking. It's given me the sense that I should go for certain things and try certain things to take risk to weather that anxiety. And I don't consider myself a particularly competitive person, but I would sooner die than disappoint, or let down one of my friends. I can think of nothing worse actually, than disappointing one of my friends, everything else is secondary to me. - What disappointment? - Disappoint, meaning not, I mean, certainly I strive always to show up as best I can for the friendship, and that can be in small ways. That can mean making sure the phone is away, sometimes it's about, I'm terrible with punctuality 'cause I'm an academic. And so, I just get lost in time and I don't mean anything, but it's striving to, to listen to, to enjoy good times and to make time. It kind of goes back to this first variable we talked about, to make sure that I spend time and to get time in person and check in. And I think there's so many ways in which friendship is vital to me, it's it's actually to me, what makes life worth living. - Yeah. Well, there's a, I am surprised like with the high school friends how we don't actually talk that often these days in terms of time, but every time we see each other, it's immediately right back to where we started. So, I struggled that how much time you really allocate, for the friendship to be deeply meaningful because they're always there with me even if we don't talk often. So, there's a kind of loyalty. I think maybe it's a different style, but I think to me, friendship is being there in the hard times, I think. Like I'm much more reliable when you're going through shit than in like- - You're pretty reliable anyway. - No, but if you're like a wedding or something like that, or like, I don't know, like you want an award of some kind, yeah, I'll congratulate the shit out of you, but like that's not, and I'll be there, but that's not as important to me as being there when like nobody else is like just being there when shit hits the fan, or something's tough where the world turns their back on you, all those kinds of things, that, to me, that's where friendship is meaningful. - Well, I know that to be true about you and that's a felt thing and a real thing with you. Let me ask one more thing about that actually, because I'm not a practitioner Jujitsu, I know you are, Joe is, but years ago, I read a book that I really enjoyed, which is Sam Sheridan's book, " A Fighter's Heart," he talks about all these different forms of martial arts. And maybe it was in the book, maybe it was in an interview, but he said that fighting, or being in physical battle with somebody, Jujitsu boxing or some other form of direct physical contact between two individuals creates this bond unlike any other. Because he said it's like a one night stand, you're sharing bodily fluids with somebody that you barely know. - Yeah. - And I chuckled about it 'cause it's kind of funny and it kind of tongue in cheek. But at the same time, I think this is a fundamental way in which members of a species bond is through physical contact. And certainly, there are other forms, there's cuddling, and there's hand holding, and there's in their sexual intercourse, and there's all sorts of things. - What's cuddling? I haven't heard of it. - I heard this recently, I didn't know this term, but there's a term, they've turned the noun cupcake into a verb, cupcaking it turns out, I just learned about this. Cupcaking is when you spend time just cuddling. I didn't know about this. You heard it here first, although I heard it first just the other day. Cupcaking is actually a- - Cuddling is everything, it's not just like, is it in bed, or is it in the coach? Like what's cuddling? I do look up what cuddling is- - We need to look at this up and we need to define the variables. I think it definitely has to do with physical contact, I'm told, but in terms of battle, a competition, and the Sheridan quote, I'm just curious. So, do you get close, or feel a bond with people that, for instance, you rolled Jujitsu with, or even though you don't know anything else about them, was he right about this? - Yeah, I mean on many levels. He also has the book, what? "A Fighter's Mind." - Yeah, that was the third one. He's actually an excellent writer. What's interesting about him, just briefly about Sheridan, I don't know him, but I did a little bit of research, he went to Harvard, he was an art major at Harvard, he claims all he did was smoke cigarettes and do art. I don't know if his art was any good. And I think his father was in the SEAL teams. And then when he got out of Harvard, graduated, he took off around the world learning all the forms of martial arts, and was early to the kind of ultimate fighting kind of mixed martial arts and things. Great book. Yeah, yeah. - It's amazing. I don't actually remember it, but I read it, and I remember thinking that was an amazing encapsulation of what makes fighting like the art, like what makes it compelling. I would say that there's so many ways that Jujitsu grappling, wrestling, combat sports in general, is like one of the most intimate things you could do. I don't know if I would describe in terms of bodily liquids and all those kinds of things. - I think he was more or less joking. - I think there's a few ways that it does that. So, one, because you're so vulnerable [sighs] So, the honesty of stepping on the mat and often all of us have ego thinking we're better than we are at this particular art. And then the honesty of being submitted, or being worse than you thought you are and just sitting with that knowledge, that kind of honesty, we don't get to experience it in most of daily life. We can continue living somewhat of an illusion of our conceptions of ourselves 'cause people are not going to hit us with the reality, the mat speaks only the truth, the reality just hits you. And that vulnerability is the same as like the loss of a loved one, though it's the loss of a reality that you knew before, you now have to deal with this new reality. And when you're sitting there in that vulnerability, and there's these other people that are also sitting in that vulnerability, you get to really connect like, fuck, like I'm not as special as I thought I was, and life is like not, life is harsher than I thought I was, and we're just sitting there with that reality, some of us can put words to them, some we can't. So, I think that definitely, is a thing that at least the intimacy. The other thing is the human contact. There's something about, I mean, like a big hug, like during COVID, very few people hugged me and I hugged them, and I always felt good when they did. Like we were all tested, and especially now we're vaccinated, but there's still people, this is true of San Francisco's, it's true in Boston, they want to keep, not only six feet away, but stay at home and never touch you. That loss of basic humanity is the opposite of what I feel in Jujitsu, where it was like that contact where you're like, I don't give a shit about whatever rules we're supposed to have in society where you have to keep a distance and all that kind of stuff. Just the hug, like the intimacy of a hug, that's like a good bear hug, and you're like just controlling another person, and also there is some kind of love communicated through just trying to break each other's arms. I don't exactly understand why violence is the such a close neighbor to love, but it is. - Well, in the hypothalamus, the neurons that control sexual behavior, but also non-sexual contact, are not just nearby the neurons that control aggression and fighting, they are salt and pepper with those neurons. It's a very interesting, and it almost sounds kind of risky and controversial and stuff, I'm not anthropomorphizing about what this means, but in the brain, those structures are interdigitated, you can't separate them except at a very fine level. And here, the way you describe it, is the same as a real thing. - I do want to make an interesting comment. Again, these are the things that could be taken out of context, but one of the amazing things about Jujitsu, is both guys and girls train it. And I was surprised. So, like I'm a big fan of yoga pants [giggles] at the gym kind of thing. It reveals the beauty of the female form. But the thing is, like girls are dressed in skintight clothes in Jujitsu often. And I found myself not at all, thinking like that at all when training with girls. - Well, the context is very non-sexual. - But I was surprised to learn that. When I first started to Jujitsu, I thought, wouldn't that be kind of weird to train with the opposites that in something so intimate. - So, boys and girls, men and women, they roll Jujitsu together? - Completely. - Interesting. - And the only times girls kind of try to stay away from guys, I mean, there's two contexts, of course, there's always going to be creeps in this world. So, everyone knows who kind of stay away from, and the other is there's a size disparity. So, girls will often try to roll with people a little bit closer weight-wise, But no, that's one of the things that are empowering to women, that's what they fall in love with when they started doing Jujitsu, is first of all, they gain an awareness and a pride over their body, which is great. And then second, they get to [chuckles] especially later on, start submitting big dudes like these bros that come in who are all shredded and like muscular, and they get to technique to exercise dominance over them, and that's a powerful feeling. - You've seen women force a larger guy to tap her, or even choke them up. - Well, I was deadlifting like a four, oh boy, I think it's 495. So, I was really into power-lifting when I started at Jujitsu, and I remember being submitted by, I thought I walked in feeling like I'm going to be, if not the greatest fighter ever, at least top three. And so, as a white belt, you roll in like all happy. And then you realize that as long as you're not applying too much force, that you're having, I remember being submitted many times by like 130, 120-pound girls at our Balance Studios in Philadelphia, that a lot of incredible female Jujitsu players. And that's really humbling too that technique can overpower in combat pure strength. And that's the other thing, there is something about combat that's primal. Like there, it just feels, it feels like we were born to do this. Like that- - We have circuits in our brain that are dedicated to this kind of interaction. There's no question. - And that's what it felt like, it wasn't that I'm learning a new skill. It was like, somehow I am a remembering echoes of something I've learned in the past. - Well, it's like hitting puberty. A child before puberty has no concept of boys and girls having this attraction, regardless of whether or not they're attracted to boys or girl, doesn't matter. At some point, most people, not all, but certainly, but most people, when they hit puberty, suddenly people appear differently, and certain people take on a romantic or sexual interest for the very first time. - Yeah. - And so it's like, it's revealing a circuitry in the brain. It's not like they learn that it's innate. And I think it, when I hear the way you describe Jujitsu and enrolling Jujitsu, it reminds me a little bit, Joe was telling me recently about the first time he went hunting and he felt like it revealed a circuit that was in him all along, but he hadn't experienced before. - Yeah. That's definitely there. And of course, there's the physical activity. One of the interesting things about Jujitsu is it's one of the really strenuous exercises that you can do late into your adult life, like into your 50, 60, 70s, 80s. When I came up, there's a few people in their 80s that were training. And as long as you're smart, as long as you practice techniques and pick your partners correctly, you can do that kind of art. That's late into life. And so you're getting exercise. There's not many activities I find that are amenable to that. So, because it's such a thinking game, the Jujitsu in particular is an art or technique pays off a lot. So you can still maintain, first of all, remain injury free if you use good technique, and also through good technique be able to go, be active with people that are much, much younger. And so that was, to me, that and running are the two activities you can kind of do late in life. Because to me a healthy life has exercises as the piece of the puzzle. - No, absolutely. And I'm glad that we're on the physical component, because I know that there's for you, you've talked before about the crossover between the physical and the intellectual and the mental. Are you still running at ridiculous hours of the night for ridiculously long? - Yeah, so, definitely. I've been running late at night here in Austin. People tell, the area we're in now, people say it's a dangerous area, which I find laughable coming from the bigger cities. No, I run late at night. There's something. - If you see a guy running through Austin at 2:00 a.m. in a suit and tie, it's probably. [Lex laughing] - Well, yeah. I mean, I do think about that 'cause I get recognized more and more in Austin. I worry that, but not really, that I get recognized late at night. But there is something about the night that brings out those deep philosophical thoughts and self-reflection, that really enjoy. But recently I started getting back to the grind. So I'm going to be competing or hoping to be compete in September and October. - In Jujitsu? - In Jujitsu, yeah. To get back to competition. And so that requires getting back into a great cardio shape. I've been getting, running as part of my daily routine. - Got it. - [Lex] Yeah. - Well, I always know I can reach you regardless of time zone in the middle of the night, wherever that happens. - Well, part of that has to be just being single and being a programmer. Those two things just don't work well in terms of a steady sleep schedule. - It's not bankers hours kind of work. Nine to five. I want to, you mentioned single. I want to ask you a little bit about the other form of relationship, which is romantic love. So, your parents are still married? - Still married, still happily married. - That's impressive. - [Lex] Yeah. - A rare thing nowadays. - [Lex] Yeah. - So you grew up with that example? - Yeah. I guess that's a powerful thing, right? If there's an example that I think can work. - Yeah. I didn't have that in my own family, but when I see it, it's inspiring and it's beautiful. The fact that they have that, and that was the norm for you, I think is really wonderful. - Well, it was a, in the case of my parents it was interesting to watch 'cause there's obviously tension. Like, there'll be times where they fought and all those kinds of things. They obviously get frustrated with each other and they like, but they find mechanisms how to communicate that to each other, like to make fun of each other a little bit, like to tease, to get some of that frustration out, and then ultimately to reunite and find their joyful moments and be that the energy. I think it's clear 'cause I got together in there I think early 20s, like very, very young. I think you grow together as people. - Yeah. You're still in the critical period of brain plasticity. [laughing] - And also, I mean, it's just like divorce was so frowned upon that you stick it out. And I think a lot of couples especially from that time, the Soviet Union, that's probably applies to a lot of cultures. You stick it out and you put in the work, you learn how to put in the work. And once you do, you start to get to some of those rewarding aspects of being, like through time has sharing so many moments together. That's definitely something that was an inspiration to me, but maybe that's where I have. So I have a similar kind of longing to have a lifelong partner, like to have that kind of view, where same with friendship, lifelong friendship is the most meaningful kind. That there is something with that time of sharing all that time together. Like till death do us part is a powerful thing. Not by force, not because of the religion said it or the government said it or your culture said it, but because you want to. - Do you want children? - Definitely, yeah. Definitely want children. It's- - How many Roombas do you have? - Oh, I thought- - You should, no, no- - Human children? - No, human to human children. - 'Cause I already have the children. - Exactly. What I was saying, you probably need to at least as many human children as you do Roombas. Big family, small family. - So. - In your mind's eyes, they're a bunch of Fridman's running around. - So I'll tell you, like realistically, I can explain exactly my thinking, and this is similar to the robotics work is, if I'm like purely logical right now, my answer would be I don't want kids. Because I just don't have enough time. I have so much going on. But when I'm using the same kind of vision I use for the robots is I know my life will be transformed with the first. Like I know I would love being a father. And so the question of how many, that's on the other side of that hill. It could be some ridiculous number. So I just know that- - I have a feeling and I could be, I don't have a crystal ball, but I don't know. I see an upwards of, certainly three or more come comes to mind. - So much of that has to do with the partner you're with too. So like that, that's such an open question, especially in this society of what the right partnership is. 'Cause I'm deeply empathetic. I want to see, like to me, what I look for in your relationship is for me to be really excited about the passions of another person, like whatever they're into, it doesn't have to be a career success. Any kind of success, just to be excited for them, and for them to be excited for me. And like share in that excitement and build, and build and build. But there was also practical aspects of like, what kind of shit do you enjoy doing together? And I think family is a real serious undertaking. - It certainly is. I mean, I think that I have a friend who said it, I think best, which is that you first have, he's in a very successful relationship and has a family. And he said, you first have to define the role and then you have to cast the right person for the role. [Lex laughing] - Well, yeah, there's some deep aspects of that, but there's also an aspect to which you're not smart enough from this side of it to define the role. I think there's part of it that has to be a leap that you have to take. And I see having kids that way. You just have to go with it and figure it out also. As long as there's love there, like what the hell is life for even? So I've, there's so many incredibly successful people that I know that I've gotten to know that all have kids. And the presence of kids for the most part has only been something that energizes them, something they gave them meaning, something that made them the best version of themselves, like made them more productive, not less, which is fascinating to me. - It is fascinating. I mean, you can imagine if the way that you felt about Homer, the way that I feel and felt about Costello is at all a glimpse of what that must be like then. - Exactly. The downside, the thing I worry more about is the partner side of that. I've seen, the kids are almost universally a source of increased productivity and joy and happiness. Like, yeah, they're a pain in the ass. Yeah, is complicated. Yeah, so and so forth, people like to complain about kids. But then when you actually look past that little shallow layer of complaint, kids are great. The source of pain for a lot of people is if when the relationship doesn't work. And so I'm very kind of concerned about like, dating is very difficult, and I'm a complicated person. And so it's been very difficult to find the right kind of person. But that statement doesn't even make sense because I'm not on dating apps, I don't see people. You're like the first person I saw in awhile. It's like you and Michael Malice and like Joe. So, like, I don't think I've seen like a female. What is it? An element of the female species in quite a while. So, I think you have to put yourself out there. What is it? Daniel Johnston says, true love will find you, but only if you're looking. So there's some element of really taking the leap and putting yourself out there in kind of different situations. And I don't know how to do that when you're behind a computer all the time. - Well, you're a builder and you're a problem solver, and you find solutions, and I'm confident the solution is out there, and. - I think you're implying that I'm going to build the girlfriend, which I think. - Well, and maybe we shouldn't separate this friendship, the notion of friendship and community, and if we go back to this concept of the aggregate, maybe you'll meet this woman through a friend, or maybe you'll or something of that sort. - So, one of the things, I dunno if you feel the same way, I definitely one of those people that just falls in love and that's it. - Yeah, I can't say I'm like that. With Costello it was instantaneous. - Yeah. - It really was. I mean, I know it's not romantic love, but it was instantaneous. No, I, but that's me. And I think that if you know, you know, because that's a good thing that you have there. - It's, I'm very careful with that, because you don't want to fall in love with the wrong person. So I try to be very kind of careful with, I've noticed this because I fall in love with every, like this mug, everything I fall in love with things in this world. So, like, you have to be really careful because a girl comes up to you and says she loves DUSTY HUSKY, that doesn't necessarily mean to marry her tonight. - Yes. And I like the way you said that out loud so that you heard it, you doesn't mean you need to marry her tonight, right? - [Lex] Exactly. - [Andrew] Right. - But I mean, but people are amazing, and people are beautiful and that's, so I'm fully embraced that, but also you have to be careful with relationships. And at the same time, like I mentioned to you offline, I don't, there's something about me that appreciates swinging for the fences and not dating, like doing serial dating, or dating around. - Like you're a one guy, one girl kind of guy. - [Lex] Yeah. - And you said that. - And it's tricky because you want to be careful with that kind of stuff. Especially now there's a growing platform that have a ridiculous amount of female interests of a certain kind. But I'm looking for deep connection, and I'm looking by sending home alone, and every once in a while talking to Stanford professors. - Perfect solution. - On a podcast. - Perfect solution. - Is going to workout great. - It's well, it's part of, that constitutes machine learning of sorts. - Yeah, of sorts. - I do, you mentioned what has now become a quite extensive and expansive public platform, which is incredible. I mean, the number of people out, first time I saw your podcast, I noticed the suit, I was like, he respects his audience, which was great, but I also thought this is amazing. People are showing up for science and engineering and technology information and those discussions and other sorts of discussions. Now, I do want to talk for a moment about the podcast. So my two questions about the podcast are, when you started it, did you have a plan? And regardless of what that answer is, do you know where you're taking it, or would you like to leave us? I do believe in an element of surprise is always fun. But what about the podcast? Do you enjoy the podcast? I mean, your audience certainly includes me, really enjoys the podcast. It's incredible. - So I love talking to people, and there's something about microphones that really bring out the best in people. Like you don't get a chance to talk like this. If you and I were just hanging out, we would have a very different conversation in the amount of focus we allocate to each other. We would be having fun talking about other stuff and doing other things. There'll be a lot of distraction. There would be some phone use and all that kind of stuff. But here we're 100% focused on each other and focus on the idea. And like sometimes playing with ideas that we both don't know the answer to, like a question we don't know the answer to. We're both like fumbling with it, trying to figure out, trying to get some insights at something we haven't really figured out before and together arriving at that. I think that's magical. I don't know why we need microphones for that, but we somehow do. - It feels like doing science. - It feels like doing science for me, definitely. That's exactly it. And I'm really glad you said that because I don't actually often say this, but that's exactly what I felt like. I wanted to talk to friends and colleagues at MIT to do real science together. That's how I felt about it. Like to really talk through problems that are actually interesting, as opposed to like incremental work that we're currently working for for a particular conference. So really asking questions like, what are we doing? Like, where's this headed to? Like, what are the big, is this really going to help us solve, in the case of AI, solve intelligence? Like, is this even working on intelligence? There's a certain sense, which is why I initially called it artificial intelligence. Is like most of us are not working on artificial intelligence. You're working on some very specific problem and a set of techniques, at the time it's machine learning to solve this particular problem. This is not going to take us to a system that is anywhere close to the generalizability of the human mind. Like the kind of stuff the human mind can do in terms of memory, in terms of cognition, in terms of reasoning, common sense reasoning. This doesn't seem to take us there. So the initial impulse was, can I talk to these folks do science together through conversation? And I also thought that there was not enough, I didn't think there was enough good conversations with world-class minds that I got to meet. And not the ones with the book, or like this was just the thing. Oftentimes you go on this tour when you have a book, but there's a lot of minds that don't write books. - And the books constrain the conversation too, when you're talking about this thing, this book. - But there's, I've noticed that, with people that haven't written a book who are brilliant, we get to talk about ideas in a new way. We both haven't actually, when we raise a question, we don't know the answer to it once the question is raised. And we try to arrive there. Like, I dunno, I remember asking questions of world-class researchers in deep learning of, why do neural networks work as well as they do? That question is often loosely asked, but like when you have microphones and you have to think through it, and you have 30 minutes to an hour to think through it together, I think that's science. I think that's really powerful. So that was the one goal. The other one is, again, don't usually talk about this, but there's some sense in which I wanted to have dangerous conversations. Part of the reasons I wanted to wear a suit is like, I want it to be fearless. The reason I don't usually talk about it is because I feel like I'm not good at conversation. So it looks like it doesn't match the current skill level. But I wanted to have really dangerous conversations that I uniquely would be able to do. Not completely uniquely, but like, I'm a huge fan of Joe Rogan, and I had to ask myself, what conversations can I do that Joe Rogan can't? For me, I know I bring this up, but for me that person I thought about at the time was Putin. Like that's why I bring him up. He's just like with Costello, he's not just a person. He's also an idea to me for what I strive for. Just to have those dangerous conversations. And the reason I'm uniquely qualified as both the Russian, but also there's the judo and the martial arts, there's a lot of elements that make me have a conversation he hasn't had before. And there's a few other people that I kept in mind, like Don Knuth, is a computer scientist from Stanford that I thought is one of the most beautiful minds ever. And nobody really talked to him, like really talked to him. He did a few lectures, which people love, but really just have a conversation with him. There's a few people like that. One of them passed away, John Conway, that I never got, we agreed to talk, but he died before we did. There's a few people like that, that I thought like it's such a crime to not hear those folks. And I have the unique ability to know how to purchase a microphone on Amazon and plug it into a device that records audio and then publish it, which seems relatively unique. Like that's not easy in the scientific community. People knowing how to plug in a microphone. - No. They can build Faraday cages, and two-photon microscopes and bioengineer, all sorts of things, but the idea that you could take ideas and export them into a structure or a pseudo structure that people would benefit from seems like a cosmic achievement to them. - I don't know if it's fear or just a basically they haven't tried it, so they haven't learned the skill level. - But I think they're not trained. I mean, we could riff on this for awhile, but I think that, but it's important. And maybe we should, which is that it's, they're not trained to do it. They're trained to think in specific games and specific hypotheses, and many of them don't care to, right? They became scientists because that's where they felt safe, and so why would they leave that Haven of safety? - Well, they also don't necessarily always see the value in it. We're all together learning, you and I are learning the value of this. I think you're probably having an exceptionally successful and amazing podcast that you started just recently. - Thanks to your encouragement. - Well, but there's a raw skill there that's, you're definitely an inspiration to me in how you did the podcast in the level of excellence you reach. But I think you've discovered that that's also an impactful way to do science. That podcast. And I think a lot of scientists have not yet discovered that. That this is a, if they apply same kind of rigor as they do to academic publication or to even conference presentations, and they do that rigor and effort to podcast, whatever that is, that could be a five-minute podcast, a two-hour podcasts, it could be conversational, or it can be more like lecture like, if they apply that effort, you have the potential to reach over time, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions of people. And that's really, really powerful. But yeah, for me giving a platform to a few of those folks, especially for me personally, so maybe you can speak to what fields you're drawn to, but I thought computer scientists were especially bad at this. So there's brilliant computer scientists that I thought it would be amazing to explore their mind, explore their thinking. And so that I took that almost as an, on as an effort. And at the same time I had other guests in mind, or people that connect to my own interests. So the wrestling. Wrestling, music, football, both American football and soccer. I have a few particular people that I'm really interested in. Buvaisar Saitiev. The Saitiev brothers, even Khabib for wrestling, just to talk to them, 'cause. - Oh, 'cause you can, you guys can communicate- - In Russian and in wrestling, right? As wrestlers and as Russians. And so that little, it's like an opportunity to explore a mind that I'm able to bring to the world. And also it, I feel like it makes me a better person, just that being that vulnerable and exploring ideas together. I don't know, like good conversation. I don't know how often you have really good conversation with friends, but like podcasts are like that. And it's deeply moving. - It's the best. And what you brought through. I mean, when I saw you sit down with Penrose, Nobel Prize winning physicist, and these other folks that, it's not just 'cause he has a Nobel, it's what comes out of his mouth is incredible. And what you were able to hold in that conversation was so much better, light years beyond what he had any other interviewer, I don't want to even call you an interviewer 'cause it's really about conversation. Light years beyond what anyone else had been able to engage with him was such a beacon of what's possible. And I know that, I think that's what people are drawn to. And there's a certain intimacy, that certainly to people, our friends, as we are, and they know each other, that there's more of that, but there's an intimacy in those kinds of private conversations that are made public. And. - Well, that's the, with you, you're probably starting to realize, and Costello, is like, part of it, because you're authentic and you're putting yourself out there completely, people are almost not just consuming the words you're saying, they also enjoy watching you, Andrew, struggle with these ideas or try to communicate these ideas. They like the flaws, they like a human being. - Oh, good, that flaws. - Well, that's good 'cause I got plenty of those. - But they like the self-critical aspects, like where you're very careful, where you're very self-critical about your flaws. I mean, in that same way, it's interesting I think for people to watch me talk to Penrose, not just because Penrose is communicating ideas, but here's this like silly kid trying to explore ideas. Like they know this kid. There's a human connection that is really powerful. Same, I think with Putin, right? Like it's not just as a good interview with Putin, it's also, here's this kid struggling to talk with one of the most powerful, some will argue dangerous people in the world. They love that. The authenticity that led up to that. And in return, I get to connect, everybody I run to in the street and all those kinds of things, there's a depth of connection there, almost within like a minute or two that's unlike any other. - Yeah, there's an intimacy that you've formed with with them. - Yeah, we've been on this like journey together. And yeah, I have the same thing with Joe Rogan before I ever met him, right? Like I was, because I was a fan of Joe for so many years, there's something, there's a kind of friendship as absurd as it might be to say in podcasting and listening to podcasts. - Yeah. Maybe it fills in a little bit of that or solves a little bit of that loneliness that you've been talking about earlier. - Until the robots are here. [laughing] - I have just a couple more questions, but one of them is on behalf of your audience, which is, I'm not going to ask you the meaning of the hedgehog, but I just want to know, does it have a name? And you don't have to tell us the name, but just, does it have a name? Yes or no? - Well, there's a name he likes to be referred to as, and then there's a private name in the privacy of his own company that we call each other. No. [Lex laughing] I'm not that insane. No, his name is Hedgy. He's a hedgehog. I don't like stuffed animals. But his story is one of minimalism. So I gave away everything I own, now three times in my life. By everything I mean almost everything, kept jeans and shirt and a laptop. And recently it's also been guitar, things like that. But he survived because he was always in, at least in the first two times was in the laptop bag, and he just got lucky. And so I just liked the perseverance of that. And I first saw him in the, the reason I got a stuffed animal, I don't have other stuffed animals, is it was in a thrift store, in this like giant pile of stuffed animals and he jumped out at me, because unlike all the rest of them, he has this intense mean look about him. That he's just, he's upset at life, at the cruelty of life. And it's just, especially in the contrast of the other stuffed animals, they have this dumb smile on their face. If you look at most stuffed animals, they have this dumb look on their face. They're just happy. Is like "Pleasantville." - It's what we say in neuroscience, they have a smooth cortex, not many form. - Exactly. And this, like Hedgy like saw through all of it. He was like Dustyesky's man from underground. I mean, there's a sense that he saw the darkness of the world and persevered. So like, and there's also a famous Russian cartoon, "Hedgehog in the Fog" that I grew up with, I connected with. [Lex laughing] People who know of that cartoon, you could see it on YouTube, it's. - "Hedgehog in the Fog." - Yeah. [Lex laughing] It's just, as you would expect, especially from like early Soviet cartoons. It's a hedgehog, like sad, walking through the fog, exploring like loneliness and sadness. It's like, but it's beautiful. It's like a piece of art, people should, even if you don't speak Russian, you'll see, you'll understand. - Oh, the moment you said that I was going to ask, so it's in Russian? But of course it's in- - It's in Russian, but it's more, it's very little speaking in it. It's almost a, there's an interesting exploration of how you make sense of the world when you see it only vaguely through the fog. So he's trying to understand the world. - We have Mickey Mouse, we have Bugs Bunny. We have all these crazy animals, and you have the "Hedgehog in the Fog." - So there's a certain period, and this is again, I don't know what it's attributed to, but it was really powerful, which there's a period in Soviet history, I think probably '70s and '80s where like, especially kids were treated very seriously. Like they were treated like they're able to deal with the weightiness of life. And that was reflected in the cartoons. And there was, it was allowed to have like really artistic content, not like dumb cartoons that are trying to get you to like smile and run around, but like create art. Like stuff that, you know how like short cartoons or short films can win Oscars, like that's what they're swinging for. - So what strikes me about this is a little bit how we were talking about the suit earlier, it's almost like they treat kids with respect. - Yeah. - Like that they have an intelligence and they honor that intelligence. - Yeah, they're really just adult in a small body. Like you want to protect them from the true cruelty of the world. - Sure. - But in terms of their intellectual capacity or like philosophical capacity, they are right there with you. And so that the cartoons reflected that, the art that they consumed, education reflected that. So he represents that. I mean, there's a sense of, because it's survived so long and because I don't like stuffed animals, that it's like we've been through all of this together and it's the same, sharing the moments together as the friendship. And there's a sense in which, if all the world turns on you and goes to hell, at least we got each other. And he doesn't die, because he's an inanimate object, so. - Until you animate him. - Until you animate him. And then I probably would want to know what he was thinking about this whole time. He's probably really into Taylor Swift or something like that. And it's like that I wouldn't even want to know anyway. - Well, I now feel a connection to Hedgy, the hedgehog that I certainly didn't have before. And I think that encapsulates the kind of possibility of connection that is possible between human and other object and through robotics certainly. There's a saying that I heard when I was a graduate student that's just been ringing in my mind throughout this conversation in such a, I think appropriate way, which is that, Lex, you are in a minority of one, you are truly extraordinary in your ability to encapsulate so many aspects of science, engineering, public communication, about so many topics, martial arts and the emotional depth that you bring to it. And just the purposefulness, and I think if it's not clear to people, it absolutely should be stated. But I think it's abundantly clear that just the amount of time and thinking that you put into things is, it is the ultimate mark of respect. So, I'm just extraordinarily grateful for your friendship and for this conversation. - I'm proud to be a friend. And I just wished you showed me the same kind of respect by wearing a suit and make your father proud maybe next time. [Andrew laughing] - Next time indeed. Thanks so much my friend. - Thank you. Thank you, Andrew. - Thank you for joining me for my discussion with Dr. Lex Fridman. If you're enjoying this podcast and learning from it, please consider subscribing on YouTube. As well, you can subscribe to us on Spotify or Apple. Please leave any questions and comments and suggestions that you have for future podcast episodes and guests in the comment section on YouTube. At Apple, you can also leave us up to a five-star review. If you'd like to support this podcast, we have a Patreon. That's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support us at any level that you like. Also, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. Links to our sponsors can be found in the show notes. And finally, thank you for your interest in science. [bright music]

========================================

--- Video 319 ---
Video ID: aXvDEmo6uS4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aXvDEmo6uS4
Title: Maximizing Productivity, Physical & Mental Health with Daily Tools
Published: 2021-07-12 12:00:01 UTC
Description:
In this episode I discuss science-supported tools for enhancing focus, learning, creativity, sleep, physical strength and endurance and brain and body health. I explain each protocol in detail, the rationale behind it, and how the protocol can be adjusted depending on individual needs. I set these tools in the context of a 24-hour day as a way of framing how one might incorporate these tools and protocols into their own daily routine.

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.helixsleep.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction: Protocols for sleep, mood, focus, exercise creativity
00:04:08 Sponsors
00:08:50 Protocol 1: Record Your Daily Waking Time & Temperature Minimum 
00:12:07 Protocol 2: Self-Generate Forward Motion (Outdoors) 
00:17:00 Protocol 3: View Natural Light For 10-30min Every Morning
00:22:43 What To Do If You Can’t View The Sun: Blue Light 
00:26:50 Protocol 4: Hydrate Correctly 
00:28:00 Protocol 5: Delay Caffeine 90-120m After Waking
00:30:48 Protocol 6: Fast (or Fat-Fast) Until Noon
00:32:30 What Actually Breaks A Fast & What Doesn’t?
00:34:30 Fat Loss & Glucagon-Like Peptide 1 (GLP1), Yerba Mate, Guayusa Tea
00:37:30 Protocol 7: Optimize Deep Work: Visual Elevation, Ultradian Cycles, White Noise
00:48:30 Optimal Time of Day To Do Hard Mental Work 
00:52:07 Protocol 8: Optimal Exercise; 3:2 Ratio
01:03:54 Tools for Training & Mental Focus: Fasting, Salt, Stimulants, Alpha-GPC 
01:10:00 Protocol 9: Eat For Brain Function & Mood
01:17:39 Protocol 10: Get Your Testosterone & Estrogen In An Ideal Range
01:24:00 Protocol 11: Reset the Mind & Body, Enhance Neuroplasticity, Reveri.com
01:31:15 Protocol 12: Hydrate Correctly, Nap Rules
01:33:29 Protocol 13: View Late Afternoon/Evening Light To Support Sleep & Dopamine
01:39:00 Protocol 14: Eat Dinner That Promotes Serotonin, Calm Sleep
01:44:27 Protocol 15: Optimize Falling & Staying Asleep; Tools & Supplements That Work
01:55:00 Protocol 16: Preventing Middle of the Night Waking
01:59:10 Protocol 17: Weekends, Recovering From A Poor Nights Sleep
02:05:20 Neural Network, Supplement Sources, Sponsors

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk about science-based protocols for sleep, mood, learning, nutrition, exercise of various kinds, strength and endurance, and hypertrophy, and we are going to talk about some protocols that relate to creativity. We're going to talk about behavioral protocols, supplement based protocols, all science backed by quality, peer-reviewed literature. The reason that we're holding this episode now is that in the recent previous episodes, we've covered some pretty intense and in-depth topics. We've talked about vision and how we see and how to get better at seeing and how to maintain vision. We've talked about hearing and balance. We've talked about chemical sensing. And we had a guest episode that covered a lot of information about new and emerging technologies in neuroscience, as well as mental health. That was the interview episode with Dr. Karl Deisseroth. So given that we've covered so much detailed information in the previous 27 episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I decided that we would hold office hours. Office hours in the university setting are when students come to the professor's office or you meet outdoors on campus or in the classroom to review the material and questions from lecture in more detail. Now, unfortunately, we don't have the opportunity to meet face to face in real life, but nonetheless, you've been sending your questions, putting them in the comment section on YouTube, et cetera, and I prepared a number of answers to the questions that have shown up most frequently. Now, in order to provide context and structure to the way that we will address these questions, I've arranged the science and science-based protocols that relate to various aspects of life- such as mood, exercise, sleep, waking, anxiety, creativity, et cetera- into the context of a day. Selecting the unit of a day in order to deliver this science information and protocols is not a haphazard decision on my part. It's actually the case that every cell in our body, every organ in our body, and our brain is modulating or changes across the 24 hour a day in a very regular and predictable rhythm. And it's no coincidence that the Earth spins once on its axis every 24 hours. These two things are coordinated by virtue of genes and different proteins and things that are expressed in every cell of your body. And so selecting the unit of the day is not just a practical one, but it's one that's related to our deeper biology. You may have heard in my interview episode with Dr. Karl Deisseroth that he himself, in order to juggle a tremendous workload, a full-time clinical practice, a lab of 40 plus people, a family of five children, et cetera, breaks up his life into units of days. And so today we are going to further dissect the day as a unit that one can manage and manage extremely well, and, in fact, can optimize. So we're basically going to talk about how to leverage science-based protocols. And when I say science, I mean, quality, peer-reviewed science published in excellent journals. We're going to talk about how to take that science, convert it into specific protocols that break up along the course of a single day and direct certain types of behaviors in order to optimize the various features of life. I will couch this in the context of what I do across a daily 24-hour rhythm. That doesn't mean that you have to follow this schedule at all or even in part. It's just by way of example. Any number of the different things that I describe could be applied to any number of different schedules or frameworks. But if there's one truth that applies to all of us, is that we all have to exist within the context of this 24 hour rhythm that we all possess. So that's what we'll focus on. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that I believe are the very highest quality possible. Developed by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, ROKA sunglasses and eyeglasses were developed with their intention to create sunglasses and eyeglasses that could be worn anywhere. So while exercising or while working, at home, while driving. The reason I like ROKA glasses so much is that first of all, they're extremely lightweight. The optical clarity of the lenses is excellent, and so I often just forget that I have even have them on. When I'm outside and I'm wearing sunglasses, they have this really terrific feature which is that I can move in and out of shadows or the cloud cover can change and I can see perfectly well the entire time. You know, many eyeglasses and sunglasses that I've tried, depending on what we call the "ambient lighting conditions," the local lighting conditions outside, I have to take them off or put them back on. It's really annoying for me. But with ROKA glasses, somehow, I'm assuming because they really understand the science of the visual system, the eyeglasses and sunglasses work seamlessly with whatever environment you're in. So that's absolutely terrific. Another thing about ROKA eyeglasses and sunglasses is that their aesthetic is really terrific. You know, I don't think I'm alone in saying that many performance glasses as they're called end up making people look like a cyborg, but the sunglasses are of the sort that, you know, you can wear while running or biking or driving or out to dinner. I don't typically wear sunglasses while out to dinner, but you get the idea. You can wear them anywhere and they look very natural. They have a huge number of different styles to select from. If you'd like to try ROKA glasses, you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. With InsideTracker, it alleviates a specific problem that's associated with most, if not all, of the other blood tests and DNA tests out there. And that problem is you get information back about the levels of various things, metabolic factors, hormones, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they have this terrific dashboard that allows you to both see your levels of hormones, metabolic factors, and the rest, but also, it suggests specific things that you can do with your nutrition, your exercise, and lifestyle, and so forth in order to bring those levels into the ranges that are best for your immediate and long-term health. In addition, they make the whole process of getting your blood and DNA taken very easy. They'll even come to your home to take the sample. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code HUBERMAN at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are ideally matched your sleep needs. I started sleeping on a Helix mattress about eight months ago, and I can honestly say it's the best sleep that I've ever had in my entire life. And that's because the mattress was actually designed for me. And you can have a mattress designed for you. If you go to helixsleep.com, they have this free, very brief, two-minute quiz that asks you a number of questions like do you sleep on your side or your back? Do you tend to run warm while you sleep or do you tend to get cold in the middle of the night? Maybe you don't know the answers to those questions, and that's fine too. After taking that quiz, they will match you to a specific mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs. I matched to the so-called "Dusk Mattress," D-U-S-K, because I wanted a mattress that was not too firm, not too soft. As I mentioned, I absolutely love it. If you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two-minute sleep quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress and you'll get up to $200 off your mattress order and two free pillows. They also make these terrific pillows. They have a 10-year warranty and you get to try out the mattress for 100 nights risk free. If you don't like it, they'll come pick it up and they'll take it away, but I think you'll love it. I certainly love mine. Again, if you're interested, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. So let's talk about how to apply quality, peer-reviewed science to your day and how to optimize everything from sleep to learning, creativity, meal timing, et cetera. As I mentioned earlier, I'm going to do this in the context of my day and what I typically do. However, the specific protocols for any number of different things, sleep, relaxation, meal timing, exercise, et cetera, any one or all of those could be rearranged to suit your specific needs. I'm going to tell you what I do from morning until waking and even what I do while I sleep in order to optimize my sleep. So let's start with getting up in the morning. Now, for me, I tend to wake up sometime around 6:00 AM, 6:30, sometimes as late as 7:00 AM. I don't typically sleep much later than 7:00 AM. The first thing I do after I wake up is I take the pen that's on my nightstand and the pad of paper on my nightstand and I write down the time in which I woke up. Now, I do sleep with my phone in my room. I realized this is considered a sin and has certain hazards associated with it, but I put my phone on airplane mode about an hour before I go to sleep. And then I set my alarm typically for 6:30 AM. And some days the alarm wakes me up; other days I wake up before the alarm. And yes, some days the alarm goes off and I hit snooze a few times, and then usually by 7:00 AM, I am up and out of bed. The reason for writing down what time I wake up is because I want to know that average wake up time. That average wake up time informs what's called my "temperature minimum." It tells me when my body temperature was lowest. The temperature minimum is the time in each 24-hour cycle that your body temperature is lowest. I don't sleep with a thermometer in my mouth or elsewhere, and I don't think you should either. Instead, I know that the lowest temperature that my body will be at across the 24-hour cycle tends to be two hours before my typical wake up time. And I want to know that number. It's called our "temperature minimum." So if you're somebody that typically wakes up at 8:00 AM, then your temperature minimum is sometime around 6:00 AM. Remember, the temperature minimum is a time in the 24-hour cycle. I don't care what my actual temperature is; I care when my lowest temperature is. And I know that that lowest temperature is approximately two hours before my average wake-up time. So I highly recommend that you write down when you wake up or track that in some way that works for you and use that as a reference point to determine your temperature minimum. We will return to the temperature minimum and how you can leverage the temperature minimum for several things: shifting your clock, shifting your circadian sleep schedule and wake schedule. Also for shifting your eating schedule, et cetera, We will return to that. But even if you don't travel, even if you don't care about things like jet lag, even if you sleep fabulously all year round, never have a poor night's sleep, knowing your temperature minimum, that time when your temperature is at its lowest point, is a valuable thing to know. The second thing I do after I wake up is to get into forward ambulation, which is just nerd speak for taking a walk. I have a dog, and as many of you know, he's a bulldog and he doesn't really like to walk, especially not in the morning. But for humans and for animals, there's a phenomenon whereby when we generate our own forward motion, forward ambulation, visual images pass by us on our eyes, so-called "optic flow." And for those of you that are low vision or no vision, the same phenomenon occurs in the auditory system. Sounds pass by us in so-called "auditory flow." Getting into a mode of forward ambulation, and especially experiencing visual flow, has a powerful effect on the nervous system. The effect it has is essentially to quiet or reduce the amount of neural activity in this brain structure called the "amygdala." Amygdala means "almond," and many of you have probably heard about the amygdala for its role in anxiety and fear and threat detection. And indeed, the amygdala is part of the network in the brain that generates feelings of fear and threat and anxiety. It does a bunch of other things too, but that's one of its primary functions. There are now at least half a dozen quality papers published in quality, peer-reviewed journals that show that forward ambulation, walking or biking or running, in generating optic flow in particular has this incredible property of lowering activity in the amygdala and thereby reducing levels of anxiety. There are two papers that I'd like to highlight in particular that relate to this phenomenon. The first one was published in the journal Neuron and the title of this paper is "Whole-Brain Functional Ultrasound Imaging," that just means they have a cool technique to evaluate the activity of structures in the brain across the entire brain, reveals brain modules for visual motor integration. What they found in this study, and I should mention the first author is Mace, this comes from Botond Roska's group, this was work done in mice, but I'll talk about other species in a moment. What they found was essentially that when these mice walk forward and their eyes move from side to side, which is a natural consequence of moving forward, so-called "optic flow" is flowing past their eyes, many brain areas are activated, increase in their level of firing, but the amygdala in particular reduced its levels of firing. That's a very interesting finding, but it is in mice. However, another paper, "Eye-Movement Intervention Enhances Extinction via Amygdala Deactivation," was published in The Journal of Neuroscience, a strong journal, and shows that, again, these eye movements, these lateral eye movements from side to side reduce activity levels in this fear/threat/anxiety center in the brain, the amygdala. Now, those are eye movements. They didn't specifically look at forward ambulation. And yet other papers have looked at forward ambulation and we know that forward ambulation, walking forward, generates the sorts of eye movements that cause optic flow and reductions in amygdala activation. So for me, this process of taking a walk each morning isn't about exercise. It's not about burning calories. It's not about any of that. It's really about getting into optic flow and reducing the levels of amygdala activation. Now, I don't have anxiety, at least I don't have chronic anxiety or generalized anxiety. I tend to have a lot of energy, but at these points in the morning, I'm not very energetic. Sometimes I'm sort of shuffling more than I'm walking in fact. And Costello is almost always shuffling and I'm almost always trying to drag him first thing in the morning. But that walk is a particularly important protocol each day because it really serves to push my neurology in the direction that I'd like it to go, which is alert, but not anxious. And it's kind of a fine line sometimes, especially as events surface throughout the day, emails come in, text messages come in, get bombarded with a number of things. I want to be alert and responsive. I want to be able to focus, but I don't want to. feel anxious or reactive to these things. So the forward ambulation and this optic flow is the way that I ensure, based on quality, peer-reviewed data, that my amygdala activation is slightly suppressed. Now, at the same time, I also want the alertness. I want alert and focused. I don't just want to be sleepy or super, super relaxed. I want to have a high degree of focus and alertness because I'm soon going to move into a about of work. I need to lean into the day. So in order to do that, I make sure that the walking is done outdoors. That might be sort of a duh, but many people get up and start moving around their house, their apartment, and they don't go anywhere. And just walking around inside, it will generate some optic flow, but nothing like the sort of optic flow that you can generate in larger environments like out of doors environments. If you can't get outdoors, doing it indoors is perfectly fine, but it's not going to have the same magnitude of positive effect. Now, in order to get the alertness, I do it outdoors because I also want sunlight in my eyes. I know many of you have heard me talk about this ad nauseam on various podcasts, in this podcast, but getting sunlight in your eyes first thing in the morning is absolutely vital to mental and physical health. It is perhaps the most important thing that any and all of us can and should do in order to promote metabolic well-being, promote the positive functioning of your hormone system, get your mental health steering in the right direction. There are a number of reasons for this, but before I get into those reasons, let me just emphasize what the protocol is. The protocol is get outdoors, ideally with no sunglasses if you can do that safely, even if there's cloud cover. More photons, light information are coming through that cloud cover than would be coming from a very bright indoor bulb. So getting outdoors is absolutely key. How long should you do this? It's going to depend on the brightness of the environment. It's going to depend on a number of different factors. Two minutes would be a minimum, 10 minutes would be even better, and if you can, 30 minutes would be fantastic. Now, it's a very bright day or, you know, you live in a place where there's bright sunlight, clear day on a snowfield, you would only need something like 60 seconds. But most people aren't living in those sorts of conditions. So getting outside for a 10-minute walk or a 15-minute walk will basically ensure that you're getting adequate stimulation of these neurons in the eye that are called the "melanopsin," intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells. I know that's a mouthful. These are neurons that don't care about shapes of objects or the motion of objects. These are neurons that convey to the brain that it's daytime and it's time to be alert. And it sets in motion a huge number of biological cascades within every cell and organ of your body from your liver to your gut, to your heart, to your brain. It really sets things down the right path. Early in the day, we experience a natural and healthy bump in a hormone called "cortisol." Cortisol comes from the amygdala. That cortisol, as I mentioned, is healthy and normal and promotes wakefulness. It actually promotes a healthy immune system. So I know you've heard that stress and cortisol disrupt the immune system, but not the short little pulse of cortisol that you get each morning. It's very important that that pulse of cortisol arrive early in the day. I want to emphasize this again. It's very important that that pulse of cortisol arrive early in the day And that pulse of cortisol is going to happen once every 24 hours no matter what. It's going to happen and you get to time it. How do you time it? Primarily by when you view bright sunlight or bright light of another kind, and we'll talk about that in a moment. So you want that cortisol pushed early. If you wake up before the sun comes out, it's fine to turn on artificial lights, but then you would want to get outside as soon as you can to get this, excuse me, natural light stimulation of your eyes. And it does have to be to your eyes. Just to really drill down into the details for a moment, you don't want to stare directly at the sun or any light that's so bright that it feels painful. If you feel like you have to close your eyes or blink, please do. You don't want to damage your retinas. The point here is to get the sunlight indirectly. It's going to essentially be scattered everywhere through the cloud cover, but you know from looking at us at a flashlight directly into that flashlight versus looking at the beam that flashlight generates on the ground that if you're standing in the shade, you're going to. get less of that sunlight than you are if you're out in an open field. So this is why the time outside, it's going to need to vary depending on your particular environment. But do your best to do this every day. If you miss a day, no big deal, but try not to miss more than one day. Otherwise your mental and physical health will start to suffer. And doing this each day costs nothing. It's just time You can combine it with the forward ambulation with the walk and the optic flow that I talked about before. And that's what I do each morning to generate a sense of alertness in my body and brain to generate a sense of calm, yet alert. And that's also what I do with Costello, with my bulldog. People have asked me, do the same mechanisms apply to animals? Well, the reality is many of these mechanisms were actually discovered in animals, and then were tested in humans and verified that they also exist in humans. Not always. Sometimes it was the reverse, where they were tested first in humans, and then brought to animals. But indeed, your dog, your horse, you know, I don't know what other animals are out there, they need this. Now, if you have a hamster or a nocturnal animal, the reason why they like to run on their wheels at night is because they're nocturnal. They don't like being in the light. Light actually causes them to freeze, right? Actually, if you are into aquaria, you like fish, they always say, "Don't overfeed your fish. You'll kill the fish." That's true, but guess what the fastest way to kill a fish is? To keep the lights on 24 hours a day They also need circadian rhythms, these 24-hour rhythms. So we'll do an entire month at some point about pet health, but meanwhile, get that morning sunlight. So now we have a first protocol, which is to write down the time of day that you wake up, the second protocol is to take a walk first thing in the morning, and the third protocol is woven in with that walk, at least for me, which is to get that sunlight exposure. Now, if you can't get sunlight exposure, you absolutely can't, I don't necessarily recommend buying one of these dawn alarm lights. And I'm sorry to say this, but they're just vastly overpriced relative to what they are. They're basically a bright LED. I instead use, I have a pad that's a 930-lux LightPad. I think it was designed for drawing. Those are available at a fraction of the cost that a morning light simulator would provide, and yet it's really bright enough, at least for me. I tend to put it on my desk while I work each morning. So here's a principle that you can leverage. If you want to be alert, view bright lights and make those lights above you or in front of you. If you want to go to sleep soon or you don't want to be awake for whatever reason, try and eliminate your exposure to light. And this, again, is not about exposure of the skin to light; this is about exposure of your eyes, of your neural retinas to light. For those of you that are concerned about blue light, I want to that blue light is precisely the wavelength of light that is optimal for stimulating these neurons in your eye, which set your circadian rhythms properly. So you don't want to shield yourself from blue light early in the day or throughout the day or anytime you want to be awake. In fact, that could have a number of detrimental consequences. Fortunately, all those consequences are going to be reversible after a short period of time of making sure that you don't wear your blue blockers during the day, please. The time to wear blue blockers, if you do, is at night and in the evening when you're headed towards sleep. My colleague Samer Hattar, who is head of the chronobiology unit at the National Institute of Mental Health, has spoken about this before on my Instagram. We held an Instagram Live and I said, "Samer, what do you think about blue blockers?" And he said, "I don't think that's a good idea at all, unless it's really late at night and you're in a bright environment and you're trying to limit the amount of bright light that impacts the eyes." Eliminating specific wavelengths of light, in Samer's opinion and also in my opinion, is not a natural thing for the visual system and the brain to experience. Some people get headaches while they work on the computer all day or staring at screens, and so they get blue blockers thinking that's going to protect them from their headaches. However, any protection that you get from headaches from blue blockers is going to be minimal in comparison to what's really going on there, which is that people are viewing devices and screens up close for too many hours throughout the 24-hour cycle. A better remedy would be to step away from that computer from time to time, and to make sure that you can look far off into the distance. Ideally, a distance longer than 20 feet like view a horizon, go out on a balcony, things of that sort. Take a walk around, get into optic flow So if you're into blue blockers, make sure you're only wearing them in the late evening and at night. I personally don't wear blue blockers at all. I prefer to just control my light viewing behavior by doing this, I do the other form of circadian control, which is to dim the lights. And I do that because dimming the lights and setting them lower in the environment sets up the brain and body for sleep much better than simply just wearing some blue light blue blockers, excuse me. And please know if you do wear blue blockers that if the light in your environment is bright enough, it doesn't matter if you're blocking out the blues. The cells in the eye will respond to other wavelengths of light. So I have no vendetta against the blue blockers, and, you know, I fully expect the blue block-anistas to come after me with, I guess, blue blockers, but as you do that, please understand that the biology points in the direction of get a lot of bright light throughout the day, including blue light, and at night, just limit the total amount of overall light that you're exposed to, including from screens. So then Costello and I get back from our walk. Sometimes that walk was 10 minutes, sometimes it was 60 minutes, depending on how slowly Costello is walking that day. Indeed, many mornings I'm the guy carrying his bulldog back up the hill. My neighbors know me so well, they know Costello so well that they've since stopped pulling over and asking if the dog is okay. Sometimes they'll ask if I'm okay. Nonetheless, we get back, I give him his food, I give him his water, and I give me my water. I'm a big believer, based on quality, peer-reviewed data, that hydration is essential for mental performance. Now, I confess I don't really like drinking big glasses or big jugs of water first thing in the morning. I don't know why, but my thirst doesn't tend to kick in first thing. You may be different. Either way, I force myself, essentially, to drink at least 16 and, most days, 32 ounces of water. I also put a little bit of sea salt in the water. As many of you know, neurons require ionic flow. What that means is neurons need sodium, they need magnesium, and they need potassium in order to function. We do tend to get dehydrated at night. Even if the day is not very hot, I try and top off or I try and make sure that I'm hydrated early in the day before I begin any work. So I make myself drink this water with a little bit of sea salt. How much sea salt? If you really want to get detailed, I suppose it's about half a teaspoon. It's not much, That's what I do. And I drink that more or less room temperature. I find that drinking really cold water first thing in the day kind of like cramps up my insides, so I don't do that. At that point, I start thinking about and fantasizing about and craving caffeine, but I don't drink that caffeine yet. I purposely delay my caffeine intake to 90 minutes to 120 minutes after I wake up. Of course, I know when I wake up 'cause I wrote it down, although it's pretty easy to commit to memory. The reason I delay caffeine is because one of the factors that induces a sense of sleepiness is the buildup of adenosine or, as some people call it, adenosine in our system. The buildup of adenosine accumulates the longer we are awake. So when I wake up in the morning, when you wake up in the morning, your adenosine levels are likely to be very low. However, caffeine is an adenosine blocker. It's actually a competitive antagonist for you aficionados. It sort of parks in the receptor that adenosine normally would park at and prevents adenosine from acting on that receptor. That's why you feel more alert, because it's essentially blocking the effect of this sleepiness factor that we all create called the "adenosine." The reason for delaying caffeine intake 90 minutes to two hours after waking is I want to make sure that I don't have a late afternoon or even early afternoon crash from caffeine. One of the best ways to ensure a caffeine crash is to drink a bunch of caffeine, block all those adenosine receptors, and then by early or late afternoon, when that caffeine starts to wear off and gets dislodged from the receptors, a lower level of adenosine is able to create a greater level of sleepiness. It took me years to figure this out. I used to wake up and I'd think, "Oh, I don't want to drink caffeine too close to bedtime, so I'm going to start drinking my caffeine really early." I let my cortisol naturally come up in the morning. I avoid drinking caffeine until about 90 minutes or two hours after waking. And when I do that, I find that I don't experience the afternoon crash. At least I don't experience that crash unless I do something foolish, like ingest far too much food at lunch or I stay up all night the night before. But provided I don't do anything foolish like that, delaying caffeine to 90 minutes to two hours optimizes this relationship between adenosine and wakefulness and sleepiness in a way that really provides a nice, consistent arc of energy throughout the day and brings energy down as I'm headed toward sleep and falling asleep. My primary objective early in the day is to get into a mode of being focused, yet alert so that I can get work done. I found that the best way for me to achieve that state is through fasting. So I don't eat anything until about 11:00 AM or 12:00 noon. I'm not absolutely religious about it. There are days when I'll have a few Brazil nuts or a spoonful or three of almond butter, for instance, but most days I'm not doing that. I'm just not eating anything. I'm drinking some caffeine caffeine source for me is yerba mate, guayusa tea. Those are my preferred sources I tend to avoid coffee these days. Occasionally I'll have a cup, but most often I stick to the teas. I drink water as much as I feel I need to and want to. And I also drink my athletic greens, which is compatible at least for me with fasting. Let's talk about why fasting works to create this heightened state of alertness, yet calm brain state. Fasting increases levels of adrenaline, also called "epinephrin" in the brain and body. And when our levels of epinephrin and adrenaline are increased, we learn better, we can focus better. There's terrific data supporting that. You don't want epinephrine, aka adrenaline, too high. That feels like stress and panic. You get jittery, you can't focus. But in its optimal range, adrenaline really provides a heightened sense of focus and the ability to encode, meaning bring in, and retain, remember information. And so since my job is mainly a cerebral one where I'm writing grants and working on papers, et cetera, I fast in the early part of the day. I mentioned ingesting things like guayusa or yerba mate or, in my case, athletic greens. Many people ask, in fact there's a whole community and discussion boards, et cetera, and YouTube comments on the internet, about what breaks a fast and what doesn't. The fact of the matter is that's going to be highly individual because it's going to depend on how sensitive your blood sugar. And more accurately, it's going to depend on things like your insulin sensitivity. So for instance, if you're somebody who gets up in the morning, hydrates, and goes out for a six-mile run, you could probably eat a jar of almond butter and still be what's called fat-fasted. Your insulin levels will still be very low because even though that is a large volume of almond butter, even to me and Costello, that large number of calories comes from a source that doesn't increase blood sugar very much and insulin very much. Now, I'm not suggesting you do that, but what I just described as a vastly different situation than somebody that ate their last meal at 2:00 AM, and that meal was essentially a feast. And for that person, fasting until 10:00 or 11:00 AM, their blood sugar might still actually be pretty high or even lowish such that they might eat one almond and it would bump them out of fasting. So you get the idea. It's going to depend on your recent eating history, your blood sugar history, your glycogen stores, et cetera. So if anyone tells you that breaks a fast or that doesn't, that's kind of silly. Would one grain of sugar break your fast? No. Would an entire tablespoon of sugar break your fast? Yes. You'll get a big blip in blood sugar and insulin from that. However, how long that lasts, how long it breaks your fast will depend on how glycogen-depleted you are and a number of other factors. So for me, I just keep it fairly simple: I ingest water, caffeine from your yerba mate and guayusa, and I drink my athletic greens with some lemon juice in it. That constitutes my fasting. And there are days when I do all those things. There are days when I do none of those things. Although most days, I would say about 355 days out of the year, I'm ingesting water, caffeine, and athletic greens during this period of fasting early in the day, and that's the period of time when I do my work. One interesting fact about yerba mate and guayusa teas is that they increase release of something called "GLP-1." GLP-1 is related to glucagon. Glucagon is a hormone that you can sort of think about as opposite to insulin and blood sugar. It's more complex than that, but GLP-1 has a couple of positive properties. One is it increases lipolysis and mobilization of body fat stores, so burning of fat. In fact, there are now a number of clinical trials that are achieving good success and there are drugs out there only available by prescription which mimic GLP-1 and are being used to treat, quite successfully, certain types of diabetes and obesity. Now, I'm not diabetic, nor am I trying to shed a ton of body fat, but I figure as long as I'm fasting and as long as I like yerba mate and guayusa, which I do, they're delicious, I'll tell you which type I use in a moment, I might as well increase my GLP-1 because it's probably not as good as getting out and doing some cardio work. But nonetheless, if I'm fasted, increasing GLP-1 in my system, I'm going to be alert from the caffeine, the adrenaline, et cetera, and I'm going to burning body fat while I'm doing my work. So for me, it's just an efficient, biochemically rational, or I should say grounded in quality biochemistry sort of approach. Yerba mate comes in a lot of different forms. There are a lot of different brands out there, et cetera. I don't have any relationship whatsoever in a business sense to any of these brands. Some of them are very smoky. I, just because of something in my genetic makeup, or I don't know, maybe it was some sort of Y chromosome-associated lesion early in life, but I don't like smoky flavors. So I'm not a Gouda cheese guy. I don't like smoky stuff. You may love it, but I tend to avoid smoky-tasting mates. Instead, there's a particular brand that I just found on the internet called Anna Park. I don't know Anna, I don't know if she has a park, and I certainly don't know what Anna Park is, but for me, that's the best-tasting yerba mate. Again, I don't have any relationship to them, but it's affordable in the context of yerba mate and it's the one that I use. And I should mention along the lines of affordability and GLP-1 is there's a nice feature of yerba mate which is if you put it in a filter or a metal strainer and you pour hot water over it, and then drink it, keep the leaves. The yerba mate leaves can be used over and over again. It seems that the GLP-1 stimulating aspects of yerba mate actually are enhanced with subsequent pour overs. So there's something interesting about these teas that my tea aficionado friends tell me allows the tea to release more of some of the beneficial compounds by reusing the tea leaves. Now, eventually it'll grow mold and other sorts of disgusting things. You don't really want to run that experiment. I would say you can use it for a day or two before it starts to go bad, but that's a feature that will extend the life of whatever yerba mate you happen to use if you decide to use it, and that's certainly what I do. Next, I want to talk about what I'm doing while I'm drinking all this yerba mate. 'Cause I'm not just sitting there thinking about all the GLP-1 circulating in my system. I'm working. A couple of things for optimizing workspace that are grounded in neuroscience and physiology. I've talked before about the fact that when our eyes are directed upward, literally when our eyelids are open, no surprise there, and when our eyes are directed upward, it creates a state of heightened alertness. And this has a relationship to the brainstem neurons that create alertness and their control over the muscles of the eye and, believe it or not, the eyelids. Now, it's not the case that if you are absolutely exhausted and you need to feel more alert that looking upward is going to make you feel wide awake, although it will help support your levels of alertness. The point here is that you can optimize your workstation in a physical way that leverages this aspect of the visual system and your level of alertness. Since most of us want to be awake while we're working, try and position your screen or your tablet, whatever device you happen to be working on, at least at eye level and ideally slightly higher. Now, if you think about it, most people are not doing this. Most people are looking down at their computer or tablet or are angling their eyes at their screen at about 30 degrees. That is not going to support heightened states of alertness and optimal attention. In fact, the opposite relationship between eye position and alertness is also true. When we look down, when our eyelids are slightly closed, it tends to decrease our levels of alertness and increase our levels of sleepiness. I really want to emphasize this, that there's a bi-directional or reciprocal relationship between the brainstem areas that control alertness and the eyes, meaning how alert you are controls how open or closed your eyes are, no surprise there, but also the how open and upward directed your eyes are will increase your levels of alertness And if your eyes are pointed downward and your eyelids are hooded, like they're slowly closing, like Costello's are always are, you'll feel more sleepy, especially if you're somebody who tends to have that mid-morning sleepiness or mid-morning crash. So what I do is I have a standing desk, but I also prop the computer up such that it's at least at eye level. And I haven't figured out yet how to develop a workstation where the computer is above me. I think the only way to really do that is actually to tilt one's body back, but actually that's not a good idea either. They have done studies recording from areas of the brain associated with alertness. Areas like locus coeruleus in the so-called reticular activating system. What they found is that depending on how reclined you are or upright you are, you will decrease with reclining and increase with sitting forward your levels of alertness. So body posture and whether or not your upright or reclining will impact your levels of alertness in the predictable ways. And where you position your eyes, whether or not your eyes are upright, so to speak, looking up or directly forward or looking down, will dictate whether or not you are feeling more alert or more sleepy, respectively. So try and arrange a workstation or a position of your body in your chair or your standing desk, whatever it is, that allows you to work with a heightened state of alertness. This is really, really key for me because I found that when I would sit down, not only would my hip flexors start to get sore, I feel tight in the back, et cetera, but if I was staring down at my screen all day or even for short periods of the day, I would start to feel sleepy and I couldn't figure out what was going on. I also thought maybe I needed glasses. I do wear readers at night, but it was really a problem. And simply by getting the screen directly in front of me at eye level, it's been completely transformative. So we're now at the description of my day in these protocols in which I would do a 90-minute about of work. Now, why 90 minutes? Well, the brain is going through these 90 minutes so-called "ultradian cycles" throughout the entire day and night. Every 90 minutes, we shift over from being very alert to being less alert, and then back to alert again. Here's how it works. At the start of one of these 90 minute ultradian cycles, my brain is not quite engaged in whatever it is I'm trying to do. Oftentimes I have things jumping into my mind, I've got distractions, et cetera. I'll talk about how to deal with those distractions in a moment. But I set a timer for 90 minutes and I try and get a strong about of work done inside of that 90 minutes with the full understanding that the entire 90 minutes is not going to be uniform in terms of my ability to focus. There will be kind of peaks and valleys within that, but that 90 minutes is about what the brain can handle in terms of a dedicated effort for high degree of focus. Some people can push out a little bit further, some people can't handle more than 10 minutes, but that's what I'm striving toward. You'd be amazed how much you can get done in 90 minutes if you are focused. So how do you increase that focus and how do you use the timer feature? Well, you can combine those. I use a program called Freedom. It shuts me out of the internet completely. So that means no checking the markets, no checking social media, no checking, you know, the news, no checking email, none of that. I get a dedicated about of work done. I confess, I don't allow myself to go to the restroom in that period of time. Here's an interesting little tip that's grounded in physiology. You have a direct neural connection from your bladder to your brainstem areas that increase alertness. This is why when you have to go to the bathroom, when you have to urinate, it is extremely agitating, right? It can be very, very agitating. I'm not encouraging you to get so agitated by filling your bladder so much and resisting going to the bathroom that you are uncomfortable and can't focus, but I generally will just drink liquids and work away and work away, and I won't walk away to go use the bathroom unless I absolutely have to. Sort of odd that we're talking about this, but this is one way in which I've learned to funnel my attention into whatever it is I'm doing. Because as you all know, the moment you sit down to do some serious work and you flip off the internet, all of a sudden it's as if the phone has a voice, it starts calling you.. It's almost as if the restroom has a voice. But we all are familiar with the fact that if we are focused on something that all that just kind of melts away. So the goal is to get into what I call the tunnel, to really get into a tunnel of quality work. The brain loves that state, but it's very hard for many of us to access. My phone is absolutely off. It's not on airplane mode. It's absolutely off during this time. If I've been struggling with that and, I confess, you know, there are times when, for whatever reason, something going on in life, it's been harder to put away the phone. I will sometimes put it in my car. I used to joke that I used to throw it up on the roof or something like that. Look, I've done and I suggest people do whatever they need to in order to self-regulate that activity. And if you're somebody that feels that you absolutely need to be on your phone and on the computer for this work about or the work that you do, well, that's a different matter altogether. This is just simply how I work. So I will do 90 minutes and I do set a timer and I turn on the program, Freedom locks me out of the internet. If someone rings the doorbell, I will often shout, "Not coming to the doorbell. Leave it there." I mean, unless there's a real emergency, I'm not going to step away from that work. I learned how to do this when I was a graduate student under different conditions where I used to slice brains on what's called a microtome. So I used to spend time, just cutting very thin slices, it's like a deli slicer, but for a brain, of various types of brains. And I've sectioned through a lot of brains. And we had a rule, which is that when the blade hits the brain, you don't stop pulling, even though it's very, very slow even if a nuclear bomb goes off, even if a fire alarm goes off. Now, I don't want anyone, you know, burning to a crisp because they didn't step away from their workflow. That would be foolish, but that's the mentality that I've embedded in myself, that there's nothing more important than what I'm doing in that 90-minute block. And that's what works for me. You can try various other things. That's what works for me. In addition, I use low level white noise. This is something that is supported by quality, peer-reviewed data. We covered this on the episode on hearing and balance, but it turns out that white noise, which is essentially all frequencies of sound, or all frequencies of sound that we can perceive, mixed up kind of randomly, there's no structure to it, turned on at a low volume, not with headphones most of the time, puts the brain into a state that's optimal for learning and workflow. And I covered two papers during that episode. One that showed that, indeed, brain areas involved in attention, brain areas involved in focus and cognition and memory, those are engaged to a greater degree when there is low levels of white noise playing in the background. The other paper that's really interesting did brain imaging and showed the areas of the brain that are associated with dopamine release are increased by low levels of white noise. Dopamine release is associated not just with pleasure, but with motivation and craving. So everything about this 90-minute block from the low levels of white noise to the position of my computer, how I'm standing, where my eyes are positioned, is geared towards putting me in this tunnel of work. And I have to say that while it can be a challenge to try and achieve this state in this tunnel of work some days, you start to get kind of addicted to it. It feels really good. It's like a workout for the mind. And it is something that as you exit that 90 minutes, you really feel like you've accomplished a lot because often you have, and it just feels deeply satisfying. And I'm convinced that that's because of the release of neuromodulators like dopamine and the norepinephrine that's circulating in your system. And I want to be clear that I'm not perfect about this 90 minutes. Occasionally I get drawn away. Occasionally something will happen or I'll go use the restroom or Costello will have a need or somebody will have a need that I will have to respond to, but I really try and achieve this most, if not every day that I'm alive because for me, that work session is kind of holy. It's where I set up a relationship, not just between me and the work that I'm doing, but between me and my ability to control my own state of mind using these various supports of the white noise, et cetera. But really those supports are peripheral to the fact that I'm creating this space. I'm funneling my brain into a state rather than allowing whatever events and contexts on social media and elsewhere might be occurring in the world that would yank me out of what for me is my purpose and my mission in life, which is to do the sorts of work that I do. There's a powerful way in which you can place the timing of this 90-minute work about in an optimal way. You have access to a very important piece of data that dictates when this about should start more or less and when it should end. That piece of data is your temperature minimum. If you're somebody who wakes up on average at 7:00 AM, well, then your temperature minimum is 5:00 AM. And you can be reasonably sure, I want to underscore reasonably, but you can be reasonably sure that your best work is going to be done anywhere from four to six hours after your temperature minimum. So for me, I tend to wake up around 6:30 AM, that means my temperature minimum is at 4:30 AM. You can add five hours to that. So that means that a 90 minute work about could fall at 9:30 AM and it would be fairly optimized. Or I could do it at 10:30 AM, or I could do it at 8:30 AM. Somewhere in there, all right? That we can't say that it's exactly six hours after your temperature minimum. You will find it, however. There is a precise and best time for you to do this 90-minute work about. Whether or not it's five or six hours after your temperature minimum is going to vary from person to person. How do I know this? How do I know this relationship between temperature minimum and focus cognition? Well, temperature minimum defines the trough, the nadir, as they say, of your temperature across the 24-hour cycle. And immediately after that, your temperature will start to rise. That temperature rise is actually what triggers the initial cortisol release that you experience and wakes you up further. And then, of course, that sunlight that you're getting is going to further enhance that healthy release of cortisol. That cortisol will then provide fuel, if you will, for that increase in temperature. And your body will continue to increase in temperature throughout the day toward the afternoon. What you're trying to do in this idea of optimizing this 90-minute work about to a particular time of day is catch the portion of the steepest slope of that temperature rise. Now, again, you're not walking around with a thermocouple or a thermometer in some orifice of your body. So you don't have accurate information about temperature, but you can make very good guesses about when your body temperature is rising fastest by virtue of that temperature minimum. So again, just to be clear, it's a 90-minute work about. That's about what the brain can handle for a very intense work about. Do you understand, again, that they're going to be portions of that 90 minute that your brain is flickering in and out of focus, other portions, where you're going to be entirely focused. That's entirely normal. But when to place that 90-minute work about, when to start it, and when to end it will depend on that temperature minimum. So if you're somebody who wakes up at 8:00 AM each morning, your temperature minimum is 6:00 AM, chances are you're going to want to start this work about somewhere around 10:00 AM or 11:00 AM. Now, some people wake up and feel very alert first thing in the morning. They can really do their best work first thing in the morning. Please, if that's you continue to do that. Leverage that time. Use that time. But if you're somebody who struggles to find focus, definitely let your physiology and this rise in your body temperature support your efforts to focus rather than trying to do your best work at times of day when your physiology is actually directing your body and your brain toward de-focus and towards being more lethargic. It just is setting yourself up for success when you try and capture this rising phase of your temperature. So up until now, we've been emphasizing practices that allow you to optimize your level of alertness and your levels of mental focus. Data going back to the 1990s supports the idea that physical movement of particular kinds can support brain health and brain function both in the immediate term and in the long term. Now, this is has had a profound impact on the field of neuroscience, but frankly, it's also had a profound impact on how I structure my day. So after I've finished a about of work, this 90-minute about of work, I force myself some days, other days I want to, but I force myself to do some sort of physical exercise that is going to be supportive of my brain health and brain function and organ health and bodily function in general. So I just briefly want to touch on what the structure of that exercise looks like, how it's structured within the day and how it's structured across the weeks in fact, based on the scientific data and what the scientific data say is best or optimal in order to promote longevity of the brain, ability to focus, as well as cardiovascular health and all the other things that we know exercise supports. Now, there are various forms of physical activity or what we call exercise, but those can generally be batched into two categories. First is strength and hypertrophy work. So physical movements that are designed to make you stronger and/or make your muscles larger. There's also endurance work. Physical exercise and movements that are designed to allow you to do more work over time or to extend the amount of time that you can do work of any kind, both physical and mental. And we did two full podcast episodes on the details and the science and the protocols related to these topics. We did an episode on the science of strength and hypertrophy, of building strength and muscle building. And that included a lot of protocols. And we did an episode on endurance. How to build any one or all of the four types of endurance, which are muscular endurance, anaerobic, aerobic, long-distance endurance, et cetera. So if you're interested in the specifics of those protocols, please see those episodes. However, right now I just want to emphasize how the data impact my day and how I structure my day in a way that I can incorporate physical movement in a way that supports my brain and health. Basically, after I finished that cognitive work about, that 90-minute work about, I do some form of physical exercise for about an hour. The data all point to the fact that working out hard for longer than an hour can actually be detrimental because of the way that it raises cortisol. And cortisol can be a good thing if it's appropriately timed and in the appropriate low levels, but you don't want to have your cortisol levels up throughout the day or have big spikes of cortisol repeatedly. So keeping workouts relatively short can definitely help with that And certainly if you're training hard, 60 minutes or less should be more than sufficient. And for many people, including myself, 45 minutes or 50 minutes is probably even more optimal. The basic design of this physical exercise is that it be approximately 60 minutes. So maybe 60 plus or minus 15 minutes should be well within the margins of keeping hormonal health proper and not going too long nor making the workout so short that it's not beneficial. And essentially what the data tell us is that in order to optimize cardiovascular and brain health and other systems of the body, we want to exercise at least five days per week. I know that seems like a lot. It certainly is a lot for certain people. Some of you, you compulsive exercisers, might gasp at the idea of taking two days off. I personally find that taking two full days off per week is actually both beneficial to my exercise training performance, as well as pleasant. I like those rest days. But essentially the structure of the exercise regimen that works for sake of supporting health is going to be one in which there's a 3:2 ratio. Where for a 12-week period or so, maybe 10 to 12 weeks, three of those five workouts per week emphasize strength and hypertrophy and the other two emphasize endurance. Then, after 10 or 12 weeks, one over to a 10- or 12-week regimen of doing a 3:2 ratio where you're prioritizing endurance work. So primarily the sorts of workouts that are described in the endurance episode and those protocols. And the other two days, you're focusing on strength and hypertrophy work merely to maintain strength and hypertrophy, to not lose the strength and hypertrophy that you've created. And there a lot of data now supporting the fact that maintaining muscular health and bone health is supported by resistance training, weight training of various kinds. It can also be done with body weight if you don't have access to equipment. And, of course, that doing cardiovascular endurance work is very beneficial both to the muscles of the body, the organs of the body, but also to the brain. Many of you have probably heard that doing physical exercise of various kinds can support the production of new neurons in the brain. Frankly, those data are specific to research animals. As far as we know, increases in neuron number are not supported by exercise in humans. There is a little bit of data that supports that maybe a few neurons might get created by running or weightlifting or things of that sort in human beings, but there's still a host of other reasons to have this hour or so per day where one is doing physical exercise. And those include increased blood flow to the brain. Remember, the brain is an organ too. It's the most metabolically demanding organ in your body and it's receiving those metabolic factors, it's receiving its fuels by way of vasculature, of blood vessels and capillaries and veins and things of that sort. So movement is very crucial to get your brain to function properly. Movement of various kinds is very important to get your brain to function properly. Resistance training turns out to be as important as endurance training because of the way that it stimulates the release of particular hormones actually from bones, things like osteocalcin, which can positively impact brain function and can support the health of existing neurons as opposed to increasing the number of neurons. It turns out increasing the number of neurons may not actually be as beneficial as we think. It all sounds great. More neurons, more neurons. Certainly more neurons is better than fewer neurons and losing neurons, but incorporating new neurons into existing brain circuitry is actually very challenging for the brain to do. I make sure that after that workout, I get this one hour or so of exercise five days per week because of the ways that it supports my general health. And there are now hundreds of studies supporting the fact that both endurance work and strength training or hypertrophy training done in combination, meaning not necessarily in the same workout, but done across the week is immensely beneficial for the production of things like brain-derived neurotrophic factor, for limiting inflammatory cytokines like IL-6, for promoting anti-inflammatory cytokines like IL-10, provided that exercise is of the proper duration and that it's not so intense that you're actually creating damage to the various systems of the body. Now, where is the threshold between optimal, sub-threshold and detrimental? This is a complicated theme if we don't put some structure around it. So let's put a little bit of structure around it. We already said that about 60 minutes, so 60 minutes plus or minus 15 minutes, is going to be optimal for all these health benefits. What about the structure of the actual workouts? Well, we need to address this issue of intensity. A good rule of thumb based on the literature, and I discussed this with Dr. Andy Galpin prior to this strength and hypertrophy and endurance episodes, and the literature that's published in quality, peer-reviewed journals really points to the fact that approximately 80% of the resistance training you do should be resistance training that doesn't go to what they call failure, where you can't actually move the resistance anymore. The other 20% can be of the higher intensity to failure type training. Now, with respect to endurance work, one can build up endurance without having to log long, long mileage or extensive mileage in the pool or by running. And that's because there are these other forms of endurance that can build up, for instance, the capillary beds within the muscles. Building up the capillary beds within the muscles will allow more oxygen utilization within the muscles, and thereby will increase your endurance both of the muscles, but also will improve brain metabolism and the way that the heart functions, so cardiovascular function. That 80/20 rule of less than failure and work to failure in the resistance exercise regime can be transported or translated to the endurance exercise portion by focusing on that thing that we're familiar with, which is the burn when we're running hard or cycling hard, we'll experience a kind of burning of the muscles that's associated with the lactate system. During the episode on endurance, I pointed out that that burn is not lactic acid. Contrary to common belief, it is not lactic acid. It's associated with lactate metabolism. And again, about 80% of the endurance work should not incorporate that so-called "burn," but if 20% of that work or so, I should say approximately 20% of that work, does include the so-called "burning sensation," that burning sensation actually triggers the activation of release of certain compounds and molecules from glia, this brain cell type that supports neuron health. And actually, the lactate system is its own form of fuel for the brain. And so there's increasing interest in generating the lactate or pushing past that lactate threshold for small portion, 20% or so, of endurance work in order to support brain health and function. So what does all this all look like as a protocol? Well, as I mentioned before, this 3:2 ratio. So maybe you spend 10 weeks or so or 12 weeks or so focusing mainly on endurance, where three workouts per week on endurance work, 80% of those workouts, meaning 80% of the time you're below that burn threshold, you are not experiencing a burning sensation, but that for 20% of it, you are. That, based on the scientific data, should support lactate metabolism, brain health, et cetera, as well as cardiovascular health and oxygen utilization. All the forms of endurance that we're aware of. And then the other two workouts would involve resistance training, again, with this 80/20 split, where 80% of the work is not to failure and 20% is. And then maybe after 10, 12 weeks, you switch, where you start emphasizing strength and hypertrophy work for three of the workouts and endurance work for two of the workouts. Now, of course, some of you will be able to train six days a week or you'll compulsively need to train seven days a week. If you decide to do that, please be aware that this cortisol threshold is a real thing. So for me, the 3:2 ratio works out perfectly 'cause I like two full days off a week. When I take those really depends on my schedule and how I'm feeling. Sometimes it's two days in a row. Sometimes they're interspersed throughout the week. But in reviewing the scientific literature for those two episodes of the podcast and in talking to people who are really informed in the world of resistance training and endurance training and how that relates to brain health and body health, this seems to be the most rational and grounded protocol, so that's the one that I follow. So on any given day, I finish that work block and I train. I do some sort of resistance or endurance training. I put those on alternate days or different days, rather. So we've now talked about the arc that spans all the way from waking to a morning about of focused work to physical training. I have not mentioned ingesting anything or nutrients. One of the most common questions I get are what should I eat for my brain? Well, ironically enough, one of the best things you can do for your brain is to not eat, but, of course, we all have to eat sooner or later and eating is wonderful. I absolutely love eating. I even enjoy the mere act of chewing. But the question of what to eat is an important one as it relates to brain health and brain function. Before we talk about that, I want to emphasize that training fasted actually has some immediate and long-term benefits. Prior to having my lab at Stanford, I was down in San Diego at UC San Diego and had an appointment at the Salk Institute of Biological Studies. I had a colleague there by the name of Satchin Panda. He wrote a wonderful book called "The Circadian Code." He runs a serious biology laboratory focusing on metabolism, circadian rhythms, and so forth, as well as the effects of fasting. Satchin and his book "The Circadian Code" describe how engaging in physical exercise while fasted can amplify the effects of that exercise, not just for sake of increasing the percentage of things like body fat burned, et cetera, but for cellular health, liver health, and the health of other organs. So where possible, I do strive to do my workout without eating anything first. However, some days I'm very, very hungry, and so I do ingest water, which contains electrolytes, so that means sodium, magnesium, potassium, for the simple reason that sodium, magnesium, potassium are required for neurons to function properly. It's part of the way they generate electrical activity. As well, Ingesting electrolytes for me can quell hunger. And this points to a whole other topic we could do another episode on at some point, which is many times people will think that their blood sugar is low and actually that's not the case. And frankly, one wouldn't want their blood sugar to be high. You don't want your blood sugar too low, but you also don't want it too high. Very low blood sugar is terrible, but lowish blood sugar tends to give us a sense of mental clarity and focus, related to this adrenaline phenomenon that we talked about earlier. In order to be able to focus on exercise or work or anything else, you need sufficient electrolytes. And so many people find that if they simply ingest some water with salt, maybe a 99-milligram potassium tablet, all of a sudden they feel very mentally clear and able to do physical work and mental work. So what I do is, prior to this morning exercise, although it's now late morning in this way I'm describing it and typically it does occur late morning, I'll have some water with either maybe half a teaspoon of sea salt with a 99-milligram potassium tablet or these days I'm fond of taking what's called "LMNT." L-M-N-T. LMNT. I learned about this from Lex Friedman's podcasts. I know many of you are familiar with Lex, has a excellent podcast, excellent scientist. I don't have any business relationship to LMNT. They're not a sponsor of the podcast, but LMNT is a product that essentially contains electrolytes: sodium, potassium, as well as magnesium malate, which has been shown to offset things like delayed onset muscle soreness. That form of magnesium doesn't make people drowsy. It's not an anxiolytic like some other forms of magnesium. An anxiolytic is just one that reduces anxiety. So whether or not it's LMNT or whether or not you're just putting a little bit of salt into some water and ingesting that prior to training, that can be an excellent way to ensure that you're able to complete the physical exercise, even though you haven't eaten anything. And I confess, some days I will eat a little bit before my workout, just because I can't seem to resist eating. I want to mention the use of stimulants before physical training. This has certain benefits and certain drawbacks. The benefits are sometimes it can facilitate motivation because things like caffeine can increase the release of dopamine, can increase the release of epinephrin, can reduce that adenosine level in the bloodstream. So some people use caffeine before training in ways that benefit them. It can also increase fat oxidation and kind of fat metabolism and things if that's your goal. I'm not a particular fan of ingesting stimulants before training because of a whole set of problems associated with most forms of stimulants in the form of energy drinks, et cetera. I am not a fan of energy drinks. I did a decent portion of a previous episode on food and mood on energy drinks and some of the detrimental things they contain. Rather, I try and train simply by ingesting the caffeine sources I mentioned before, guayusa, mate, some electrolytes, some water. Occasionally I'll have an espresso or a cup of coffee before I train. And on rare occasions, I should emphasize rare occasions, if I really need help increasing my motivation or I decide I want to push extremely hard, I will ingest something like alpha-GPC. Alpha-GPC supports the release of a neuromodulator called acetylcholine. So 300 milligrams of alpha-GPC has been shown to increase physical performance, but also cognitive performance. Some people might not be interested in ingesting anything to improve their physical performance or anything at all, but they might be addressing how they can improve cognitive performance and focus. And alpha-GPC is a non-stimulant way to approach that. Again, definitely check with your doctor before taking anything or stopping to take anything, but alpha-GPC has been shown in various studies to improve cognitive performance. And in people who have age-related cognitive decline, there have been some positive benefits reported in quality, peer-reviewed journals. If you want to explore those references, please go to examine.com, go please put in alpha-GPC, go to the Human Effect Matrix, and there you can find details of those studies, references to PubMed, et cetera. So let's talk about food timing first. As I mentioned, I eat my first meal sometime around noon plus or minus an hour for the reasons we've discussed. The volume of food is also important. If you eat a large volume of anything, because it diverts blood to your gut, you will feel lethargic and you will have less blood going to your brain. That seems like a simple and trivial fact, but if you want be able to think, you can't ingest large volumes of anything into your gut. So the discussion about what foods give you energy is kind of moot if you eat enormous volumes of that food. Now, the volumes are going to depend on you and your needs and your activity levels. I'm going to discuss what I do in terms of food content, but I'm not going to discuss food volume. I sort of know where that mostly full, like 80% full line is, and I usually eat a little bit past that, frankly. And I'm able to maintain a decent degree of alertness into the afternoon. And that's my goal and I think that's the goal of most people, to not work out in the morning or do some work, and then just collapse into a slumber that lasts all afternoon, but to be able to generate alert, calm, focus states throughout the day. So for lunch, I do emphasize slightly lower carbohydrate or low carbohydrate intake for the simple reason that adrenaline and dopamine and their associated neuromodulators are going to support alertness. So for me, I fast up until about noon. Then I eat a lunch that consists of some sort of protein thing, like some meat or some chicken or some salmon and some vegetables, et cetera. And if I've exercised previously, which I do, as I mentioned, five days a week, then I will ingest some starches. I'll in just some red or, bread, excuse me, or rice or oatmeal and butter and nuts and things like that. I will consume the various food groups, as they say, but I will keep the total amount of carbohydrate a little bit on the low side, or if I haven't trained, I won't have any carbohydrate at all. Not because I'm ketogenic, not because I'm inter carbohydrate, not because I'm on a pure carnivore diet, far from it, but because starches cause the release of serotonin in the brain and lend themselves to a state of sleepiness. Now, I should mention that about 25% of individuals have genes that encode for enzymes that allow them to eat large amounts of carbohydrate and not suffer from this lethargy, this kind of sedation from carbohydrates. But I don't have that gene, and so for me, eating a noonish meal that is not enormous, but is decent in size, but that is mainly protein, healthy fats, and lowish carbohydrates or no carbohydrates is what allows me to achieve heightened states of alertness throughout the day, which is what I need for my purposes. So just knowing that meats and nuts support alertness, provided you don't eat too much of them, that vegetables are healthy for us and therefore we should eat them, and I happen to like them as well, and that carbohydrates tend to have a kind of sedative like quality to them, that should help you and guide your food choices in an intelligent way that's grounded in the scientific literature as it relates to alertness. Now, what about components of foods that are not about alertness, but are about mood? We did an entire episode on mood and food, and it's very clear, based on now dozens of studies, that ingesting sufficient levels of omega-3 fatty acids is going to support healthy mood and even can act as an antidepressant. More than a dozen studies have shown that ingesting at least 1,000 milligrams per day of the EPA form of essential fatty acid is as effective as prescription antidepressants in relieving depression. And if you're somebody who requires prescription antidepressants, Prozac, Zoloft, et cetera, it can allow people to take lower doses of those medications, which in many cases is a positive thing or a good thing to do because of the side effect profiles that many of those drugs carry. So I find these data remarkably compelling. I mean, here we have a food or a substance from food that can improve our mood and our sense of wellbeing, and it does that by way of increasing certain neuromodulators in the brain, in particular dopamine, but also some other related neuromodulators. So if you're eating fatty salmon regularly, if you're eating krill regularly, meaning if you're a whale, if you're ingesting foods that tend to have a lot of omega-3s, you probably don't need to supplement with omega-3. Most people are not ingesting sufficient levels of omega-3, and I'm certainly one of those people. Despite an effort to eat good foods and whole foods, et cetera, and unprocessed foods, I've made the choice to ingest at least 1,000 milligrams per day of EPA. I do that in the form of fish oil and the EPA-DHA combination fish oil, but the threshold of 1,000 milligrams is not 1,000 milligrams of fish oil; it's 1,000 milligrams of EPA. Now, for those of you that don't want to consume fish oils and prefer to get your omega-3s from non-animal sources, there are non-animal sources, various forms of algae, et cetera. You can just look that up online and you should be able to find that. There are also a number of foods that include these essential omega-3s. We did an episode on food and mood where I go into more detail than you could ever want on that, as well as some additional recommendations. We also did an episode on thyroid function, this hormone that's important for metabolism, and that pointed to the importance of getting sufficient iodine, which you should naturally get from the salts you're ingesting, provided you're ingesting enough salt. I'm not somebody who eats a lot of kelp, but, or seaweed, although I don't mind the taste of seaweed, I don't ingest it regularly, but ingesting sufficient selenium or selenium has been shown to be important for proper thyroid production and thyroid function, which is why I tend to eat a few Brazil nuts each day typically with my lunch or sometimes before my workout. It doesn't really matter. The point is that the volume, the amount, the content, and indeed the ratios of protein to fat to carbohydrates are going to impact how you feel and they're going to impact your brain health. And, of course, the timing. We know that allowing periods of 12 hours or more each 24-hour cycle where you're not ingesting anything is beneficial for your brain and body health. That's what Satchin Panda and his colleagues' work has shown over and over again in these quality studies. So when people ask me, you know, "What should I eat for my brain?" More often than not, it's really a question of how you're structuring your day, when you're eating for the first time, how long you're allowing yourself to fast each 24-hour cycle, and also whether or not you're getting sufficient omega-3s, whether or not you're getting sufficient selenium to support things like thyroid function, which has an impact both on the metabolism of the body, but also the metabolism in the brain. And when I say metabolism, I don't just mean burning energy; I actually mean the rebuilding of things. So in the episode on growth hormone and thyroid hormone, we talked about how metabolism means, not just the breakdown of fats and carbohydrates, but also the building up, the repair of muscle tissue, the repair of bone, the reinforcing of bone and the repair and the buildup of brain tissue. And so those are the things that I emphasize because they are so strongly supported by the scientific data done in mice studies, done in humans. And basically there's a lot of biochemical evidence that supports everything that I just described. Along the lines of health and wellbeing, I'd be remiss if I didn't mention hormones. Hormones have broad effects on the body and brain. We did an entire month on hormones if you want to hear about any of those hormones in detail. We talked about testosterone and optimizing testosterone, estrogen, et cetera. The sex steroid hormones, which include testosterone and estrogen, which, of course, are present in varying ratios, but in both men and women and in kids, they are manufactured from cholesterol. We hear about cholesterol as this terrible thing, but they are actually made from cholesterol. And so if you don't get sufficient levels of cholesterol, that can be problematic for your hormones and that can be problematic for your brain and your body health. So without going into too much detail, I'll just point to a couple of things that I do that, at least from my blood work and from my subjective experience, have been very beneficial for me that some of you might want to consider. First of all, I am not shy about my love for butter. I will eat packs of butter directly. I believe if people are going to eat cheese without a cracker, I will eat butter without a cracker. Butter is high in cholesterol, so I don't eat a ton of it, but at least for me and for my lipid profiles, it's fine. Butter has cholesterol, which is a precursor to the sex steroid hormones, and men and women need testosterone and estrogen in order to feel good and to be able to think. You do not want your estrogen too low or your testosterone too low. So I eat butter in order to ensure that I get sufficient cholesterol. Butter also has some other things that are beneficial, various small fatty acids that are that are interesting in terms of their effects on metabolism, et cetera. You can look those up, benefits of butter. But again, volume is important and you can't overdo it. Costello incidentally loves butter as well. Along the lines of hormones and testosterone, I get a lot of questions about this I think because a lot of online communities are sort of obsessed with testosterone, and I just want to emphasize that, yes, having sufficient levels of testosterone is vitally important for brain function and having sufficient levels of estrogen will allow your brain to actually function. It turns out that estrogen is one of the main ways in which the brain maintains longevity and maintains its ability to think. So we should all be seeking optimal testosterone levels for ourselves, both testosterone and estrogen. And many of the things that we've discussed up until now, morning sunlight, exercise, fasting, those can support testosterone and estrogen in meaningful and positive ways. I get a lot of questions about hormone optimization. We did an entire month on this topic. We did an entire episode on testosterone and estrogen optimization. I just want to briefly highlight two things that could be relevant, and then if you want more details, please go see that episode. The first is that testosterone can exert its various functions only in its unbound form, free testosterone. We all make a particular binding protein called "sex hormone binding globulin" that essentially binds up testosterone, prevents it from being free. This sounds like a terrible thing, but actually it's a good thing because it allows testosterone be transported to the various tissues, including the brain, where it can exert its various functions. For those that have lower than desired levels of testosterone or too much sex hormone binding globulin, it turns out that 400 milligrams per day of something called "tongkat ali," which is a form of ginseng, can actually help increase levels of free testosterone. Many people experience a positive subjective effect and some objective affects as well, meaning increases in free testosterone when they do blood analysis. There are some data on that, not a ton in the peer-reviewed literatures, and again, always approach these with a sense of caution and definitely talked to your doctor. If you want to learn more about that, you can go to examine.com. There's a lot of information there listed about that. The other compound that's relevant both to men and women, or I should say people that are trying to optimize testosterone and/or estrogen, is Fadogia. Fadogia agrestis is actually an herb that increases the levels of what's called "luteinizing hormone." Luteinizing hormone is a hormone that's released from the hypothalamus within the brain that travels to the gonads, either the ovaries or the testes, to stimulate the release of estrogen or testosterone. And Fadogia agrestis has been shown, albeit in a limited number of studies, to increase levels of luteinizing hormone and thereby levels of testosterone and estrogen in ways that some people find beneficial. So I just want to mention those two. And again, if you want a lot more information about hormone optimization, please see the episodes on hormone optimization. A key aspect to the mid-day meal, if you want that meal to benefit you, is to take a brief walk afterwards. It turns out that brief walks of five to 30 minutes after ingesting food can accelerate metabolism and actually can accelerate and improve nutrient utilization, which is essentially the same as metabolism. But nonetheless, that's something that I do after I finish my noon meal. I do force myself to stand up and go outside and take a brief walk. That also gets me, again, into optic flow. It also has another benefit, which is that I am giving my brain and thereby my body more information about light and time of day, which is always better than less information about light and time of day. Much of our circadian rhythm and our health rhythms and all of our cognitive rhythms, et cetera, are supported by our cells knowing where they are in time, and light is the primary zeitgeber, that's German for "timekeeper," is the primary way in which the body learns information or about what function should be turned on and what functions should be turned off. So getting that morning light pulse, but then also leaving the house or apartment or workplace and getting out for a few minutes after lunch is beneficial for metabolism, beneficial for nutrient utilization, and beneficial for all the organs and tissues of the body because you're getting that outside light exposure. Now I'd like to shift our attention towards science supported-protocols that increase the effectiveness and our performance in everything. And by everything I mean sleep, I mean physical performance, I mean mental performance, I mean less anxiety, all the things. Truly all the things. And that is something called "non-sleep deep rest." Non-sleep deep rest or NSDR is an acronym that I coined as an umbrella term to encompass many protocols that all have been shown, in one form or another, to support better brain and body function. Now, these protocols have names that you've heard before. Things like meditation, things like yoga nidra, and things like hypnosis. All of these protocols and these activities, however, share something in common, which is they involve a deliberate and directed shift in one's state, and the shift tends to be toward a state of deeper relaxation. We certainly don't have time now to dissect out the literature on all of these. There is ample literature, I should say there is robust and ample literature, supporting the fact that a regular meditation practice is beneficial. But meditation itself has many forms: transcendental meditation, loving kindness meditation, third eye meditation, walking meditation. Yoga nidra is a practice I've talked about many times before, which involves simply lying down. It doesn't involve any movement. No down dogs or up dogs or anything. It just involves lying on your back and doing some specific long exhale breathing. There are a lot of yoga nidra scripts out there that are quite good. But there's one NSDR type protocol that has been shown by the greatest number of scientific studies to promote not just states of deep relaxation, not just states of heightened focus, but also to accelerate plasticity and learning within the brain, and that's hypnosis. And I've become increasingly excited and interested in hypnosis as a tool, and not just a tool of any kind, but a tool that really can be directed toward particular goals and outcomes. And I think that's really what sets hypnosis apart as an NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, protocol from things like naps or things like yoga nidra or things like meditation. And I certainly believe and understand that meditation naps and yoga nidra can be directed toward less anxiety, et cetera, but hypnosis is unique in that it's very directed. The essence of hypnosis is for the person, you, to guide your brain toward a particular outcome or change. So I'd like to point out a particular resource. It's a completely zero-cost resource, which is reveri.com. That's R-E-V-E-R-I.com. reveri.com obviously is a website where there are links to an app that's available in Apple and Android. This is a hypnosis app, but this isn't just any hypnosis app. This is a hypnosis app that contains multiple hypnosis protocols that are all backed by very high-quality science. The science was done by my colleague and our associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford School of Medicine, that David Spiegel is responsible for that work. I'm not associated with that scientific work. They've examined what brain areas get activated during hypnosis, what the outcomes are for various hypnosis protocols. And within Reveri, you will find hypnosis protocols for enhancing your focus, enhancing creativity, reducing pain, getting better at sleeping, reducing anxiety. Most of these are about 10 or 15 minutes long. Some of them are extremely brief. One minute long. They have a one-minute hypnosis that you can do. Those one minute hypnosis scripts work best if you've been doing the 10 and 15 minute ones regularly or semi-regularly. It's a really wonderful resource for which there is a lot of peer-reviewed published data. One study I'd like to emphasize in particular is Jiang et al. J-I-A-N-G. That is a reference you can find on the reveri.com website under Our Research. And the title of this paper is "Brain Activity and Functional Connectivity Associated with Hypnosis," and it was published in the journal Cerebral Cortex. What this paper essentially shows is that specific areas of our brain that are involved in executive function, which is associated with our ability to focus, as well as what's called the "default mode network," which is sort of the way that your brain idles, does your brain tend to idle at a level of high anxiety or calm, as well as activation of a brain area called the "insula." That's I-N-S-U-L-A. The insula is extremely interesting. Hypnosis has been shown to activate the insula, which can enhance our sense of interoception, our sense of internal state, which might sound like a annoying thing. You don't want to be thinking about your heartbeat or your breathing. But what's really interesting about hypnosis is that it increases areas of the brain that are responsible for deep relaxation, focus, and self-awareness, this interoception, simultaneously. And that's very unusual compared to other states, any other states of any kind. So I've made it a practice, a daily practice in fact, that after lunch and after this walk, I do a brief 10-minute hypnosis script because what I've found is that in contrast to naps and in contrast to other forms of NSDR, it really allows me to enter a state of deep relaxation, but also to then exit that state in a very focused and deliberate way that allows me to lean into my afternoon in an alert way, in a way that I can function and do mental work and interact with people, et cetera. So there's no brain fog, there's no grogginess. And I want to emphasize that the hypnosis that I'm referring to here and that Reveri provides is not stage hypnosis. This isn't you being programmed to squawk like a chicken or do anything against your will. This is you teaching your brain how to access these focused, relaxed, interoceptive states. This is also an extremely valuable aspect to hypnosis because it can increase plasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. It's essentially opening up pathways that allow you to change your brain in the ways that you want. And it's very directed toward particular outcomes So I am an, as you can probably tell, I'm very enthusiastic about hypnosis as an optimal NSDR protocol, and so I do that every single day. There are days that I don't manage to do it for whatever reason. I forget or interference from email or et cetera. But that is essentially how I enter my early afternoon. I do this post-lunch, post-walk NSDR in the form of a Reveri hypnosis. Again, a completely zero-cost resource to you. There are excellent data. All those data can be found on the Reveri site, and you can also learn a lot more about hypnosis and what sorts of hypnosis protocols might be optimal for you. So if you are looking for a science-backed, zero-cost, very effective tool for getting better at focusing, better at sleeping, better at all the things that I believe people want, I do believe that is the best tool that one can access at this point in time. So then after I exit hypnosis, I usually give Costello a little scratch behind the ear, and then I make sure that I hydrate. Hydration, again, is vitally important for brain function. It's vitally important for all bodily functions. And I often forget to do it, so I've just sort of linked the drinking of water to my hypnosis practice. As soon as I'm done, I hydrate. And then I tend to focus on another work about. So this would be, for me, sometime around 2:30 or 3:00 in the afternoon when normally I would be quite sleepy and passing out. However, the protocol of shifting my morning caffeine to 90 minutes to two hours after waking, as well as the use of this hypnosis protocol has really allowed me to move through the afternoon in a way that I don't experience that dip in. Energy every once in a while I'll feel kind of sleepy or kind of out of it, but I've been really pleasantly surprised at the extent to which one can avoid that afternoon dip. If you do certain things properly prior to the arrival of 2:00 or 3:00 PM. Now, if you're a napper and you want to nap, no big deal. Naps can be wonderfully beneficial. Here are the rules around napping according to the sleep science. Stanford has an excellent sleep clinic. I consulted with Jamie Zeitzer, my colleague in the Stanford Sleep Laboratory, as well as Matt Walker out at Berkeley whose name I'm sure most of you are familiar with. He wrote this wonderful book, "Why We Sleep." Naps should be 90 minutes or less, and 20-minute naps are fine, but not longer than 90 minutes. And there are essentially two varieties of people: people for whom napping interferes with falling asleep later that night and staying asleep and people for whom the nap does not interfere. You have to decide who you are. And if you're somebody who can nap and not have any trouble falling asleep and staying asleep later that night, well, by all means, nap. Just make it 90 minutes or less. Again, these 90-minute cycles are really a vital constraint that we should all obey. If it's 91 minutes, don't worry. You won't dissolve into a puddle of tears. But if you're starting to sleep for an hour or more in the afternoon, that can be problematic. If you're somebody who can nap for 10, 20 minutes, that's probably better than getting a full 90-minute cycle, unless you didn't get enough sleep the night before. But you really have to figure out what's right for you. There's a lot of variety there. But that's essentially what the science says. Now, whether or not you nap or whether or not you do not nap, a key protocol for sleep health and wakefulness and metabolism and hormone health is viewing light in the afternoon. So here's the reason for doing this. As we progress into the evening hours, there's a phenomenon where our retina, our eyes, become very sensitive to light, such that if we view bright lights or even not so bright lights between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM, that is strongly disruptive, very disruptive for our dopamine production. It can really screw up our sleep, and it's actually been shown in data from David Berson's lab at Brown University, one of the foremost circadian biology laboratories, as well as Samer Hattar's laboratory at the National Institute of Mental Health that viewing bright light, or even not so bright light, between these hours of 11:00 PM and 4:00 AM or even 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM can disrupt learning and memory, can disrupt the immune system and can disrupt mood in very long-lasting ways. There are ways to offset that, however. What I call your "Netflix inoculation." For those of you that like to stay up late on the tablet or computer or watching Netflix, getting a little bit of afternoon light in your eyes, somewhat counter-intuitively, can prevent this disruption of bright light later in the evening, at least somewhat. What do I mean by that? Well, if you view light as the sun is starting to go down, so if you step outside around 4:00 PM, 5:00 PM, again, what time exactly will depend on time of year and where you are located on our planet, but as the sun starts to head down, you don't necessarily have to see the sunset, it'd be lovely if you could, sunsets are beautiful, but if you can get outside and see the sun as it arcs down, or if you can't see the sun directly, get some sunlight in your eyes in the afternoon hours, so maybe 4:00 PMish, and do that for 20, 30 minutes, maybe reading outside or taking a walk, I walk the dog again, that's my protocol, in order to get that evening light, what it does is it lowers the sensitivity of your retina in the late evening hours, which allows you to buffer yourself against the negative effects of bright light later at night. Now, it won't allow you to blast your eyes with bright light; you still need to dim the lights in the evening. But there's a very nice study that was published in scientific reports that illustrates that if one does this, if you go outside and view sunlight in the evening hours for anywhere from five to 30 minutes, and I realized that people have a range of constraints on their schedule, but from five to 30 minutes, what happens is that your melatonin rhythm stays appropriate. Now, we haven't talked too much about melatonin, but melatonin is a hormone that is inhibited by light. It's actually prevented by light. And melatonin is the hormone that allows you to fall asleep easily. Now, I'm not talking about supplementing melatonin; I'm talking about melatonin that you naturally produce from your pineal. So the protocol is very simple: get outside in the afternoon or evening for 10 to 30 minutes, take your sunglasses off, get some bright light, get some natural light in your eyes. If you can't do that, probably better to just stay with standard artificial lights inside. Don't crank them up, but just start to dim them. Again, this would be a time to avoid blue blockers. People are popping on blue blockers at four o'clock in the afternoon 'cause you're worried that blue light is going to disrupt your sleep. Well, you're making your eyes more sensitive to any light that you might see later in the evening, blue light or otherwise. So get that afternoon light. So what you'll probably notice is that the optimal protocols for optimizing your brain and body health and performance and sleep, et cetera, are actually really simple. But just because they're simple does not mean that they are not powerful; in fact, they are very powerful because they leverage the most powerful technology that exists, which is your nervous system. You know, we always think about technologies as devices, and indeed there are some wonderful devices out there. Some people are really into tracking their sleep and their sleep time. If you're into that, great. That's not something that I personally do, although I keep telling myself that I should do that. There are devices that can control brainwaves and things of that sort. But what we are talking about today are really basic things that we can all do that can steer our neurology and our biology in the directions that are going to support workflow, that are going to support hormones, that are going to support brain function. So this afternoon light viewing is yet another example of leveraging a technology that you were born with and that you will die with and that you will have every day in between in order to tweak the hormones of your system, in this case, the hormone melatonin, so that it's released at the appropriate times and not at the wrong times. Because we know that when hormones and systems of the body are well aligned with the 24-hour schedule, beautiful things happen. And when they are misaligned, terrible things happen. Sometimes those terrible things are subtle at first, but disrupting your circadian rhythms is really bad for every system in your body. Getting it right, and as you can tell, getting it right doesn't take much, can really serve to "optimize" you. When I say "optimize," I mean it puts you into a better mood overall, better state for learning, et cetera. So get that afternoon light as well. So at some point in the evening, I eat that thing that we call dinner. And while it feels sort of strange to talk about my dinner, the reason I want to talk about my dinner and what I eat for dinner is that for me, dinner, of course, is about eating- I'll mention again I love eating- but also about optimizing the transition to sleep and sleep. So obviously I eat foods that I enjoy. I'm not one of these people that will eat anything or avoid eating anything simply to benefit from that. I do enjoy food very, very much. And so my dinner generally is comprised of things that are going to support rest and deep sleep. And that means starchy carbohydrates. It's absolutely clear that one of the major ways that we can increase serotonin, which helps in the transition to sleep, is by ingesting starchy carbohydrates. Now, I realized that starchy carbohydrates are kind of a demonized term nowadays and everyone's anti-carbs, but, you know, we really should distinguish between refined sugars and complex carbohydrates. And we did an episode about this. We talked about how refined sugars disrupt, not just metabolism, but they actually disrupt some of the neurons in the gut that sense fatty acids and amino acids from fats and proteins. But those same neurons can actually respond to sugar and create a situation where you actually start craving more sugar because those neurons in your gut communicate via a nerve pathway for you aficionados called "the vagus nerve" and a little cluster of neurons called the "nodose ganglia." N-O-D-O-S-E. Nodose ganglias are right next to the corner of your jaw and can trigger the activation and the release of dopamine in your brain, which basically makes you crave more sugar, independent of how something tastes. So when I say carbohydrates, what I really mean is starchy carbohydrates, non-refined sugars. And in the episode about food and mood and metabolism as well, I referenced a really spectacular lecture by Dr. Robert Lustig who's a pediatric endocrinologist at UCSF, UC San Francisco, absolutely spectacular talk, you can find it on YouTube easily, where he talks about the science of refined sugars. And this isn't in any kind of conspiracy or paranoid way. This is really the medical and scientific literature. So my dinner is carbohydrates and some protein. So maybe some chicken or fish or something like that, maybe some eggs, or sometimes just pasta or just rice and vegetables. And that's because I enjoy those foods, but also because I want to increase the amount of serotonin in my brain so that I can actually fall asleep that night. Many people who are on low-carbohydrate diets struggle with falling and staying asleep, and that's because it's hard to achieve heightened levels of serotonin which are necessary to enter sleep. I should also mention that melatonin and serotonin fall in the same pathway. They are related hormones and neuromodulators. We won't go into their biosynthesis now, but essentially what we're talking about is a system that's biasing us towards rest and relaxation as opposed to wakefulness. You might ask, "Well, can't I just take serotonin? Can't I just take 5-HTP or a precursor to serotonin or tryptophan?" And indeed you can, however, many people including myself, find that when they supplement with serotonin in the evening or at night, that can cause problems in the architecture or the structure of sleep. It can cause a lot of people, including me, to fall asleep very fast, sleep very deeply for three or four hours, and then wake up and have a terrible time falling back asleep. And that effect, at least for me, can last several days. It's really disruptive. So I don't like to supplement with anything that is directly dopamine or a precursor to dopamine at any time or directly serotonin or a precursor to serotonin. Rather, there are other things that can enhance the transition to sleep safely, which we will talk about in a few minutes. But the evening meal consists largely of carbohydrates for that specific purpose of generating a sense of calm. And, of course, carbohydrates are delicious. And because I'm doing some physical training and presumably you are as well, or I hope you are, 'cause it's so beneficial to one's health, that's also going to replenish my glycogen stores, which is one of the primary fuel sources for moving one's muscles and moving around and doing exercise, as well as for the brain and for cognitive function. So low carbohydrates throughout the 24-hour period are not something that are attractive to me. I realized that some people will do much better on a low-carbohydrate or even ketogenic diet, but for me, and I do believe for most people, creating a situation of maybe fasting, and then low-carb or no-carb diets for states of alertness and focus at one portion of the day, and then ingesting starchy carbohydrates for sake of inducing rest and relaxation is a at least scientifically, rationally-based protocol. It's grounded in real neurochemistry. It's grounded in things that we can point to and say, "Ah, this food substance, this thing can support my brain, not directly because it's some magic substance that's going to make all my neurons, you know, extremely robust, but rather it's going to support sleep," which is perhaps the foundation of all mental and physical health. In fact, we can point to sleep as the primary way in which we can ensure our overall health, including our brain health. So let's talk about sleep and how to access sleep, how to fall asleep easily, and how to make sure that the sleep we have is of sufficient duration and quality. One way to do that is to leverage the drop in temperature that's necessary to fall and stay asleep. So I mentioned earlier in the early parts of the day after waking, our body temperature is rising, and that continues throughout the day. And then sometime late in the afternoon, our temperature peaks, and then it starts to drop. That drop in temperature of one to three degrees is vitally important for us to be able to fall asleep easily. One way that we can decrease our transition time into sleep is to accelerate that drop in temperature. And one way to accelerate that drop in temperature somewhat counter-intuitively is to use hot baths, hot showers, or if you have access to one, a sauna. Now, this is counterintuitive because you'd say, "Well, hot bath, so it's going to heat me up." But actually, if you are to get into a sauna or a hot shower or hot bath, and then get out, your body is going to engage particular mechanisms for cooling itself off that are going to allow you to drop your temperature more quickly and fall asleep more easily. And this is why many people find that falling asleep after a nice hot shower, bath, or sauna is really, really easy and really terrific. It's sort of a natural state that follows hot baths, saunas, and showers. So how would you do this? Well, we did an entire episode on this topic as well. The use of sauna for sake of growth hormone release. If you want to check that out in all the details, you can look at the episode on growth hormone. You will experience a growth hormone release from sauna, hot bath, and hot shower, provided they're done for sufficient duration and sufficiently high temperature. For all the details of that, please go to that episode. It's all laid out there, it's all timestamped, it's all captioned in English and Spanish, et cetera. But basically what we're talking about is 20 minutes in the sauna, or if you're one of those folks who's really chasing growth hormone release, you could do 20 minutes, then get out of the sauna for 10 minutes, and just cool off at room temperature, and then get back into the sauna, then get out, and then shower, dry off, and head to bed. Shorter bouts of sauna will work also. The longer bouts of sauna, cooling, sauna, cooling have been shown to lead to huge increases in growth hormone. And growth hormone, of course, is involved both in muscle growth, but also growth and metabolism of all tissues, fat metabolism, and repair of various tissues. So it's not just about growth. You hear growth hormone, you think hypertrophy, but the enhancement of metabolism and health and repair in a number of tissues. So that's one way you can leverage heat toward the transition to sleep by the ways in which exposure to heat actually cools off your body. Now let's talk about actually getting to sleep. And let's talk about behavioral protocols first. It is absolutely true that keeping the room very dark is beneficial. Some people, including myself, have thin eyelids and it doesn't take much light to wake up the brain and body. So keeping a room very dark is essential. The other thing is keeping the room cool. You've probably heard this before. Keep the room cool, get under warm blankets, but rarely is it discussed why keeping the room cool is useful. The reason keeping the room cool is useful for getting into and staying asleep is that throughout the night, there are phases of sleep where you are paralyzed, so-called REM sleep, that's a healthy paralysis, presumably so you can't act out your dreams, but there are portions of the night where you can move. And one of the more important movements that you do in the middle of the night is put your hand out or your foot out or you take your face out from under the covers as a means to cool yourself, and you do this while you are asleep. If you are in a cool room, you can put yourself under the blankets to stay warm, and then if you want to cool off, you can simply remove a limb or you can toss the covers off entirely. However, if you are in a room that's too warm, it's very hard to cool off. You would need a bucket of ice water or to get up and turn on the air conditioning or something of that sort or turn on the fan. So it's a simple but non-trivial way in which we can improve our entrance to sleep and staying asleep. So keep the room cool or cold and get under warm blankets. And if you want to understand more about why putting a hand out or a foot out is valuable for cooling, I did an episode on the role of cooling in something called "heat dumping" or bringing he into the body through the palms, the face, and the bottoms of the feet. You've got these portals, these radiators, if you will, that allow us to bring heat into the body and to dump heat. I don't want to go into the details now, but that episode is entitled "Supercharge Your Exercise With Cold," is based on work that was done by Craig Heller's lab at Stanford University. Absolutely incredible data showing that the proper use of palmar cooling, so the palms or the upper half of the face or the bottoms of the feet, can vastly, I mean vastly increase the volume of exercise that one can do and still recover from that exercise and derive benefits from it. But this method of cooling for exercise is grounded in a basic physiological function of our palms, the bottoms of our feet, and our face, which is to dump heat or to allow cool to pass into the body. So that's why in the middle of the night, as long as you're not in REM sleep, if you get too warm, you put your foot out or you put your arms out. You're actually allowing cooling of the body through what are called "AVAs," arteriovenous anastomosis is the technical name, that are in the palms, the upper half of the face, and the bottoms of the feet. And that's a very efficient way to cool off your body, so you do that subconsciously. Now, there are things that one can take to enhance the transition to sleep. I am not a fan of melatonin for enhancing the transition to sleep for a couple of reasons. One, dosages of melatonin are far too high in most supplements. Melatonin can have some negative effects on the sex steroid hormones testosterone and estrogen. That's a serious concern. Third, melatonin's role during puberty or around puberty is to suppress the onset of puberty. So that's concerning. I don't know that people should be taking this hormone that has all these other effects. The other reason is that melatonin will aid the transition to sleep, but it won't keep you asleep. And many people that take melatonin find that they fall asleep more quickly, but then they wake up unable to fall back asleep. Three compounds that can be very beneficial for aiding the transition to sleep and for which there are wide safety margins, although please do check with your physician before taking anything, are specific forms of magnesium, something called "apigenin" and "theanine." Magnesium comes in many forms. Magnesium malate has been shown to improve recovery from sore muscles, for instance. Magnesium citrate is an excellent laxative, for instance, Magnesium threonate, that's T-H-R-E-O-N-A-T-E, threonate, and magnesium bisglycinate have transporters that allow them to cross the blood-brain barrier more readily than other forms of magnesium. And there within the brain, they promote the release of a neurotransmitter called GABA, which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter which shuts off the forebrain to some extent. It doesn't shut it off completely, but it essentially shuts down thinking, rumination, planning, and in what we call "executive function." So for many people, taking 300 to 400 milligrams of magnesium bisglycinate or magnesium threonate, and there I'm referring to the elemental magnesium for you aficionados, many people find that doing that 30 to 60 minutes before sleep can aid them in falling asleep, can really help them fall asleep faster and stay asleep. Some people, however, achieve some gastrointestinal discomfort from magnesium and therefore should avoid it. Magnesium threonate and magnesium bisglycinate for many people work, however, and when coupled with apigenin and theanine, provide a sort of synergy or a sleep cocktail that seems to be very effective in aiding the transition to sleep. So apigenin is the substance that's found in chamomile. And 50 milligrams of apigenin taken 30 minutes before sleep can act as another way to shut off the forebrain and reduce rumination, reduce anxiety, and allow people to fall and stay asleep. I did a podcast with Dr. Darya Rose. She's got an excellent podcast that I highly recommend you check out. Covers a number of different health, scientific, and other subjects. And she's a PhD in neuroscience, terrific scientist, et cetera. She's a big fan of apigenin, as am I. And then the third compound is theanine, T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E. Theanine is a compound that can also increase GABA, but also increases activation of something called "chloride channels." Chloride channels are another way in which neurons turn themselves off or turn each other off. Not turn each other off in the way that we typically hear like that turns me off, but turn them off and then shut them down. Lower their levels of activity. So magnesium threonate or bisglycinate, apigenin, and theanine in combination can be very effective for aiding the transition to sleep. And I realized that not everyone wants to take supplements. I certainly am not pushing any of these. I would hope that everybody be able to fall asleep easily and stay asleep for the duration of time that they want without any supplemental help, but I do think it's important to point out some things that lie somewhere between doing nothing and taking prescription drugs, because many of the prescription drugs associated with sleep, and you all know what those are, carry other side effects. They can create bad dreams, often very disturbing dreams. They can be addictive or at least habit forming. They can create grogginess in the morning. Some are safer than others. There's a variety of them out there. But for those that want to explore supplements and how they can impact sleep, this combination of about 300, 400 milligrams of magnesium threonate or bisglycinate, 50 milligrams of apigenin, and 100 to 200 milligrams of theanine alone or in combination have been beneficial to many people. And there are excellent studies to support those statements. Again, I suggest you go to examine.com and look up the Human Effect Matrix for each of those compounds, and you can explore them. One of the more interesting aspects to magnesium threonate and bisglycinate is that it seems to have some neuroprotective effects as well. There aren't many studies on it, but the few studies that are there point to the fact that magnesium threonate and magnesium bisglycinate can also support neuron health and neuron longevity, which is just an added bonus, in my opinion. Now, what if you wake up in the middle of the night? This is a very common occurrence. And there are two general themes around waking up in the middle of the night that one can use tools to counteract. The first theme is if you're somebody who is tired in the evenings and you're kind of pushing yourself to stay awake, so you're going to the party or you're pushing yourself to study or work when in fact you'd like to get into bed at 8:30 or 9:00, and then you're falling asleep around 10:30, 11:00, and waking up at 2:30 or 3:00 in the morning and you can't fall back asleep, chances are that your melatonin pulse was initiated early in the night. So that melatonin pulse started probably around 8:30 or 9:00, but you're staying up, you're battling that melatonin. And then sometime around 2:30 or 3:00 in the morning, that melatonin is no longer present at sufficiently high levels in your bloodstream and you're waking up, you're getting your morning cortisol pulse shifted into those wee hours of the morning. You may not like this advice, but one of the things that you can do to offset that is to simply go to bed earlier. By going to bed earlier, you're going to get the longer duration of sleep. But I realized that there are social reasons and work-related reasons why going to bed at 8:30 or 9:00 is not necessarily beneficial to your life. So in that case, you might be one of the rare individuals for whom getting a little bit more bright light in the evening could be a good thing. So this would be around the hours of 7:00 or 8:00 PM. And in that way, causing that pulse in melatonin to be delayed because, again, light inhibits melatonin. Now, the other thing is many people wake up in the middle of the night because of anxiety or because they have to use the restroom. It's perfectly fine to flip on the lights, but keep the lights dim. But if you flip on those lights, try and flip them off as soon as possible and try and get back into bed. And if you have trouble falling asleep again and you absolutely need to sleep, that's where these NSDR, these non-sleep deep rest protocols, can really be beneficial, even though the NS, the non-sleep part, might make you think that they will prevent you from falling asleep. Rather than trying to fight your mind, trying to fight anxiety, which is always a terrible thing to do, I always say it's very hard to control the mind with the mind, look to the body. And that's what NSDR scripts do. Things like yoga nidra, even the sleep hypnosis done in the middle of the night if you wake up and want to fall back asleep oftentimes will help you fall back asleep immediately. And if they don't, they will at least put your brain and body into a state of deep relaxation that more closely mimics the sleep state that you ought to be in than the awake, ruminating, stressing about the fact that you're not sleeping state. So if you wake up in the middle of the night, really try and get back to sleep. And if you can't do that by doing, for instance, long exhale breathing, which can work, use some other tool of the body to shift the mind. And the tools that I'm recommending are of the non-sleep deep rest variety. So now we've essentially traveled around the clock, so to speak, from the time where one wakes up until the time they start working, until the time they exercise, eat lunch, do an NSDR, head to sleep, get to sleep, maybe wake up, get back to sleep, et cetera. I want to emphasize that, although people's schedules vary, most people are doing more than one or two work bouts per day. And indeed, I'm doing more than one or two work bouts per day. I really emphasize that morning, 90-minute work block because I think most people would agree that there's a portion of each day in which we need to do the hardest thing or the most important thing or the thing that demands the most of our cognitive self. I position that early in the day and I position everything around that in order to ensure that it happens and that it happens with the highest degree of efficiency, and yes, I make sure that it happens every day. And that brings about two other important points. First of all, we do have this thing called weekends, and I tend to take one day off per week, not both, much to the dismay of people in my life and Costello. But nonetheless, there is something called weekend drift, which is that we can be very regimented on a Monday or a Tuesday, and then even if we're good about maintaining a schedule Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, et cetera, most of us, I would hope, would alter their schedule somewhat on the weekends in order to recover and get some additional rest. And I want to emphasize I absolutely do that. I take one day per week where I go full Costello, where I essentially do nothing in a structured way. At least if I have my way, I'm not making any plans, I'm completely free to explore what I want to do and when I want to do it. That's not the way life works out. Oftentimes there are social engagements and other things that get in the way or that I enjoy and that breaks up the day, but I do take rest. I don't think that one has to follow the same schedule every single day; however, I do think there are a few things that people should do every single day, if possible, and those are get morning sunlight, because if you don't your circadian rhythms and your health, et cetera, and your mood are going to start to drift, and to try and get sleep on a regular basis. And, of course, some of the greatest of things in life happen after 10:00 PM and some of those even involve sleepless nights of various kinds. I certainly don't want to discourage people from having a social life or from having a robust party life, if that's your thing, or for enjoying life because that's certainly one of the main things that we should all be pursuing, is to enjoy life. The only point I want to make about sleep is that if you happen to stay up late, it's still best to get up at your regular wake-up time. It's a very simple solution to a problem that a lot of people have, which is they stay up till 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning, and then they tend to sleep late, and then it tends to disrupt their rhythm. Try on most days and most nights to wake up at more or less the same time and try to go to sleep at more or less the same time. In fact, I was talking to Matt Walker about this recently, and he was also surprised to see these new data and I was surprised to see these new data that emphasize that if you get a poor night's sleep or if you're up late the previous night for good reasons, many people feel like they just want to go to bed early the next night, but it turns out that's not the best thing to do for your immediate and long-term health. Try and stay up to the point where you would normally stay up, and then get to sleep. If you go to bed a couple hours earlier, it's probably not going to kill you, but try to not go to bed, for instance, at 6:00 PM, because you were up the entire night before. That can really be disruptive. The other thing I want to emphasize is that even though that morning, 90-minute work block is so vital, of course, there's a second work block. And in fact, I described one in the afternoon after the NSDR. For me, that's Reveri hypnosis. There's a 90-minute work block in which I drop in again in a no internet connection, no phone kind of way to complete some work that's important to me. So combined, that's just three hours of focused work, which may not seem like a lot, but if you were to dissect your day and kind of look at the arc and structure of your day, I'd be willing to bet that if we added up the total period of time in which you were in what Cal Newport would call deep work, really focused, dedicated work, that it would probably amount to about three or four hours. If you can squeeze in another 90-minute work block or if you can get four 90-minute work blocks, well, then more power to you, but I think most people find that one or two of these really deep focus, 90-minute work blocks are about what one's schedule and even mind can handle. And, of course, throughout the day, there are other things happening. Outside of those 90-minute work blocks, I'm checking my text messages, I'm checking my email, I'm responding to various demands. I'm working and tending to life. So while I've carved some boundaries or delineated some boundaries around those work blocks, and I'm certain that if you do too, you will benefit from them, they are certainly not the only periods of time each day in which I or I believe other people should be trying to learn or trying to focus. And I want to emphasize that even though my job is to discover knowledge and distribute knowledge because I'm a scientist, I realized that 90-minute work blocks of the sort that I'm describing may not apply specifically to the kinds of work you do. If you're an artist or a sculptor or you build furniture, whatever it is that you happen to, you teach children or they teach you, whatever it happens to be, of course, please adapt and modify what I've described today in ways that best serve you and your schedule. What I've tried to do is provide you a picture of the 24- hour schedule that I follow and why I do certain things at particular times and why I do those particular things. And I've really tried to emphasize the scientific rationale behind those things, the peer-reviewed data. In some cases, I pointed out the specific papers. In other cases, I've referred to large bodies of work that support these practices. When I say "large bodies of work," I'm a big fan of looking to the scientific literature and asking, "Where is the center of mass for a particular topic?" For instance, where is there 50 or 100 or 1,000 papers that, for instance, support morning light viewing in order to optimize melatonin secretion in the day, cortisol secretion early in the day, mood, metabolism, et cetera? If one were to put into PubMed "light, metabolism, and mood," you would literally get tens of thousands, maybe even hundreds of thousands of studies. So when I say the center of mass, what I've really tried to do is examine the literature and figure out where there's sort of a directive protocol that emerges from all these various studies that used, you know, in some cases, animals, in many cases, humans and explored different, what we call, "dependent variables." Some studies were looking at effects on blood sugar, other on mood. So I hope that makes clear why the rationale behind what I provided today. If you're learning from this podcast and enjoying it, please support us by subscribing to the YouTube channel. There at YouTube you can also provide comments and feedback. We use that feedback to inform future episodes. In addition, please subscribe on Apple and Spotify. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review, as well as to leave us written comments. If you're not already following us on Instagram, please do. There, I provide short tutorials on neuroscience and neuroscience-based tools on a frequent basis. Please also feel free to join our Neural Network. The Neural Network is a free resource newsletter that I provide each month that has protocols and resources all zero cost. You can find it at hubermanlab.com. During today's episode, I described various supplements that one might want to consider taking. We've partnered with Thorne, that's T-H-O-R-N-E.com, because Thorne supplements are known to be of the very highest stringency and quality. When I say stringency and quality, that means the quality of the individual ingredients, as well as the amounts of those ingredients match precisely with what's listed on the packaging. If you'd like to see the supplements that I personally take, you can go to thorne.com/U/Huberman. And there, you'll see all of the supplements that I take, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements or any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Another great way to support us is by checking out our sponsors. We only work with sponsors whose products we absolutely love. And if you want to support us, please check out their websites. The links to those websites are in the episode caption. And last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 320 ---
Video ID: JVRyzYB9JSY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JVRyzYB9JSY
Title: The Science of Hearing, Balance & Accelerated Learning
Published: 2021-07-05 12:00:21 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe how our ears and nervous system decode sound waves and gravity to allow us to hear and make sense of sounds. I also describe protocols for rapid learning of sound and other types of information. I discuss sound localization, doppler effects (sound motion), pitch perception and how we isolate sounds in noisy environments. I also review the scientific findings on binaural beats and white noise and how they can improve learning. Other topics and protocols include tinnitus, sea sickness, ear movement, ear growth and the science-supported ways we can all accelerate learning using "gap effects".

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Headspace - https://www.headspace.com/specialoffer

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Review on spacing effects and learning: https://bit.ly/3qM6bto
Micro-rest and accelerated learning: https://bit.ly/3hitXKM
Ear movement: https://bit.ly/2TrS9Bf
Ears making sounds, hormones: https://bit.ly/3yneKgV
Binaural beats: review and references: https://bit.ly/36fggFO

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Overview of Topics
00:02:20 Protocol: New Data for Rapid Learning 
00:09:10 Introduction: Hearing & Balance 
00:13:53 How We Perceive Sounds
00:21:56 Your Hearing Brain (Areas)  
00:23:48 Localizing Sounds
00:28:00 Ear Movement: What It Means 
00:33:00 Your Ears (Likely) Make Sounds: Role of Hormones, Sexual Orientation 
00:35:30 Binaural Beats: Do They Work? 
00:43:54 White Noise Can Enhance Learning & Dopamine
00:51:00 Headphones
00:55:51 White Noise During Development: Possibly Harmful
01:03:25 Remembering Information, The Cocktail Party Effect
01:12:55 How to Learn Information You Hear
01:18:10 Doppler 
01:22:43 Tinnitus: What Has Been Found To Help?
01:30:40 Aging: How Big Are Your Ears? 
01:35:00 Balance: Semi-Circular Canals 
01:40:35 A Vestibular Experiment
01:43:15 Improve Your Sense of Balance
01:48:55 Accelerating Balance
01:51:55 Self-Generated Forward Motion
01:56:25 Dizzy versus Light-Headed
01:58:38 Motion Sickness Solution
02:01:23 Synthesis

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, we're going to talk all about hearing and balance and how you can use your ability to hear specific things and your balance system in order to learn anything faster. The auditory system, meaning the hearing system, and your balance system, which is called the vestibular system, interact with all the other systems of the brain and body and, used properly, can allow you to learn information more quickly, remember that information longer and with more ease and you can also improve the way you can hear. You can improve your balance. We're going to talk about tools for all of that. This is one area of science, where we understand a lot about the cells and the mechanisms in the ear and in the brain and so forth. So we're going to talk about that a little bit, and then we're going to get directly into protocols, meaning tools. We're also going to talk about ways in which the auditory and balance system suffer. We're going to talk about tinnitus, which is this ringing of the ears that, unfortunately, for people that suffer from it, they really suffer. It's very intrusive for them. We're going to talk about some treatments that can work in some circumstances and some of the more recent emerging treatments that I think many people aren't aware of. We're also going to talk about this, what seems like kind of a weird fact, which is that 70% of people, all people, make what are called otoacoustic emissions, their ears actually make noises. Chances are your ears are making noises right now, but you can't perceive them. And yet those can have an influence on other people and animals in your environment. It's a fascinating aspect of your biology. You're going to learn a lot about how your biology and brain and ears and the so-called inner ear that's associated with balance, you're going to learn a lot about how all those work, you're going to learn a lot of neuroscience. I'll even tell you what type of music to listen to. And if you listen to me, you can leverage that in order to learn faster. Before we begin talking about the science of hearing and balance and tools that leverage hearing and balance for learning faster, I want to provide some information about another way to learn much faster. There's a paper that was published recently. This is a paper that was published in Cell Reports, an excellent journal. It's a peer-reviewed paper from a really excellent group, looking at skill-learning. Now, previously, I've talked about how, in the attempt to learn skills, the vital thing to do is to get lots of repetitions. You've heard of the 10,000 hours thing, you've heard of lots of different strategies for learning faster, 80/20 rule and all that; the bottom line is you need to generate many, many repetitions of something that you're trying to learn. And the errors that you generate are also very important for learning. It also turns out that taking rest within the learning episode is very important. I want to be really clear what I'm referring to here. In earlier episodes, I've discussed how when you're trying to learn something it's beneficial, it's been shown in scientific studies, that if you take a 20-minute shallow nap or you simply do nothing after a period of learning, that it enhances the rates of learning and the depth of learning, your ability to learn and remember that information. What I'm about to describe are new data that say that you actually should be injecting rest within the learning episode. Now I'm not talking about going to sleep while learning. This is the way that the study was done: the study involved, having people learn sequences of numbers or keys on a piano. So let's use the keys on a piano example. I'm not a musician, but I think I'll get this correct. They asked people to practice a sequence of keys, G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G; G-D-F-E-G. And they would practice that either continually for a given amount of time, or they would just do that for 10 seconds, they would play G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G for 10 seconds. And then they would take a 10-second pause or rest. They would just space take a space or a period of time where they do nothing for 10 seconds then they would go back to G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G. So the two conditions, essentially, were to have people practice continually, lots of repetitions, or to inject or insert these periods of 10 seconds idle time where they're not doing anything, they're not looking at their phone, they're not focusing on anything, they're just letting their mind drift wherever it wants to go and they are not touching the keys on the keyboard. What they found was that the rates of learning, the skill acquisition and the retention of the skill was significantly faster when they injected these short periods of rest, these 10-second rest periods. And the rates of learning were, when I say significantly faster, were much, much faster. I'll reveal what that was in just a moment, but you might ask why would this work? Why would it be that injecting these 10-second rest periods would enhance rates of learning? What they called them was micro-offline gains because they're taking their brain offline from the learning task for a moment. Well, turns out the brain isn't going offline at all. You've probably heard of the hippocampus, the area of the brain involved in memory and the neocortex, the area of the brain that's involved in processing sensory information. Well, it turns out that during these brief periods of rest, these 10-second rest periods, the hippocampus and the cortex are active in ways such that you get a 20 times repeat of the G-D-F-E-G. It's a temporal compression, as they say. So basically, the rehearsal continues while you rest, but at 20 times the speed. So if you were normally getting just, let's just say five repetitions of G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G, G-D-F-E-G per 10 seconds. Now you multiply that times 20. In the rest periods, you've practiced it 100 times. Your brain has practiced it. We know this because they were doing brain imaging, functional imaging of these people with brain scanners while they were doing this. This is an absolutely staggering effect and it's one that, believe it or not, has been hypothesized or thought to exist for a very long time. This effect is called the spacing effect. And it was actually first proposed by Ebbington in 1885. And since then, it's been demonstrated for a huge number of different, what they call domains, in the cognitive domain. So for learning languages, in the physical domain, so for learning skills that involve a motor sequence. It's been demonstrated for a huge number of different categories of learning. If you want to learn all about the spacing effect and the categories of learning that it can impact, there's a wonderful review article. I'll provide a link to it. The title of the review article is parallels between spacing effects during behavioral and cellular learning. What that review really does is it ties the behavioral learning and the improvement of skill to the underlying changes in neurons that can explain that learning. I should mention that the paper that I'm referring to, the more recent paper that injects these 10-second little micro-offline gains, rest periods is the work of the laboratory of Leonard Cohen, not the musician, Leonard Cohen. He passed away, he was not a neuroscientist; a wonderful poet and musician, but not a neuroscientist. Again, the paper was published in Cell Reports and we will provide a link to the full paper as well. So the takeaway is if you're trying to learn something, you need to get those reps in, but one way that you can get 20 times, the number of reps in is by injecting these little 10-second periods of doing nothing. Again, during those rest periods, you really don't want to attend to anything else, as much as possible. You could close your eyes if you want, or you can just simply wait and then get right back into generating repetitions. I find these papers that Cell Reports and other journals have been publishing recently to be fascinating because they're really helping us understand what are the best protocols for learning anything. And they really leverage the fact that the brain is willing to generate repetitions for us, provided that we give it the rest that it needs. So inject rest throughout the learning period. And if you can, based on the scientific data, you would also want to take a 20-minute nap or a 20-minute decompress period where you're not doing anything after a period of learning. I think those could both synergize in order to enhance learning even further, although that hasn't been looked at yet. Before we begin talking about hearing and balance, I just want to mention that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I want to thank the sponsors of today's podcast and make it clear that we only work with sponsors whose products we absolutely love, and that we think you will benefit from as well. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses, that, in my opinion are the very highest quality available. The company was founded by two all-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about their eyeglasses and sunglasses were created with performance in mind. These eyeglasses and sunglasses have a number of features that really make them unique. First of all, they're extremely lightweight, the optical clarity of the lenses is spectacular. And for the sunglasses, they have this really great feature, which is as you move in and out of shadows, or across the day, the amount of sunshine might change, you always experience the world as clear and bright, and that can only come from really understanding how the visual system works. The visual system has all these mechanisms for adaptation and habituation. You don't need to know how those things work, but the folks at Roka clearly do because you put these glasses on and you don't even notice that they're on. They also stay on your face even if you get sweaty. They were designed to be used while active, so running and biking, et cetera or indoors. One thing that I really like about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses is that the aesthetic is terrific. Even though they were designed for performance, unlike a lot of sunglasses out there that were designed for performance that look kind of ridiculous, kind of space-age, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses, you could wear anywhere. The aesthetic is really clean and they have a huge number of different styles to select from. If you'd like to try Roca eyeglasses, you can go to Roka, that's R-O-K-A, .com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's Roka, R-O-K-A, .com and enter the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. And now with the advent of DNA tests, we can get further insight and information into how our metabolism is working, how our brain is functioning, how our endocrine system, meaning our hormone system is functioning. One of the issues with a lot of companies and programs that involve getting blood and DNA tests, however, is that you get the information back, you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they make all of that very easy. First of all, they can send someone to your home to take the samples, if you like or you can go to a local clinic. You get the information back and, of course, you get all the numbers and levels of hormone factors, metabolic factors, et cetera, but the dashboard at InsideTracker provides directives so that if you want to bring those numbers up or bring them down, or if you want to keep them in the same range, it points to specific regimens related to nutrition, exercise, and other lifestyle factors so you can really move around those numbers to best suit your health goals and health status. If you want to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, and you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that's backed by 25 published studies. And in addition to those, there are hundreds of studies showing that meditation is beneficial for our brain and for our body. One of the challenges, however, is maintaining a meditation practice. I started meditating a long time ago, but I found it very hard to keep that practice going. Then I discovered the Headspace meditation app and what I found was that because they have meditations that are very short, as well as some that are longer and some that are much longer, I could maintain my meditation practice. Sometimes I do a short five-minute meditation, sometimes I do 20-minute meditation, I try and meditate at least 20 minutes per day, but sometimes, some weeks, I only do it five times a week and I'll just meditate for longer. So with Headspace, you have the full palette of meditations to select from. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get a free one-month trial so no cost whatsoever, with their full library of meditations. So that's the best offer that they have. So, again, if you want to try Headspace and you want to get access to all their meditations for free go to headspace.com/specialoffer. Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Okay, well, if you can hear me, that's amazing because what it means is that my voice is causing little tiny changes in the airwaves wherever you happen to be. And that your ears and whatever's contained in those ears and in your brain can take those sound waves and make sense of them. And that is an absolutely fantastic and staggering feat of biology and yet we understand a lot about how that process works. So I'm going to teach it to you now in simple terms over the next few minutes. So what we call ears have a technical name. That technical name is oracles, but more often they're called pinna, the pinnas, P-I-N-N-A, pinna. And the pinnas of your ears, this outer part that is made of cartilage and stuff is arranged such that it can capture sound in the best way for your head size. We're going to talk about ear size also, 'cause it turns out that your ears change size across the lifespan and that how big your ears are or rather how fast your ears are changing size is a pretty good indication of how fast you're aging. So we'll get to that in a few minutes, but I want to talk about these things that we call ears and some of the stuff contained within them that allow us to hear. So the shape of these ears that we have is such that it amplifies high-frequency sounds. High frequency sounds, as the name suggests, is the squeakier stuff. So low frequency sound, Costello snoring in the background that's a low frequency sound or high frequency sound, okay? So we have low frequency sounds and high frequency sounds and everything in between. Now those sound waves get captured by our ears. And those sound waves, for those of you that don't maybe fully conceptualize sound waves, are literally just fluctuations or shifts in the way that air is moving toward your ear and through space. In the same way that water can have waves, air can have waves. So it's reverberation of air. Those come in through your ears and you have what's called your eardrum. And on the inside of your eardrum, there's a little bony thing that shaped like a little hammer. So attached to that eardrum, which can move back and forth like a drum, it's a little membrane, you got this hammer attached to it. And that hammer has three parts. For those of you that want to know, those three parts are called malleus, incus and stapes. But basically, you can just think about it as a hammer. So you've got this eardrum and then a hammer. And then that hammer has to hammer on something. And what it does is it hammers on a little coiled piece of tissue that we call the cochlea, sometimes called the cochlea, depending on where somebody lives in the country. So, typically, in the Midwest, on the East Coast, they call them coh-chleah. And on the West Coast, we call them caw-cochlea, same thing. So this snail-shaped structure in your inner ear is where sound gets converted into electrical signals that the brain can understand. But I want to just bring your attention to that little hammer because that little hammer is really, really cool. What it means is that sound waves come in through your ears, that's what's happening right now, that eardrum that you have, it's like the top of a drum. It's like a membrane, or it can move back and forth. It's not super rigid and it moves that little hammer. And then the hammer goes, doom-doom-doom-doom and hits this coil-shaped thing that we're calling the cochlea. Now the cochlea, at one end, is more rigid than the other. So one part can move really easily and the other part doesn't move very easily. And that turns out to be very important for decoding or separating sounds that are low frequency like Costello's snoring and sounds that are of high frequency, like a shriek or a shrill. And that's because within that little coil thing, we call the cochlea, you have all these tiny little what are called hair cells. Now they look like hairs, but they're not at all related to the hairs on your head or elsewhere on your body. They're just shaped like hair, so we call them hair cells. Those hair cells, if they move, send signals into the brain that a particular sound is in our environment. And if those hair cells don't move, it means that particular sound is not in our environment. So just to give you the mental picture of this, sound waves are coming in, because there's stuff out there, making noises like my voice; it's changing the patterns of air around you in very, very subtle ways; that information is getting funneled into your ears because your pinnas are shaped in a particular way. The eardrum then moves this little hammer and the hammer bangs on this little snail-shaped thing. And because that snail-shaped thing, at one end, is very rigid, it doesn't want to move and at the other end, it's very flexible, it can separate out high-frequency and low-frequency sounds. And the fact that this thing in your inner ear that we call the cochlea is coiled, is actually really important to understand because along its length, it varies in how rigid or flexible it is, I already mentioned that before and at the base, it's very rigid and that's where the hair cells, if they move, will make high-frequency sounds, and at the top, what's called the apex, it's very flexible and it's more like a bass drum. So basically what happens is sound waves come into your ears and then at one end of this thing that we call the cochlea, at the top, it's essentially encoding or only responding to sounds that are like, doom-doom-doom-doom. Whereas, at the bottom, it responds to high-frequency sounds like a cymbal, [clanging]. And everywhere in between, we have other frequencies, medium frequencies. Now this should stagger your mind. If it doesn't already, it should. Because what this means is that everything that's happening around us, whether or not it's music or voices or crying or screaming or screaming of delight from small children who are excited, 'cause they're playing or 'cause they get cake; all of that is being broken down into its component parts and then your brain is making sense of what it means. These things that I've been talking about, like the pinna of your ears and this little hammer and the cochlea, that's all purely mechanical. It has no mind of its own. It's just breaking things down into high frequencies, medium frequencies and low frequencies. And if you don't understand sound frequency, it's really simple to understand, just imagine ripples on a pond. And if those ripples are very close together, that's high frequency; they occur at high frequency. If those ripples are further apart, it's low frequency. And obviously, medium frequency is in between. So just like you can have waves in water, you can have waves in air. So that's really how it works. Now we are all familiar with light and how, if you take a prism and put it in front of light, it will split that light into its different wavelengths, its different colors, red, green, blue, et cetera. So like the Pink Floyd "Dark Side of the Moon" album, I think, has a prism and it's converting white light into all the colors, all the wavelengths that are contained in white light. Your cochlea, essentially, acts as a prism. It takes all the sound in your environment and it splits up those sounds into different frequencies. So you can think of the cochlea of your ear, sort of like a prism and then the brain takes that information and puts it back together and makes sense of it. So those hair cells in each of your two cochlea, because you have two ears, you also have two cochlea, send little wires, what we call axons that convey their patterns of activity into the brain. And there are a number of different stations within the brain that information arrives at before it gets up to the parts of your brain, where you are consciously aware. And because some of you have asked for more names and nomenclature, I'll give that to you. If you don't want a lot of detailed names, you can just ignore what I'm about to say. But, basically, the cochlea send information to what's called the spiral ganglion. A ganglion, by the way, if you're going to learn any neuroscience, just know that anytime you hear ganglion, a ganglion is just a clump, so it means a bunch of neurons. So a clump of cells. So the spiral ganglion is a bunch of neurons that the information then goes off to what are called the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem. Brainstem is down near your neck, then up to a structure that has a really cool name called the superior olive, because you have one on each side of your brain. And if I were to bring you to my lab and show you the superior olives in your brain or anyone else's brain, they look like little olives, even that little divot in them that to me, it looks like a pimiento, but they just call them the superior olive. And then the neurons in the superior olive, then they send information up to what's called the inferior colliculus, only called inferior because it sits below a structure called the superior colliculus. And then the information goes up to what's called the medial geniculate nucleus. And then up to your neocortex where you make sense of it all. Now you don't have to remember all that, but you should know that there are a lot of stations in which auditory information is processed before it gets up to our conscious detection. And there is a good reason for that, which is that more important than knowing what you're hearing, you need to know where it's coming from. It's vital to our survival, that if something, for instance, is falling toward us, that we know if it's coming to our right side, if it's going to hit us from behind, we have to know, for instance, if a car is coming at us from our left or from our right. And our visual system can help with that. But our auditory and our visual system collaborate to help us find and locate the position of things in space. That should come as no surprise. If you hear somebody talking off to your right, you tend to turn to your right, not to your left. If you see somebody's mouth moving in front of you, you tend to assume that the sound is going to come from right in front of you. Disruptions in this auditory hearing and visual matching are actually the basis of what's called the ventriloquism effect, which we'll talk about in a few minutes in more depth. But the ventriloquism effect can basically be described in simple terms as when you essentially think that a sound is coming from a location that it's not actually coming from. We'll talk about that in a moment but what I'd like you to realize is that one of these stations, deep in your brainstem is responsible for helping you identify where sounds are coming from through a process that's called interaural time differences. And that sounds fancy, but really, the way you know where things are coming from, what direction a car or a boss or a person is coming from is because the sound lands in one ear before the other. And you have stations in your brain, meaning you have neurons in your brain that calculate the difference in time of arrival for those sound waves in your right versus your left ear. And if they arrive at the same time, you assume that thing is making noise right in front of you. If it's off to your right, you assume it's over on your right. And if the sound arrives first to your left ear, you assume, quite correctly, that the thing is coming toward your left ear. So it's a very simple and mechanical system at the level of sound localization. But what about up and down? If you think about it, a sound coming from above is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. A sound from below is going to land on your right ear and your left ear at the same time. So the way that we know where things are in terms of what's called elevation, where they are in the up and down plane is by the frequencies. The shape of your ears actually modifies the sound depending on whether or not it's coming straight at you, from the floor or from high above. And so already at the level of your ears, you are taking information about the outside world and determining where that information is coming from. Now, this all happens very, very fast and it's subconscious but now you know why if people really want to hear something, they make a cup around their ear. They essentially make their ear into more of a fennec fox type ear. If you've ever seen those cute little fennec fox things, they have these big spiky ears, they look like a French bulldog, although the fox version version of the French bulldog. This big, tall ears, and they have excellent sound localization. And so when people lean in with their ear, with their hand like this, if you're listening to this, I'm just cupping my hand at my ear, I'm giving myself a bigger pinna. And if I do it on the left side, I can do this side. And if I really want to hear something, I do it on both sides. So this isn't just gesturing, this actually serves a mechanical role. And actually, if you want to hear where things are coming from with a much greater degree of accuracy, this can actually help because you're capturing sound waves and funneling them better. It's really remarkable, this whole system. So you've got these two ears and because of the differences in the timing of when things arrive in those two ears, as well as these differences in the frequencies that certain things sound, or I should say the differences in the frequencies that arrive at your ears, depending on whether or not the thing is above you or right in front of you or below you, you're able to make out where things are in space pretty well. So now you're probably starting to realize that these two things on the side of our head that we call ears are there for a lot more than hanging earrings on or for other aesthetic purposes or for putting sunglasses on top of. They are very powerful devices for allowing us to capture sound waves from our environment. Now I have a question for you, which is, can you move your ears? It turns out that unlike other animals, humans are not terrifically good at moving their ears. Other animals can move their ears even independently. So Costello is pretty good at raising his ears, the two of them together, He can't really move his ear separately. Some dogs can do that really well. In fact, sighthounds and some scenthounds do that exquisitely well. Some animals like deer and other animals that really have very acute hearing will put one ear down to a very particular angle and will tilt the other one and they will actually capture information about two distant sound-making organisms, those could be hunters coming after them or other animals coming after them. They are very good at doing this. We're not so good at it. But about 60% of people, it's thought, can move their ears consciously without having to touch their ear. So can you do that? Maybe you should try it. Ask someone to look at you and see whether or not you can do it. The typical distances that people can move it is usually no more than two or three millimeters. It's subtle but can you flap your pinna with just using mental control? If you can, or if you can't, try looking all the way to your right or all the way to your left. Obviously, if you're driving a car or doing something or exercising, don't put yourself in danger right now. But if you move your eyes all the way to your left, which I'm doing now or all the way to my right, you might feel a little bit of a contraction of the muscles that control ear movement. Now I want to ask you this: can you raise one eyebrow? I'm not very good at it, I can do a little bit, but it's mostly by like cramping down my face on one side. And I certainly can't raise my right eyebrow. I can only do my left eyebrow. Trying to talk while I'm doing this, that's why it looks strange. People who can raise one eyebrow very easily, almost always, can move their ears without having to touch them. It's controlled by the same motor pathway. And there does seem to be a small, but statistically significant sex difference in the ability to move one's ears. Typically, men can do this more than women can, although plenty of women can move their ears as well. Now, if you think that is all a little strange or off topic, it's not because what we're really talking about here is a system of the brain, but also of the body of the musculature for localizing things in space. And so you might find it interesting to note that one of the things that we share very closely with other primates, with non-human primates, like macaque monkeys and chimpanzees, if you look at their ears, their ears are remarkably similar to our ears, or rather our ears are remarkably similar to their ears. The eyes of certain monkeys like macaque monkeys are remarkably similar to human eyes. This is one of the reasons why, if you look at a baby macaque monkey, it has this unbelievably human element to it. But the ears of these primates is very similar to our ears; our ears, similar to their ears. If you're interested in ear movements and what they could mean and some of the things that ear movements correlate with in other aspects of our biology, there's a nice paper, actually, a scientific paper. The author's last name is Code, C-O-D-E, it was published in 1995. I'll give a reference to that. It's a review article that discusses some of the sex differences in ear movement control, as well as the relationship between ear movements and eye movements. And it's a pretty accessible paper. It's one that I think any of you who are interested in this topic could parse fairly easily. And there's some very interesting underlying biology and some theories as to why humans would have this so-called vestigial or ancient carry-over of a system for moving our ears. Now, if ear movement seems strange, next, I want to talk about a different feature of your hearing and ears that's even stranger, but that has some really interesting implications for your biology. And I'm guessing that you've not heard of this. What am I about to describe are called otoacoustic emissions. And otoacoustic emissions, as the name suggests, are sounds that your ears make. Believe it or not, 70% of people make noises with their ears, but they don't actually detect them. Like I said, you've never heard of this. Okay, that's not what I mean. But what I do mean is that 70% of people's ears are making noise that's cast out of the ear. And these otoacoustic emissions, actually, can be detected by microphones. Sometimes they can be detected by other people in the room if they have very good hearing. Now, it turns out that women or, I should be technical here, females who report themselves as heterosexual, have a higher frequency, not frequency of sound, but a higher frequency of otoacoustic emissions than do men who report themselves as heterosexual. Women who report themselves as homosexual or bisexual, make fewer otoacoustic emissions than heterosexual women. These are data that come from Dennis McFadden's lab at the University of Texas, Austin. He actually discovered these, what are called sexual dimorphisms and differences based on sexual orientation without looking for them. He was studying hearing. He's a auditory scientist and people were coming into his laboratory and they were detecting these otoacoustic emissions. And they started to notice the group differences in otoacoustic emissions. So they started asking people about their sex and about their sexual orientation. And these differences fell out of the data, as we say. And it's interesting because otoacoustic emissions are not something that we associate with sex or sexual dimorphism. But what these data really underscore is, first of all, a lot of us are making noises with our ears, some of us more than others. And that exposure to certain combinations of hormones during development are very likely shaping the way that our hearing apparati, meaning the cochlea and the pinna and all sorts of things, how those develop and how those functions throughout the lifespan. We did do an episode on hormones and sexual development, which gets much deeper into the other effects that hormones have on the developing brain and body. If you want to check out that episode, we will put a link to it in the captions. So now I want to shift to talking about ways to leverage your hearing system, your auditory system so that you can learn anything, not just auditory information, but anything faster. I get a lot of questions about so-called binaural beats. Binaural beats, as their name suggests, involve playing one frequency of sound to one ear and a different frequency of sound to the other ear. So it might be doomed, doon, doon, doon to your right ear, and it might be to ding-ding-ding-ding-ding-ding to the left ear. And the idea is that the brain will take those two frequencies of sound and because the pathways that bring information from the ears into the brain, eventually crossover, they actually share that information with both sides of the brain, that the brain will average that information and come up with this sort of intermediate frequency. And the rationale is that those intermediate frequencies place the brain into a state that is better for learning. And when I say better for learning, I want to be precise about what I mean. That could mean more focus for encoding or bringing the information in. As you may have heard me say before, we have to be alert and focused in order to learn. There is no passive learning unless we're little tiny infants. So can binaural beats make us more focused? Can binaural beats allow us to relax more if we're anxious? I know some people, they go to the dentist and the dentist offers binaural beats as they drill into your teeth and give root canals and things of that sort, probably causing some anxiety just describing those things right now. But those are available in many dental practices. Binaural beats have been thought to increase creativity, or at least they have been proposed to increase creativity. So what does the scientific data say about binaural beats? There are a number of different apps out there that offer binaural beats. There are a number of different programs. I think you can also even just find these on YouTube and on the internet. But typically, it's an app and you'll program in a particular outcome that you want: more focused, more creative, fall asleep, less anxious, et cetera. So what does the scientific data say? So believe it or not, the science on binaural beats is actually quite extensive and very precise. So sound waves are measured, typically, in hertz or kilohertz. I know many of you aren't familiar with thinking about things in hertz or kilohertz. But again, just remember those waves on a pond, those ripples on a pond. If they're close together, then they are of high-frequency. And if they're far apart, than they are of low frequency. So when you hear more hertz, what you're essentially hearing is higher frequency. And so if it's many more kilohertz then it's much higher frequency than if it's fewer hertz or kilohertz. And so you may have heard of these things as delta waves or theta waves or alpha waves or beta waves, et cetera. Delta waves would be big, slow waves, so low frequency. And, indeed, there is quality evidence from peer-reviewed studies that are not sponsored by companies that make binaural beat apps that tell us that delta waves like one to four hertz, so very low frequency sounds, think Costello's snoring, can help in the transition to sleep and for staying asleep. And that theta rhythms, which are more like four to eight hertz can bring the brain into a state of subtle sleep or meditation, so deeply relaxed, but not fully asleep. And then you can sort of ascend the staircase of findings here, so to speak. And you'll find evidence that alpha waves, eight to 13 hertz can increase alertness to a moderate level. That's a great state for the brain to be in for recall of existing information. And that beta waves, 15 to 20 hertz are great for bringing the brain into focus states for sustained thought or for incorporating new information and especially gamma waves, the highest frequency, the most frequent ripples of sound, so to speak, 32 to 100 hertz for learning and problem-solving. Now, all of this matches, or I should say, maps onto what I've said before about learning really nicely, which is that you need to be in a highly alert state in order to bring new information in, in order to access a state of mind in which you can tell your brain or the brain is telling itself, okay, I need to learn this. This is why stress and unfortunate circumstances are so memorable is because our brain gets into a really high alert system. Here, we're talking about the use of binaural beats in order to increase our level of alertness or our level of calmness. Now that's important to underscore because it's not that there's something fundamentally important about the binaural beats. They are yet another way of bringing the brain into states of deep relaxation through low frequency sound or highly alert states for focused learning with more high-frequency sound. So they are effective and I'll review a little bit of the data in detail, they're effective, but it's not that they're uniquely special for learning. It's just that they can help some people bring their brain into the state that allows them to learn better. So there are a lot of studies that allowed us to arrive, or I should say allowed the field to arrive on these parameters of slow, slow, low frequency waves are going to bring you into relaxed states, high frequency waves into more alert states. There's very good evidence for anxiety reduction from the use of binaural beats. And what's interesting is anxiety reduction seems to be most effective when the binaural beats are bringing the brain into delta, so those slow big waves like sleep, theta and alpha states. And I'll link to a couple of these studies although I will probably link more to the list that really segregates them out one by one so you can see them all next to one another. There's good evidence that binaural beats can be used to treat pain, chronic pain. There's three studies in peer-reviewed journals which I took a look at, and they seem to be of good quality, not sponsored research, as we say, not paid for by any specific company. Binaural beats have been shown to modestly improve cognition, attention, working memory and even creativity. But the real boost from binaural beats appears to be for anxiety reduction and pain reduction. Some people might find these beneficial for these oral surgeries, right? Believe it or not, there are people who would rather have the entire root canal or cavity drilled without Novocaine. And that's because they sometimes have a syringe phobia or something of that sort or they just don't like being numb from the Novocaine, or maybe there's an underlying medical reason. But I think most people do don't enjoy getting their teeth drilled even if they have Novocaine in there or a root canal. And so it seems that binaural beats can be effective in that environment. And you don't have to go into that sort of extreme environment to benefit from binaural beats. Binaural beats are a either relatively inexpensive thing to access, most of the apps are pretty inexpensive. I don't have a favorite binaural beats app to recommend to you. I confess I did use binaural beats a few years ago. I shifted over to other what I call NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocols in favor of those, but many people like binaural beats and say that they benefit from them, especially while studying or learning. I think part of the reason for that relates to the ability to channel our focus when we have some background noise. And this is something I also get asked about a lot. Is it better to listen to music and have background noise when studying or is it better to have complete silence? Well, there's actually a quite good literature on this as well, but not so much as it relates to binaural beats, but rather whether or not people are listening to music, so-called white noise, brown noise; believe it or not, there's white noise and there's brown noise, there's even pink noise and how that impacts brain states that allow us to learn information better or not. So now I'd like to talk about white noise and I want to be very clear that white noise has been shown to really enhance brain states for learning in certain individuals, in particular, in adults. But white noise actually can have a detrimental effect on auditory learning and maybe even the development of the auditory system in very young children in particular in infants. So first I'd like to talk about the beneficial effects of white noise on learning. There are some really excellent studies on this. The first one that I'd like to just highlight is one that's entitled: Low Intensity White Noise Improves Performance in Auditory Working Memory Task, an fMRI Study. This is a study that explored whether or not learning could be enhanced by playing white noise in the background. But the strength of the study is that they looked at some of the underlying neural circuitry and the activation of the neural circuitry in these people as they did the learning task. And what it, essentially, illustrates is that white noise, provided that white noise is of low enough intensity, meaning not super loud, not imperceptible, so not so quiet that you can't hear it, but not super loud either, it actually could enhance learning to a significant degree. And this has been shown now for a huge number of different types of learning. There's a terrific article as well in a somewhat obscure journal, at least, obscure to me, which is: The Effects of Noise Exposure on Cognitive Performance and Brain Activity Patterns. That's a study involving 54 subjects. They, basically, were evaluated for mental workload and attention under different levels of noise exposure, background noise and different, essentially, loudness of noise. And the reason I like this study is that they looked at different levels of noise and types of noise, and they varied a number of different things, as opposed to just doing a two-condition, either white noise or no white noise type thing. And what they found, again, is that provided the white noise is not extremely loud, it could really enhance brain function for sake of learning any number of different kinds of information. Now that's all great, but it really doesn't get to the deeper guts of mechanism. And as a neuroscientist, what I really want to see is not just that something has an effect. That's always nice. It's always nice to see in a nice peer-reviewed study without any kind of commercial biases that there's an effect, binaural beats can enhance learning or listening to white noise, not too loud can enhance learning. But you really want to understand mechanism because once you understand mechanism, not only does it start to make sense, but you can also imagine ways in which you could develop better tools and protocols. So I was very relieved to find, or I should say excited to find this study published in the Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, this is a 2014 paper, White Noise Improves Learning by Modulating Activity in Dopaminergic Mid-Brain Regions and Right Superior Temporal Sulcus. Now I don't expect you to know what the right spirit temporal sulcus is. I don't expect you to know what the dopamine midbrain region is, but if you're like me, you probably took highlighted notice of the word dopaminergic. Dopamine is a neuromodulator, meaning it's a chemical that's released in our brain and body, but mostly in our brain that modulates, meaning controls the likelihood that certain brain areas will be active and other brain areas won't be active. And dopamine is associated with motivation. Dopamine is associated with craving. Motivation is associated with all sorts of different things, including movement but what this study so nicely shows is that white noise can really enhance the activity of neurons in what's called the substantia nigra VTA. The substantia nigra VTA is a very rich source of dopamine and that's because it's very chockablock full of dopamine neurons. It's an area of the brain that is, perhaps, the richest source of dopamine neurons. And you actually can see this brain region under the microscope if you take a slice of brain or you look at a brain without even staining it for any proteins or dopamine or anything. It's two very dark regions at the bottom of the brain. And the reason it's called substantia nigra, nigra meaning dark is because the dopamine neurons actually make something that makes those neurons dark. And so you've got these two regions down there, that contain dopamine and can release dopamine and, essentially, activate other brain regions and activate our sense of motivation and activate our sense of desire to continue focusing and learning. But you can't just snap your fingers and make them release dopamine. You actually have to trigger dopamine release from them. Now that trigger can be caused by being very excited about something or the fact that that thing gave you a lot of pleasure in the past, or you're highly motivated by fear or desire. But what's so interesting to me is that it appears that white noise itself can raise what we call the basal, the baseline levels of dopamine that are being released from this area, the substantia nigra. So now we're starting to get a more full picture of how particular sounds in our environment can increase learning. And that's, in part, I believe, through the release of dopamine from substantia nigra. So I'm not trying to shift you away from binaural beats, if that's your thing, but it does appear that turning on white noise at a low level, not too loud. You may say, "Well, how loud?" And I'll tell you in a moment, but not too loud can allow you to learn better because of the ways that it's modulating your brain chemistry. So how loud or how soft should that white noise be while you learn? Well, in these studies, it seemed that white noise that could be heard by the person, so it wasn't imperceptible to them, so it was loud enough that they could hear, but not so loud that they felt it was intrusive or irritating to them. So that's going to differ from person to person because people have different levels of auditory sensitivity. It's going to depend on age, going to depend on a number of different factors. So I can't tell you turn to level two on your volume controller. That's just not going to work. Also, I don't know how far you are from a given speaker in the room or if you've got earphones in your head or you've got speakers in the room or if it's coming out of your computer. I don't know those things. So what you're going to have to do is adjust that white noise to the place where it's not interfering with your ability to focus, but rather it's enhancing your ability to focus. I think a good rule of thumb is going to be to put it probably on the lower third of any kind of volume dial, as opposed to in the upper third, where it would really be blasting. And really blasting any noise, frankly, is not good, but that's especially not good, meaning it's especially bad if you have headphones in. I do want to mention something about headphones before I talk about white noise in the developmental context and why it can be dangerous there. When you put headphones in your ears, it has this incredible effect of making the sounds like they come from inside your head, not from out in the room. And now that might seem like kind of a duh, but that's actually really amazing, right? Your brain assumes that the sounds are coming from inside your head, as opposed from the environment that you're in the moment you put headphones in. So if you're listening to an audiobook or maybe you're listening to this podcast with headphones, that's very different than when you're listening to something out in the room and there are other sounds, other sound waves, especially if you use these noise-cancellation headphones. So if you're going to use white noise to enhance studying or learning of any kind, this also could be for skill-learning, motor skill-learning while you're exercising, my suggestion would be that if you're using headphones, to keep it quite low. This is an effect on the midbrain dopamine neurons that's a background effect of raising the baseline of dopamine release. The way that dopamine neurons fires, they're always firing; yours are firing right now, so are mine, when something exciting happens, they fire a lot. And when something disappointing happens, that firing, the release of dopamine goes down below baseline. What you're talking about here is raising your overall levels of attention and motivation, which translate to better learning by just tickling those neurons a little bit, raising the baseline firing. You're not turning up the white noise to the point where you're feeling amazing. This isn't like turning on your favorite song. This is actually the opposite. This is about getting that baseline up just a bit. So I recommend turning the volume up just a bit so that you can focus entirely on the task that you're trying to do. And, of course, you've turned on white noise so your attention might drift to that for a moment. Is it too loud? Is it too soft? If you can disappear into the work, so to speak, if your attention can disappear into the work, then that's probably sufficiently quiet. And for those of you that say, well, I like really loud music and if I just blast the music, then I forget about the music. I don't suggest blasting music. And this is coming from somebody who really likes loud music. I grew up with kind of a loud fast rules mentality, and if you don't know what loud fast rules means, then I can't help you, but there's a time and a place, perhaps, to listen to music loud but, especially, with headphones, you can trigger, excuse me, hearing loss quite rapidly. And unfortunately, because these hair cells that we talked about earlier, our central nervous system neurons, they do not regenerate, they do not come back. Now along the lines of hearing loss, I should just say that the best way to blow out your hearing for good, to eliminate your hearing is to have very loud sounds super imposed on a loud environment. So loud environments can cause hearing loss over time. So if you work at a construction site, clanging really loud, or if you work the sound board in a club or something, you are headed towards hearing loss unless you protect your hearing with earplugs and headphones. Nowadays, some of the ear plugs are very low profile, meaning you can't see them. So that's kind of nice, so you're not like the, when I was younger, like you didn't want to be the dork to go to the concert with the earplugs, but it turns out those dorks were smarter than everybody else, because they're not the ones who are craning their neck to try and hear trivial things at the age of 30 or so 'cause they blew out their hearing. So if you are working in a loud environment or you expose yourselves to a loud environment, you really want to avoid big inflections in sound above that. So loud environment plus fireworks, loud environment plus gunshot, loud environments plus very high-frequency intense sound, that's what we call the two-hit model, this is also true for concussion, that you can take a stimulus that normally would be below the threshold of injury, you add another stimulus at the same time, that would be below the threshold of injury. And then, suddenly, you killed the neurons. So I don't want to make people paranoid, but you do want to protect your hearing. It's no fun to lose your hearing. If you're going to use headphones and you feel like you want to crank it up all the way, just remember that the more that you can get out of a lower volume, meaning the longer that you can go listening to things at lower volume, the longer you'll be able to hear that music or that thing. So again, I'm not the hearing cop. That's not my job, but as somebody who's lost some of his high-frequency hearing, I can tell you it's not a pleasure. The old argument that it helps you not have to hear or listen to people that you don't want to listen to, that does it doesn't really work. They just send you text messages instead. So what about white noise and hearing loss in development? I know a lot of people with children have these noise machines like sound waves and things like that, that help the kids sleep. And look, I think kids getting good sleep and parents getting good sleep is vital to physical and mental health and family health. So I certainly sympathize with those needs. However, there are data that indicate that white noise during development can be detrimental to the auditory system. I don't want to frighten any parents if you played white noise to your kids, this doesn't mean that their auditory system or their speech patterns are going to be disrupted or that their interpretation of speech is going to be disrupted forever. But there are data published in the journal, Science, and Science being one of the three, APEX Journal, Science, Nature, Cell, the most stringent journals, data published in the journal, Science, some years ago, actually by a scientist who I know quite well, his name is Edward Chang, he's a medical doctor now, he's a neurosurgeon, he's actually the chair of neurosurgery at UCSF and he runs a laboratory where they study auditory learning, neuroplasticity, et cetera, he and his mentor at the time, Mike Merzenich published a paper showing that if young animals and this was in animal models were exposed to white noise, so [shushing] the very type of noise that I'm saying as a older person, and when I say older, I mean, somebody who's in their late teens, early 20s and older could benefit from listening to that at a low level in the background for sake of learning, well, they exposed very young animals to this white noise, it actually disrupted the maps of the auditory world within the brain. And we haven't talked about these maps yet, but I want to take a moment and talk about them and explain this effect and what it might mean for you if you have kids or if you were exposed to a lot of white noise early on. So auditory information goes up into our cortex, into these, essentially, the outside portion of our brain that's responsible for all our higher level cognition and our planning, our decision-making, et cetera, creativity and up there, we have what are called tonotopic maps. What's a tonotopic map? Well, remember the cochlea, how it's coiled and at one end, it responds to high frequencies and the other end, it responds to low frequencies? Like a piano, the keys sound different as you extend down and up the piano keys. And it's organized in a very systematic way. It's not all intermixed high frequencies and low frequencies. It's organized in a very systematic way from one end to the other. Your visual system is in, what's called a retinotopic map. So neighboring points in space off to my right, like my two fingers off to my right are mapped to neighboring points in space in my brain. And that space right in front of me is mapped to a different location in my brain, but it's systematic, it's regular. It's not random. It's not salt and pepper. It goes from high to low or from right to center to left. In the auditory system, we have what are called tonotopic maps, where frequency, high frequency to low frequency and everything in between is organized in a very systematic way. Now our experience of life from the time we're a baby until the time that we die is not systematic. We don't hear low frequencies at one part of the room or at one part of the day and high frequencies is another part of the room and other part of the day, they're all intermixed. But if you remember, the cochlea separates them out. Just like a prism of light separates out the different wavelengths of light, the cochlea separates out the different frequencies. And the developing brain takes those separated out frequencies and learns this relationship between itself, meaning the child and the outside world. White noise, essentially contains no tonotopic information. The frequencies are all intermixed. It's just noise. Whereas when I speak, my voice has, now I'm getting technical, but it has what's called a certain envelope, meaning it has some low frequencies and some slightly higher frequency. Like I might a voice higher, although I'm not very good at that. My voice starts to crack and I can make my voice lower, although not as low as Costello's snore. So it has an envelope, it has a container. White noise has no container. It's like all the colors of the rainbow spread out together, which is actually what you get when you get white light white noise is analogous to white light. So one of the reasons why hearing a lot of white noise during development for long periods of time can be detrimental to the development of the auditory system is that these tonotopic maps don't form normally; at least, they don't in experimental animals. Now, the reason I'm raising this is that many people I know, in particular, friends who have small children, they say, "I want to use a white noise machine while I sleep. But is it okay for my baby to use a white noise machine?" And I consulted with various people, scientists about this. And they said, "Well, the baby is also hearing the parent's voices and is hearing music and it's hearing the dog bark. So it's not the only thing they're hearing." However, every single person that I consulted with said, "But there's neuroplasticity during sleep. That's when the kid is sleeping. And I don't know that you'd want to expose a child to white noise the entire night, because it might degrade that tonotopic map." It might not destroy it. It might not eliminate it, but it could make it a little less clear, like taking the keys on the piano and taping a few of them together, right? So you still got the highs and lows in the appropriate order and everything in between. But when you take the keys together, you don't get the same fidelity. You don't get the same precision of the noise that comes out of that piano. So, again, I don't want to scare anybody, but I would say if you are in a position to make the choice of either using white noise or something similar, pink noise is just a variation. It's got a little bit more of a certain frequency, just like pink light has a little bit more of a certain wavelength than white light. If you are in a position to make choices about things, to put in a young, especially very young child's sleeping environment, white noise might be something to consider avoiding. Again, I'm not telling you what to do, but it's something to perhaps consider avoiding. I don't think most pediatricians are going to be aware of these data, but if you talk to any auditory physiologists or an audiologist or somebody who studies auditory development, I'm fairly certain that they would have opinions about that. Now, whether or not their opinions agree with mine and these folks that I consulted with or not is a separate matter. I don't know, cause I don't know them, but it's something that I felt was important enough to cue you to, especially since I've highlighted, excuse me, the opposite effect is true in adulthood. Once your auditory system has formed, once it's established these tonotopic maps, then the presence of background white noise should not be a problem at all. In fact, it shouldn't be a problem at all because you're also not attending to it. The idea is that it's playing at a low enough volume that you forget it in the background and that it's supporting learning by bringing your brain into a heightened state of alertness and, especially, this heightened state of dopamine, dopaminergic activation of the brain, which will make it easier to learn faster and easier to learn the information. So now I want to talk about auditory learning and actually how you can get better at learning information that you hear, not just information that you see on a page or motor skill learning. There are a lot of reasons to want to do this. A lot of classroom teaching, whether or not it's by Zoom or in-person is auditory in nature. Not everything is necessarily written down for us. It's also good to get better at listening or so I'm told. So there's a phenomenon called the cocktail party effect. Now, even if you've never been to a cocktail party, you've experienced and participated in what's called the cocktail party effect. The cocktail party effect is where you are in an environment that's rich with sound, many sound waves coming from many different sources, many different things, so in a city, in a classroom, in a car that contains people having various conversations, you somehow need to be able to attend to specific components of those sound waves, meaning you need to hear certain people and not others. The reason it's called the cocktail party effect is that you and meaning your brain are exquisitely good at creating a cone of auditory attention, a narrow band of attention with which you can extract the information you care about and wipe away or erase all the rest. Now this takes work, it takes attention. One of the reasons why you might come home from a loud gathering, maybe a stadium, a sports event or a cocktail party, for that matter, and feel just exhausted is because if you were listening to conversations there or trying to listen to those conversations while watching the game and people moving past you and hearing all this noise, clinking of glasses, et cetera, it takes attentional effort and the brain uses up a lot of energy just at rest, but it uses up even more energy when you are paying strong attention to something, literally caloric energy burning up things like glucose, et cetera, even if you're ketogenic, it's burning up energy. So the cocktail party effect has been studied extensively in the field of neuroscience and we now know at a mechanistic level, how one accomplishes this feat of attending to certain sounds, despite the fact that we are being bombarded with all sorts of other sounds. So there are a couple ways that we do this. First of all, much as with our visual system, we can expand or contract our visual field of view, so we can go from panoramic vision, see the entire scene that we are in by dilating our gaze, talked a lot about this on this podcast and elsewhere. We can, for instance, keep our head and eyes stationary or mostly stationary, you don't have to be rigid about it, and you can expand your field of view so you can see the walls and ceiling and floor, can see yourself in the environment, that's panoramic view. It's what you would accomplish without having to try at all if you went to a horizon, for instance, or we can contract our field of view, I can bring my focus to a particular location, what we call a vergence point, directly in front of me. Now I'm pointing at the camera directly in front of me. We can do that, we can expand and contract our visual field of view. Well, we can expand and contract our auditory field of view, so to speak, our auditory window. You can try this next time you are in an environment that's rich with noise, meaning lots of different sounds. You can just tune out all the noise to a background chatter. You try not focus on any one particular sound and you get the background chatter of noise. And you'll find that it's actually very relaxing in comparison to trying to listen to somebody at a cocktail party or shouting back and forth. Now, if you're very, very interested in that person, or getting to know them better or what they're telling you, or some combination of those things, then you'll be very motivated to do it but nonetheless, it requires energy and effort and attention. How do we do this? Well, it's actually quite simple or, at least, it's simple, in essence, although the underlying mechanisms are complex. Here, I have to credit the laboratory of a guy named Mike Wehr, W-E-H-R, up at the University of Oregon who essentially figured out that we are able to accomplish this extraction of particular sounds. We can really hear one person or a small number of people amidst a huge background of chatter because we pay attention to the onset of words, but also to the offset of words. Now, the way to visualize this is if the background noise is just like a bunch of waves of noise, it's literally just sound waves coming every frequency, low frequency, high frequency, glasses clinking together. If you've got a game, people are shouting, people are talking on their phone, there's the crack of the ball, if somebody actually manages to hit the ball, the announcer, et cetera, but whatever we were paying attention to, we set up a cone of auditory attention, a tunnel of auditory attention, where we are listening although we don't realize it, we are listening for the onset and the offset of those words. Now this is powerful for a couple of reasons. First of all, it's a call to arms, so to speak, to disengage your auditory system when you don't need to focus your attention on something particular. So if you are somebody, you're coming home from work, you've had a very long day and you're trying to make out a particular conversation on background noise, you might consider just not having that conversation, just letting your auditory landscape be very broad, almost like panoramic vision. If you're trying to learn how to extract sound information, it could be notes of music, it could be scales of music, it could be words spoken by somebody else, maybe somebody is telling you what you need to say for a particular speech or the information that you need to learn for a particular topic, and they're telling it to you, deliberately paying attention both to the onset and to the offset of those words can be beneficial because it is exactly the way that the auditory system likes to bring in information. So one of the more common phenomenon that I think we all experience is you go to a party or you meet somebody new and you say hi, I would say, "Hi, I'm Andrew." And they'd say, "Hi, I'm Jeff," for instance. "Great to meet you." And then a minute later, I can't remember the guy's name. Now, is it because I don't care what his name is? No, somehow the presence of other auditory information interfered. It's not that my mind was necessarily someplace else. It's that the signal-to-noise as we say wasn't high enough. Somehow the way he said it or the way it landed on my ears, which is really all that matters, when it comes down to learning, is such that it just didn't achieve high enough signal-to-noise. The noise was too high or the signal was too low or some combination of those. So the next time you ask somebody's name, remember listen to the onset of what they say and the offset. So it would be paying attention to the j in Jeff and it would be paying attention to that in f in F, in Jeff, excuse me. And chances are, you'll be able to remember that name. Now, I don't know if people who are super learners of names do this naturally or not. I don't have access to their brains. I don't think they're going to give me access to their brains either. But it's a very interesting way to take the natural biology of auditory attention and learning and apply it to scenarios where you're trying to remember either people's names or specific information. Now, I do acknowledge that trying to learn every word in a sentence by paying attention to its onset and offset could actually be disruptive to the learning process. So this would be more for specific attention, like you're asking directions in a city and somebody says, okay, you say you're lost and they say, okay, you're going to go two blocks down, you're going to turn left. And then you're going to see a landmark on your right. And then you're going to go in the third door on your left. That's a lot of information, at least, for me. So the way you would want to listen to that is you're going to go down the road. See, I already forgot. You're going to go left and you're just going to program and instead of just hearing the word left, you're going to think the L at the front of left and the T. You're going to left, okay. So you're coding in specific words. And what this does is this hijacks these naturally-occurring attention mechanisms that the auditory system likes to use. So a little bit of data that for auditory encoding, this kind of thing can be beneficial. There are a lot of data that attention for auditory coding is beneficial. There are a little bit of data showing that deliberately encoding auditory information this way, meaning trying to learn auditory information this way can be beneficial or can accelerate learning. And some of these features of what I'm describing here, map onto some of the work that of Mike Merzenich and others that have been designed to try and overcome things like stutter and to treat various forms of auditory learning disorders. But more importantly, and perhaps more powerful is the work of Mike Merzenich that was done with his then graduate student, Gregg Recanzone that showed that, using the attentional system, we can actually learn much faster and we can actually activate neuroplasticity in the adult brain, something that's very challenging to do. And that the auditory system is one of the main ways in which we can access neuroplasticity more broadly. So I just want to take a couple of minutes and describe the work of Recanzone and Merzenich, because it's absolutely fantastic and fascinating. What they did is they had subjects try to learn auditory information, except that they told them to pay attention to particular frequencies. So now you know what frequencies are so, essentially, high-pitched sounds or low-pitched sounds. What they found was just passively listening to a bunch of stuff does not allow the brain to change and for that stuff to be remembered at all. That's not a surprise. We've all experienced the phenomenon of having someone talk and we see their mouth moving and we're like, yeah, this is really important, this is really important. We're listening. We're trying to listen. And then they walk away and we think I didn't get any of that. And you wonder whether or not it was them, maybe this is happening to you right now. You wonder whether or not it was you, you wonder whether or not you have trouble with learning or you have attention deficit. It could be any number of different things. But what Recanzone and Merzenich discovered was that if you instruct subjects to listen for particular cues within speech, or within sounds, that not only can you learn those things more quickly, but that you can remap these tonotopic maps in the cortex that I referred to earlier. You actually get changes in the neural architecture, the neural circuitry in the brain, and this can occur not only very rapidly, but they can occur in the adult brain, which prior to their work was not thought to be amenable to change. It was long thought that neuroplasticity could only occur in the developing brain, but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich in the auditory system actually was some of the first that really opened up everybody's eyes and ears to the idea that the brain can change in adulthood. So here's how this sort of process would work and how you might apply it. If you are trying to learn music, or you're trying to learn information that you're going to then recite, you can decide to highlight certain words or certain frequencies of sound or certain scales or certain keys on the piano, and to only focus on those for certain learning bouts. So I'll give an example that's real time for me, meaning it's happening right now. I know generally what I want to say when I arrive here, I even know specifically certain things that I want to make sure get across to you, but I don't think about every single word that I'm going to say and the precise order in which I'm going to say those things. That would be actually very disruptive because it wouldn't match my normal patterns of speech and you'd probably think I was sounding rather robotic if I were to do that. So one way that we can remember information is as we write out, for instance, something that we want to say, we can highlight particular words, we can underline those. If we're listening to somebody and they're telling us information, we can decide just to highlight particular words that they said to us and write those down. Now, of course, we're listening to all the information, but the work of Recanzone and Merzenich and the work of others in addition to his former student or former post-doc, I don't know which, Michael Kilgard who's now got his own lab down in Texas or others have shown that the cuing of attention to particular features of speech, particular components of speech, the way in which it increases our level of attention overall allows us to capture more of the information overall. And so I don't want this to be abstract at all. What this means is when you're listening, you don't have to listen to every word. You're already listening to every word. All the information is coming in through your ears. What you're trying to extract is particular things or themes within the content. So maybe you decide if you're listening to me that you're only going to listen to the word tools, or you're only going to listen to when my voice goes above background, you get to decide what you decide to listen to or not. And what you decide to focus on isn't necessarily as important as the fact that you're focusing. So I hope that's clear. The auditory system does this all the time with the cocktail party effect. What I'm talking about is exporting certain elements of the mechanisms of the cocktail party effect, paying attention to the onset and offset of words or particular notes within music or particular scales, or you can make it even broader and particular motifs of music or particular sentences of words or particular phrases. And in doing that, you extract more of the information overall, even though you're not paying attention to all the information at once. Now, I'd like to talk about a phenomenon that you've all experienced before, which is called Doppler. So the Doppler effect is the way that we experience sound when the thing that's making that sound is moving. The simplest way to explain this is to translate the sound into the visual world once again. So if you've ever seen a duck or a goose sitting in a pond or a lake and it's bobbing up and down, what you'll notice is that the ripples of water that extend out from that duck or goose are fairly regularly spaced in all directions. And that's because that duck or goose is stationary. It's moving up and down, but it's not moving forward or backward or to the side. Now, if that duck or goose were to swim forward by paddling its little webbed feet under the surface, you would immediately notice that the ripples of water that are close to and in front of that duck or goose would be closer together than the ones that trailed it, that were behind. And that is essentially what happens with sound as well. With the Doppler effect, we experience sounds that are closer to us at higher frequency, the ripples are closer together, and sounds that are further away at lower frequency, especially when they're moving past us. So if you've ever, for instance, heard a siren in the distance, [humming] that's essentially my rendition of a siren, I don't know what ambulance or police or what, passing you on a street, that is the Doppler effect. The Doppler effect is one of the main ways that we make out the direction that things are arriving from and their speeds and trajectories. And we get very good, from a very young age, at discerning what direction things are arriving from and the direction that they are going to pass us in. And the Doppler effect has probably saved your life many, many times. In this way, you just don't realize it because you'll step off the curb or you're driving your car and you pull to the side so that the ambulance or firetruck can go by because you heard that siren off in the distance, and then you pull away from the curb and you get back on the road in part, because you don't see it any longer, but also you don't hear any other sirens in the distance. Now, some animals such as bats are exquisitely good at navigating their environments according to sound. Now, we've all heard that bats don't see. That's actually not true. They actually have vision, but they just rely more heavily on their auditory system. And the way that bats navigate in the dark and the way that bats navigate using sound is through Doppler. Now, they don't simply listen to whether or not things are coming at them or moving away from them and pay attention to the Doppler like the siren example I gave for you. What they do is they generate their own sounds. So a bat, as it flies around is sending out clicks, [Andrew clicks tongue] I think that's my best bat sound or maybe it's [Andrew clicks tongue] and they're clicking, they're actually propelling sound out at a particular frequency that they know. Now, whether or not they're conscious of it, I don't know. I've never asked them. And if I did ask them, I don't think they could answer. And if they could answer, they couldn't answer in a language that I could understand. But the bat is essentially flying around, sending out sound waves, pinging its environment with sound waves of a particular frequency and then depending on the frequency of sound waves that come back, they know if they're getting closer to an object or further away from it. So if they send out sounds at a frequency of, this was much slower than it would actually occur, but let's say one every half second, [whining] and it's coming back even faster [roars] then they know they're getting closer because of the Doppler effect. And if it comes back more slowly, they know that there's nothing in front of them. So the bat is essentially navigating its world by creating these auras of sound that bounce back on to them from the various objects, trees, et cetera, buildings and people, it's kind of eerie to think about. But yes, they see you, they experience you with their sound, they sense you and they're using Doppler to accomplish it. Now I'd like to talk about ringing in the ears. This is something that I get asked about a lot. And speaking of signal-to-noise, I don't know if I get asked about it a lot, because many people suffer from ringing in their ears, or because the people who suffer from ringing in their ears suffer so much that they are more prone to ask. So it could be a sampling bias, I don't know, but I've been asked enough times and some of the experiences of discomfort that people have expressed about having this ringing of the ears really motivated me to go deep into this literature. So the ringing of the ears that one experiences is called tinnitus, not ti-nahy-tus, but tinnitus. And tinnitus can vary in intensity and it can vary according to stress levels, it can vary across the lifespan or even time of day. So it's very subject to background effects and contextual effects. So I think we all know that we should do our best to maximize healthy sleep. We did a number of episodes on that. Essentially, the first four episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast were all about sleep and how to get better sleep. We all know that we should try and limit our stress. And we had an episode about stress and ways to mitigate stress as well. However, there are people, it seems, that are suffering from tinnitus, for which stress or lack of sleep just can't explain the presence of the tinnitus. Tinnitus can be caused by disruption to these hair cells that we talked about earlier or damage to the hair cells. So that's another reason why, even if you have good hearing now that you want to protect that hearing and really avoid putting yourself into these two-hit environments, environments where there's a lot of background noise, and then you add another really loud auditory stimulus. This also can happen at different times, I should mention. If you go to a concert or you listen to loud music with your headphones and then you go to a concert, or you go into a very loud work environment, the hair cells can still be vulnerable. And once those hair cells are knocked out, currently, we don't have the technology to put them back. Although many groups, including some excellent groups at Stanford and elsewhere, too, of course, are working on ways to replenish those hair cells and restore hearing. There are treatments for tinnitus that involve taking certain substances. There are medications for tinnitus. In the non-prescription landscape, which is typically what we discuss on this podcast, when we discuss taking anything, there are, essentially, four compounds for which there are quality peer-reviewed data, where there does not appear to be any overt commercial bias, meaning that nothing's reported in the papers as funding from a particular company and those are melatonin, Ginkgo bilboa, zinc and magnesium. Now I've talked about melatonin before. I'm personally not a fan of melatonin as a sleep aid, but there are four studies, first one entitled: The Effects of Melatonin on Tinnitus, tinnitus, excuse me, and Sleep. Second one, Treatment of Central and Sensory Neural Tinnitus with orally-administered melatonin. And then the title goes on much longer, but it's a randomized study. I'm not going to read out all these. Melatonin: Can it Stop The ringing? which is an interesting article, double-blinded study, and The Effects of Melatonin on Tinnitus. Each one of these studies has anywhere from 30 to more than 100 subjects, in one case 102 subjects; both genders as they list them out, typically, it's listed as sex, not gender in studies so it should say both sexes, but nonetheless; an age range anywhere from 30 years old, all the way up to 65 plus. I didn't see any studies of people younger than 30. All three focused on melatonin, not surprisingly, because of the titles, looking at a range of dosages anywhere from three milligrams per day, which is sort of typical of many supplements for melatonin, still much higher than one would manufacture endogenously through your own pineal gland, but three milligrams in these studies for a duration of anywhere from 30 days to much longer in some cases, six months. And all four of these studies found modest yet still statistically significant effects of taking melatonin by mouth, so it's orally-administered melatonin in reducing the severity of tinnitus. So that's compelling, at least to me. It doesn't sound like a cure. And, of course, as always, I'm not a physician, I'm a scientist, so I don't prescribe anything. I only profess things, I report to you the science. You have to decide if melatonin is right for you if you have tinnitus. And certainly, I say that both to protect myself, but also protect you. You're responsible for your health and wellbeing. And I'm not telling anyone to run out and start taking melatonin for tinnitus, but it does seem that it can have some effects in reducing its symptoms. Ginkgo Boaboa is an interesting compound. It's been prescribed for or recommended for many, many things, but there are a few studies, again, double-blinded studies lasting one to six months, one that has have an impressive number of subjects, 978 subjects ranging from age 18 all the way up to 65 so on and so forth that show not huge effects of Ginkgo, but as they quote, limited evidence suggests that if tinnitus is a side effect of something else, in particular, cognitive decline, so age-related tinnitus might be helped by Ginkgo Boaboa. I won't go through all the details of the zinc studies, but it seems that zinc supplementation at higher levels than are typical of most people's intakes of 50 milligrams per day, do appear to be able to reduce subjective symptoms of tinnitus in most of the people that took the supplemented zinc. There aren't a lot of studies on that. So I could only find one double-blinded study. It lasted anywhere from one to six months, 41 subjects, both genders listed out again here, 45 to 64, and they saw a decrease in the severity of tinnitus symptoms with 50 milligrams of elemental zinc supplementation. And then last but not least is the magnesium study. Again, only a single study. It's a Phase II study looking at a fairly limited number of subjects, so only 19 subjects taking 532 milligrams of elemental magnesium. For those of you that take magnesium, there's magnesium and elemental magnesium, and it's always translated on the bottle, but it was associated with a lessening of symptoms related to tinnitus. So for you tinnitus sufferers out there, you may already be aware of this, you may already be taking these things and had no positive effects, meaning they didn't help, maybe not. I hope that you'll, at least, consider these, talk to your doctor about them. I do realize that tinnitus is extremely disruptive. I can't say I empathize because I don't, from a place of experience, that is, because I don't have tinnitus, but for those of you that don't include myself, you can imagine that hearing sounds of things that aren't there and the ringing in one's ears can be very disruptive and I think would be very disruptive and explains why people with tinnitus reach out so often with questions about how to alleviate that. And I hope this information was useful to you. I'd like to now talk about balance and our sense of balance, which is controlled by, believe it or not, our ears and things in our ears, as well as by our brain and elements of our spinal cord. But before I do that, I want to ask you another question or I would rather, I'd like to ask you to ask yourself a question and answer it, which is how big are your ears. It turns out that the ears grow our entire life. In the early stage of our life, they grow more slowly. And then as we age, they grow more quickly. You may have noticed if you have family members who are well into their 70s and 80s, and if you're fortunate, into their 90s and maybe even 100s, is that the ears of some of these individuals get very, very big, relative to their previous ear sizes. So it turns out that biological age can actually be measured according to ear size. Now you have to take a few measurements but there's, believe it or not, there is a formula in the scientific literature, if you know your ear circumference, so the distance around your ear, ears, plural, presumably you have two, most people do, in millimeters, so you're going to take the circumference of your ears in millimeters. How would you do this? How would you do this? Maybe you take a string and you put it around your ear, and then you measure the string. That's probably going to be easier than marching around your ear or somebody else's ear with a ruler and measuring in millimeters. So what's your ear circumference, on the outside, don't go in on the divot or anything. You're just going around as if you're going to trace the closest fitting oval, assuming your ears are oval, closest fitting oval that matches your ear circumference. Take that number in millimeters, subtract from it... Oh, excuse me, I should do this correctly. Do that for both ears, add them together, add those numbers together, divide by two, get the average for your two ears, get your average ear circumference, of course, your two ears. Then take that number in millimeters, subtract 88.1 and then whatever value that is, multiply it times 1.96 and that will tell you your biological age. Now why in the world would this be accurate? As we age, there are changes in number of different biological pathways. One of those pathways is the pathways related to collagen synthesis. So not only are our ears growing, but our noses are growing too, and my nose seems to be growing a lot. But then again, I did sports where I would get my nose broken, something I don't recommend. As I always point out, you don't get a nose like mine doing yoga, but nonetheless, my nose is still growing and my ears are still growing. And I suspect as I get older, if I have the good fortune of living into my 80s and 90s, my ears are going to continue to grow. A comparison between chronological age and biological age is something that's a really deep interest these days in the work of David Sinclair at Harvard Medical School and others. So called Horvath clocks that people have developed have tapped into how the epigenome and the genome can give us some insight into our biological age and how that compares to our chronological age. Most of us know our chronological age, because we know when we were born and we know where we are relative to that now. But you can start to make a little chart, if you like, about your rates of ear growth. Your rates of ear growth actually correlate pretty well with your rates of biological progression through this thing that we call life. So it's not something that we think about too often, but just like our DNA and our epigenome, and some other markers of metabolic health and hormone health relate to our age, so does our collagen synthesis. And one of the places that shows up the most is in these two little goodies on the sides of our heads, which are our ears. So even though it's a little bit of a bizarre metric, it makes perfect sense in the biological context. So let's talk about balance and how to get better at balancing. The reason why we're talking about balance and how to get better at balancing in the episode about hearing is that all the goodies that are going to allow you to do that are in your ears. They're also in your brain, but they're mostly in your ears. So as you recall from the beginning of this episode, you have two cochlea, cochleas, that are one on each side of your head. And that's a little spiral snail-shaped thing that converts sound waves into electrical signals that the rest of your brain can understand. Right next to those, you have what are called semicircular canals. The semicircular canals can be best visualized as thinking about three hula hoops with marbles in them. So imagine that you have a hula hoop and it's not filled with marbles all the way around, it's just got some marbles down there at the base. So if you were to move that hula hoop around, the marbles would move around, [shushing]. You've got three of those and each one of those hula hoops has these marbles that can move around. One of those hula hoops is positioned vertically with respect to gravity. So it's basically parallel to your nose. It sits like this, if you're watching on a video, but basically it's upright. Another one of those hula hoops is basically at a 90-degree angle to your nose. It's basically parallel to the floor if you're standing up right now, if you're seated. And the other one, it's kind of tilted about 45 degrees in between those. Now why is the system there? Well, those marbles within each one of those hula hoops can move around, but they'll only move around if your head moves in a particular way, and there are three planes or three ways that your head can move. Your head can move up and down like I'm nodding right now. So that's called pitch, it's pitching forward or pitching back. So it's a nod, up and down, or I can shake my head no, side to side. That's called a yaw. You pilots will be very familiar with this, yaw. Not yawn, yaw. And then there's roll, tilting the head from side to side, the way that a cute puppy might look at you from side to side or that if somebody doesn't really understand or believe what you're saying, they might tilt their head, very common phenomenon. I mean, nobody does that to me, but they do that to each other. So pitch, yaw and roll are the movements of the head in each of the three major planes of motion, as we say. And each one of those causes those marbles to move in one or two of the various hula hoops. So if I move my head up and down when I nod, one of those hula hoops, literally, right now, the marbles are moving back and forth. They aren't actually marbles by the way, these are little, kind of like little stones, basically, little calcium-like deposits and when they roll back and forth, they deflect little hairs, little hair cells that aren't like the hair cells that we use for measuring sound waves. They're not too different, but they are different from them, not like the hairs on our heads, but they're basically rolling past these little hair cells and causing them to deflect and when they deflect downward, the neurons, because hair cells are neurons, send information up to the brain. So if I move my head like this, there's a physical movement of these little stones in this hula hoop as I'm referring to it, but they deflect these hairs, send those hairs, which are neurons, those hair cells, send information off to the brain. If I move my head from side to side, different little stones move. If I roll my head, different stones move. This is an exquisite system that exists in all animals that have a jaw. So any fish that has a jaw has this system, a puppy has the system, any animal that has a jaw has this so-called balance system, which we call the vestibular system. One of the more important things to know about the vestibular, the balance system is that it works together with the visual system. Let's say I hear something off to my left and I swing my head over to the left to see what it is. There are two sources of information about where my head is relative to my body and I need to know that. First of all, when I quickly move my head to the side, those little stones, as I'm referring to them, I realize they're not actually stones, but as I'm referring to them, they quickly, whoom, activate those hair cells in that one semicircular canal, and send a signal off to my brain that my head just moved to the side like this, not that it went like this and pitched back or not that it tilted, but it just moved to the side. But also visual information slid past my field of view. I didn't have to think about it, but just slid past my field of view. And when those two signals combine, my eyes then lock to a particular location. Now, if this is at all complicated, you can actually uncouple these things. It's very easy to do. You can do this right now. In fact, I'd like you to do this experiment if you're not already doing something else that requires your attention. And certainly, don't do this if you're driving. You're going to sit down and you're going to move your head to the left very slowly with your eyes open. So you're going to move it very, very slowly. The whole thing should take about five, six, maybe even 10 seconds to complete. Okay, I just did it. Now, I'm going to do it very quickly. I'd like you to do it very quickly as well. Now do it slowly again. What you probably noticed is that it's very uncomfortable to do it slowly, but you can do it very quickly without much discomfort at all. You just move your head to the side. The reason is when you move your head, very slowly, those little stones at the base of that hula hoop, they don't get enough momentum to move. So you're actually not generating this signal to the brain that your head is moving. And what you'll notice is that your eyes have to go, boom, boom, boom, jumping over step-by-step. Whereas if you move your head really quickly, the signal gets off to your brain and your eyes just go boom, right to the location you want to look at. So moving your body slowly is actually very disruptive to the vestibular system. And it's very disruptive to your visual system. Now, if you've ever had the misfortune of being on a boat and you're going through big oscillations on the boat, for those of you seasick, folks that get seasick, this can actually make certain people seasick just to hear about it, those big oscillations going up and down and up and down. Those are very disruptive. We'll talk about nausea in a minute and how to offset that kind of nausea. I get pretty seasick, but there are ways that you can deal with this but this is incredible because what it means is a purely physical system of these little stones rolling around in there and directing where your eyes should go. So you can do this also just by looking up. So let's just say, you're sitting in a chair, you're going to look up towards the ceiling and your eyes will just go there. You're doing this eyes open and you look down. Now try doing it right really, really slowly. Some people even get motion sick doing this, which if you do, then just stop. Okay, so you can do this also to the side, although it works best if you're moving your head from side to side and we're nodding up and down. So what we're doing here is we're uncoupling these two mechanisms, we're pulling them apart, the visual part and the vestibular part, just to illustrate to you that, normally, these mechanisms in your inner ear tell your eyes where to go, but as well, your eyes tell your balance system, your vestibular system, how to function. So I'd like you to do a different experiment. I'm not going to do it right now, but basically stand up. If you get the opportunity, you can do this safely, wherever you are, you're going to stand up and you're going to look forward about 10, 12 feet. Pick a point on a wall or you can, anywhere that you like, if you're out in public, just do it anyway. Just tell them you're listening to Huberman Lab Podcasts, and someone's telling you to do it. Anyway, if you don't want to do it, don't do it. But, basically, do it. Stand on one leg and lift up the other leg. You can bend your knee, if you like and just look off into the distance about 10, 12 feet. If you can do that, if you can stand on one leg, now close your eyes, chances are you're going to suddenly feel what scientists call postural sway. You're going to start swaying around a lot. It is very hard to balance with your eyes closed. And if you think about that, it's like, why is that? That's crazy. Why would it be that it's hard to balance with your eyes closed? Well, information about the visual world also feeds back onto this vestibular system. So the vestibular system informs your vision and tells you where to move your eyes and your eyes and their positioning tell your balance system, your vestibular system how it should function. So there's a really cool way that you can learn to optimize balance. You're not going to try and do this by learning to balance with your eyes closed. What you can do is you can raise one leg and you can look at a short distance, maybe off to just the distance that your thumb would be if you were to reach your arm out in front of you. Although you don't necessarily have to put your thumb in front of you. So maybe just about two feet in front of you. Then while still balancing, you're going to step your vision out a further distance, and then a further distance and as far as you can possibly see in the environment that you're in. And then you're going to march it back to you. Now, what the literature shows is that this kind of balance training where you incorporate the visual system and extending out, and then marching back in the point at which you direct your visual focus, sends robust information about the relationship between your visual world and your balance system. And, of course, the balance system includes not just these hula hoops, these semicircular canals, but they communicate with the cerebellum, the so-called mini-brain, it actually means mini-brain in the back of your brain, combines that with visual information and your map of the body surface. That pattern of training is very beneficial for enhancing your ability to balance because the ability to balance is, in part, the activation of particular postural muscles, but just as much, perhaps even moreso, it's about being able to adjust those postural muscles, excuse me, it's about the ability to adjust those postural muscles as you experience changes in your visual world. And one of the most robust ways that you can engage changes in your visual world is through your own movement. And so most people are not trying to balance in place, right? They're not just trying to stand there like a statue on one leg. Most of what we think about when we think about balance is for sake of sport or dynamic balance of being able to break ourselves, when we're lunging in one particular direction to stop ourselves, that is, and then to move in another direction or for skateboarding or surfing or cycling or any number of different things, gymnastics. So the visual system is the primary input by which you develop balance, but you can't do it just with the visual system. So what I'm recommending is if you're interested in cultivating a sense of balance, understand the relationship between the semicircular canals, understand that they are both driving eye movements and they are driven by eye movements. It's a reciprocal relationship. And then even just two or three minutes a day, or every once in a while, even three times a week, maybe five minutes, maybe 10 minutes, you pick, but if you want to enhance balance, you have to combine changes in your visual environment with a static posture, standing on one leg and shifting your visual environment or static visual view, looking at one thing and changing your body posture. So those two things, we now know from the scientific literature, combine in order to give an enhanced sense of balance. And there's a really nice paper that was published in 2015 called Effects of Balance Training on Balance Performance. This was in healthy adults. It's a systematic review and a meta analysis. A meta analysis is when you combine a lot of literature from a lot of different papers and extract the really robust and the less robust statistical effects. So it's a really nice paper as well. There are some papers out there, for instance, comparison of static balance and the role of vision in the elite athletes. This is essentially the paper that I've extracted most of the information that I just gave you from. And that paper, and there are some others as well, but basically I distilled them down into their core components. The core components are move your vision around while staying static, still but in a balanced position like standing on one leg, could be something more complicated if you're somebody who can do more complicated movements. Unilateral movement seemed to be important, so standing on one leg as opposed to both, or trying to generate some tilt is another way to go about it or imbalance, meaning one limb asymmetrically being activated compared to the other limb. And then the other way to encourage or to cultivate and build up this vestibular system and your sense of balance actually involves movement itself, acceleration. So that's what we're going to talk about now. So up until now, I've been talking about balance only in the static sense, like standing on one leg for instance, but that's a very artificial situation. Even though you can train balance that way, most people who want to enhance their sense of balance for sport or dance, or some other endeavor, want to engage balance in a dynamic way, meaning moving through lots of different planes of movement, maybe even sometimes while squatting down low or jumping and landing or making trajectories that are different angles. For that, we need to consider that the vestibular system also cares about acceleration. So it cares about head position, it cares about eye position and where the eyes are and where you're looking, but it also cares about what direction you're moving and how fast. And one of the best things that you can do to enhance your sense of balance is to start to bring together your visual system, the semicircular canals of the inner ear and what we call linear acceleration. So if I move forward in space rigidly upright, it's a vastly different situation than if I'm leaning to the side. One of the best ways to cultivate a better sense of balance, literally, within the sense organs and the neurons and the biology of the brain is to get into modes where we are accelerating forward, typically, it's forward while also tilted with respect to gravity. Now this would be the carve on a skateboard or on a surf board or a snowboard. This would be the taking a corner on a bike while being able to lean, safely, of course, lean into the turn so that your head is actually tilted with respect to the earth. So anytime that we are rigidly upright, we aren't really exercising the vestibular system imbalance. And this is why you see people in the gym on these, one of those bouncy balls, Bocce balls are the one that the guys roll in the park. Bouncy balls, where they're balancing back and forth, that will work the small stabilizing muscles. But what I'm talking about is getting into modes where you actually tilt the body and the head with respect to earth. What I mean is with respect to Earth's gravitational pull. Now the cerebellum is a very interesting structure because not only is it involved in balance, but it's also involved in skill-learning and in generating timing of movements. It's a fascinating structure deserving of an entire episode or several episodes all on its own, but some of the outputs of the cerebellum, meaning the neurons in the cerebellum get inputs, but they also send information out. The outputs of the cerebellum are strongly linked to areas of the brain that release neuromodulators that make us feel really good, in particular, serotonin and dopamine. And this is an early emerging sub-field within neuroscience, but a lot of what are called the non-motor outputs of the cerebellum have a profound influence, not just on our ability to learn how to balance better, but also how we feel overall. So for you exercisers out there, I do hope people are getting regular healthy amounts of exercise. We've talked about what that means in previous episodes, so at least 150 minutes a week of endurance work, some strength training, a minimum five sets per body part to maintain musculature even if you don't want to grow muscles, you want to do that in order to maintain healthy, strengthened bones, et cetera. If you're doing that but you're only doing things like curls in the gym, squats in the gym, riding the Peloton, or even if you're outside running, and you're getting forward acceleration, but you're never actually getting tilted, you're never actually getting tilted with respect to Earth's gravitational pull, you're not really exercising and getting the most out of your nervous system. Activation of the cerebellum in this way of being tilted or the head being tilted and the body being tilted while in acceleration, typically forward acceleration, but sometimes side to side has a profound and positive effect on our sense of mood and wellbeing. And as I talked about in previous episode, it can also enhance our ability to learn information in the period after generating those tilts. And the acceleration. And that's because the cerebellum has these outputs to these areas of the brain that release these neuromodulators, like serotonin and dopamine. And they make us feel really good. I think this is one of the reasons why, growing up, I had some friends, some of whom might've been the world heavyweight champions of laziness for essentially everything, except they would wake up at 4:30 in the morning to go surf. They would drive, they would get up so early to go surf. It's not just surfers and some surfers, by the way, I should point out are not lazy humans. They do a lot of other things. But I knew people that couldn't be motivated to do anything, but they were highly driven to get into these experiences of forward acceleration while tilted with respect to gravity, likewise, with snowboarding or skiing or cycling. Those modes of exercise seem to have an outsized effect both on our wellbeing and our ability to translate the vestibular balance that we achieve in those endeavors to our ability to balance while doing other things, and I don't mean psychological balance necessarily. I mean physical balance. So for those of you that don't think of yourselves as very coordinated or with very good balance, getting into these modes of acceleration forward movement or lateral movement while getting tilted, even if you have to do it slowly, could be beneficial, I do believe, and the scientific literature points to the fact that it will be beneficial for cultivating better sense of physical balance. It can really build up the circuits of this vestibular system. And then, of course, the feel-good components of acceleration while tilted or while getting the head into different orientations relative to gravity, well, that's the explanation for roller-coasters. Some people hate roller-coasters. They make them feel nauseous. Many people love roller-coasters and one of the reasons they love roller-coasters is because of the way that when you get the body, even if you're not generating the movement, you get the body into forward acceleration and you're going upside down and tilted to the side as the tracks go from side to side and tilt, et cetera, you're getting activation of these deeper brain nuclei that trigger the release of neuromodulators that just make us feel really, really good. In fact, some people get a long arc, a long duration buzz from having gone through those experiences. Some people who hate roller-coasters are probably getting nauseous, just hearing about that. So I encourage people to get into modes of acceleration while tilted every once in a while, provided you can do it safely. It's an immensely powerful way to build up your skills in the realm of balance. And it's also, for most people, very, very pleasing. It feels really good because of the chemical relationship between forward acceleration and head tilt and body tilt. Now, speaking of feeling nauseous, some people suffer from vertigo. Some people feel dizzy, some people get lightheaded. An important question to ask yourself, always, if you're feeling quote-unquote dizzy or lightheaded, is are you dizzy or are you lightheaded? Now, we're not going to diagnose anything here because there's just no way we can do that. This is essentially me shouting into a tunnel. So we don't know what's going on with each and every one of you but if ever you feel that your world is spinning, but that you can focus on your thumb, for instance, but the rest of the world is spinning and your thumb is stationary, that's called being dizzy. Now, if you feel like you're falling or that you feel like you need to get down onto the ground because you feel light-headed, that's being light-headed. And, oftentimes, with language we don't distinguish between being dizzy and being lightheaded. Now there are a lot of ways that dizziness and lightheadedness can occur. And I don't even want to begin to guess at the number of different things and ways that it could happen for those of you that suffer from it because it could be any number of them. But, oftentimes, if people are lightheaded, yes, it could be low blood sugar. It could also be that you're dehydrated. It could also be that you are low in electrolytes. We talked about this in a previous episode, but we will talk about it more in a future episode. Many people have too little sodium in their system, salt, and that's why they feel lightheaded. I have family members who, for years, thought they had disrupted blood sugar. They would get shaky, jittery, lightheaded, feel like they were nauseous, et cetera. And simply the addition of little sea salt to their water remedied the problem entirely. I don't think it's going to remedy every issue of lightheadedness out there by any stretch, but just the addition of salt, in this particular case, helped the person. And they are not alone. Many people who think that they have low blood sugar, actually are lightheaded because of low electrolytes and because of the way that salt carries water into the system and creates changes in blood volume, et cetera. Low sodium can often be a source of lightheadedness as can low blood sugar and, of course, other things as well. Now for dizziness or seasickness, we were all taught that you need to pick a point on the horizon and focus on it. But actually, that's not correct. It is true that if you are down in the cabin of a boat or you're on the lower deck and all you can see are things up close to you, that getting sloshed around, like so or the boat going up and down, like so, I think I'm getting a little seasick, even as I do this and I describe it, focusing on things close to you can be problematic. And in that case, the advice to go up on deck and get fresh air and to look off into the horizon, that part is correct. But focusing your eyes on a particular location on the horizon is effectively like trying to move very slowly as I had you do before, where you're trying to move your head very slowly while fixating on one location. Your eyes and your balance system were designed to move together. So really, what you want to do is allow your visual system to track with your vestibular system. This is why sitting in the back of an Uber or a taxi and being on your phone can make you suddenly feel very nauseous. Sometimes the cabs, particularly in New York City, they have a lot of occluders, they have a lot of stuff blocking your field of view. There's usually a little portal where you can see out to the front of the front windshield, but there's all this stuff now, televisions in the back seat and you're watching that television and the cab is moving. You're in linear acceleration, and sometimes you're taking corners, you're braking so then your vestibular system has to adjust to that. If you're looking at your phone or a book, or even if you're talking to somebody, actually, I'm starting to feel a little nauseous just talking about it. I promise I'm not going to finish this episode by vomiting at the end, at least not here, but what can happen is that you're uncoupling the visual information from your motion, from your vestibular information. You want those to be coupled. This is why a lot of people have to drive, they can't be in the passenger seat. Because when you drive, you also get what's called proprioceptive feedback. Your body is sending signals also to the vestibular system about where you are in space. When you're the passenger, you're just getting jolted around as the person is driving. And if you're looking at your phone, it's even worse. And if you're looking at the occluder between you and the two front seats, that's even worse. So this is why staring out the front windshield is great but you don't want to fixate. So, hopefully, I spared a few people and, hopefully, a few cab drivers of having people get sick in their cars or Ubers. Let your visual system and your vestibular system work together. If appropriate, get into linear acceleration, and you'll improve your sense of balance. Once again, we've covered a tremendous amount of information. Now, you know how you hear, how you make sense of the sounds in your environment, how those come into your ears and how your brain processes them. In addition, we talked about things like low level white noise and even binaural beats, which can be used to enhance certain brain states, certain rhythms within the brain, and even dopamine release in ways that allow you to learn better. And we talked about the balance system and this incredible relationship between your vestibular apparatus, meaning the portions of your inner ear that are responsible for balance and your visual system and gravity. And you can use those to enhance your learning as well, as well as just to enhance your sense of balance. If you're learning from this podcast, please subscribe on YouTube, that really helps us. In addition, please leave us any comments or feedback or suggestions for future episode content on YouTube in the comment section. If you haven't already subscribed on Apple and Spotify, please do that as well. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five-star review. At Apple, you can also leave us comments and feedback. During this episode, I mentioned some supplements. We partnered with Thorne because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency with respect to the quality of their ingredients and accuracy about the amounts of those ingredients contained within their products. If you'd like to see the products that I take from Thorne, you can go to T-H-O-R-N-E dot com, slash the letter U slash Huberman. So that's thorne.com/u/huberman to see all the supplements that I take. And if you do that, you can get 20% off any of those supplements or 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. For those of you that might want to support us in other ways, we have a Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support our podcast at any level that you like. In addition, if you'd like to support the podcast, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the episode. That is absolutely the best way to support us. Last but not least, I'd like to thank you for your time and attention and desire and willingness to learn about vision and balance. And, of course, thank you for your interest in science. [tranquil music]

========================================

